                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TAX COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT

                                          Joel Slemrod

                                      Working Paper 24799
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24799


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2018




I am grateful to Garrett Anstreicher and Tejaswi Velayudhan for excellent research assistance and
to the students in my Ph.D. class on government revenues at the University of Michigan for
stimulating conversations. Helpful comments on an earlier draft were received from Claudio
Agostini, Miguel Almunia, Alan Auerbach, Anne Brockmeyer, Wei Cui, Brian Erard, Christian
Gillitzer, John Guyton, Michael Hallsworth, Anders Jensen, Paul Michael Kindsgrab, Ben
Meiselman, Gareth Myles, Alan Plumley, Daniel Reck, Carlos Scartiscini, Christian Traxler,
David Weisbach, and Eleanor Wilking, as well as from the JEL editor and referees. The author
has an unpaid contractual relationship with the Internal Revenue Service to make research use of
de-identified tax-return data; the views expressed here are not necessarily held by the IRS, the
U.S. Department of the Treasury, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Tax Compliance and Enforcement
Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 24799
July 2018
JEL No. H20,H26

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent economic research in tax compliance and enforcement. After briefly
laying out the economics of tax evasion, it focuses on recent empirical contributions. It first
discusses what methodologies and data have facilitated these contributions, and then presents
critical summaries of what has been learned. It discusses a promising new development, the
analysis of randomized controlled trials mostly delivered via letters from the tax authority, and
then reviews recent research using various methods about the impact of the principal enforcement
tax policy instruments: audits, information reporting, and remittance regimes. I also explore
several understudied issues worthy of more research attention. The paper closes by outlining a
normative framework based on the behavioral response elasticities now being credibly estimated
that allows one to assess whether a given enforcement intervention is worth doing.


Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Room R5396
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
    Policy attention in developed countries to tax evasion and enforcement ramped up significantly

after the financial crisis of 2008, the Great Recession, and the large deficits that followed.

Particular scrutiny to high-income individuals and corporations accompanied heightened attention

to income and wealth inequality. In the United States this momentum led to a major initiative

aimed at reducing income tax evasion via unreported foreign accounts, albeit in the context of a

shrinking IRS budget. In the United Kingdom, former Chancellor of the Exchequer George

Osborne announced an ongoing crackdown on tax avoidance, tax evasion, and “imbalances” in the

tax system that would bring in £5 billion in additional revenue each year. In developing countries,

tax evasion is a long-standing policy concern. The IMF (2015, p. 6) recently stated that

    “Long a central concern in developing countries, strengthening compliance has become a
    greater priority in many advanced and emerging economies since the financial
    crisis…Improving compliance has long been a core development objective, both to enhance
    revenue and as essential to building strong, trusted public institutions.”


    Academic research into the determinants of tax evasion and the effectiveness of enforcement

initiatives has also vastly expanded in the past decade, perhaps inspired by the heightened policy

interest and certainly facilitated by expanded access of academics to administrative tax-return data

and an increased willingness of tax authorities to partner with researchers on randomized

controlled trials that hold the promise of compelling identification of the causal impact of

alternative enforcement strategies.

    In this paper I review this new wave of empirical research. Most of this scholarship postdates

the other broad surveys about tax evasion and enforcement, including one in this Journal, 1 and so




1
 Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998), Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002). A much shorter, and more policy-oriented,
version of this paper was published as Slemrod (2017). Chalfin and McCrary (2017) review the literature on criminal
deterrence, but do not address tax evasion. Mascagni (2018) surveys the experimental literature on tax compliance.

                                                                                                                 2
a fresh look is appropriate. Because this new wave of empirical research shows no sign of abating,

it is particularly timely to take stock of what has been learned in order to assess and guide the

direction of future research. Although this survey is wide-ranging, it is somewhat selective in its

coverage of both topic and method. It touches only tangentially on some substantive issues such

as multinational companies’ tax compliance and the role of bureaucratic incentives and the

behavior of tax officials, 2 and it does not address some methodological approaches such as lab

experiments and macroeconomic measures of the informal economy. 3

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After section 1 briefly lays out the economics of

tax evasion, the paper turns to the recent empirical contributions, with section 2 discussing what

methodologies and data have facilitated these contributions. Section 3 focuses on the magnitude

and nature of evasion. Section 4 assesses one prominent new development, randomized controlled

trials mostly delivered via letters from the tax authority. The next sections discuss the principal

enforcement policy instruments, audits in section 5, information reporting in section 6, remittance

regimes in section 7, with other enforcement initiatives addressed in section 8. Section 9 explores

several understudied issues worthy of more research attention and outlines a normative framework

based on the behavioral response elasticities now being credibly estimated that allows one to assess

whether a given enforcement intervention is worth doing. Section 10 concludes.



1. THE ECONOMICS OF TAX EVASION

       Discussion of tax administration, compliance, and enforcement fits naturally into what

Slemrod and Gillitzer (2014) call a “tax-systems” framework. A tax system is defined as a set of

rules, regulations, and procedures with three aspects. First, it defines what events or states of the


2
    On the former, see, for example, Clausing (2009); on the latter, see for example, Khan, Khwaja, and Olken (2016).
3
    On the former, see Alm and Jacobson (2007); on the latter, see Slemrod and Weber (2012).

                                                                                                                    3
world trigger tax liability--for example the earning of income, the ownership of a residence that

might be subject to property tax, or the sale of a capital asset—and the rate schedule to be applied

to these bases. Although this first aspect, tax bases and rates, is the principal object of modern tax

analysis, it is only one part. A tax system also must specify who or what entity must remit the tax

liability and when, which we might call remittance rules. For example, under most income tax

systems, it is the employer that remits—actually sends to the government—an approximation of

what tax their employees owe on that income. Although standard analysis often dismisses this as

irrelevant, recent research suggests that, at least in some circumstances, it matters a lot. Third, a

tax system details procedures for ensuring compliance, including the provision of third-party

information-reporting requirements and the consequences, including penalties, of not remitting

legal liability; these are the enforcement rules. This review focuses on the second and, especially,

the third aspect of a tax system, but clearly there is substantial overlap among the three issues: for

example, the tax base and the remittance system can have a profound effect on the enforceability

of taxation, and the enforcement regime can affect the impact of tax rates on taxpayer decisions

that determine the tax base.

1.1 Why Tax Evasion Matters

    Tax evasion 4 is an important issue because it affects both the resource cost of raising taxes and

the distribution of the tax burden—the bread-and-butter concerns of public economics. If tax

evasion could somehow be costlessly eliminated, the additional money collected could be used to



4
  I will use the terms evasion and noncompliance interchangeably, although in some countries evasion has a
particular legal meaning. I will also conform to standard usage in which evasion refers to illegal actions to reduce tax
liability, while avoidance refers to legal actions to reduce tax, recognizing that in many situations the dividing line is
blurry. Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) distinguish further between real (and legal) behavioral responses to taxation,
such as reducing labor supply, which they call real responses, and actions that reduce tax liability without
substantively altering one’s consumption basket, such as re-characterizing a given action as tax-preferred R&D or
delaying an asset sale with a taxable capital gain by a day to a lower-tax-rate year, for which they reserve the term
avoidance.

                                                                                                                        4
finance worthy government projects or cuts in tax rates that would benefit most compliant

taxpayers. But expanding government programs could be financed in a number of other ways, such

as by raising tax rates or by broadening the income tax base, and a tax reduction could be financed

by cuts in overall spending. The real policy question is whether curbing evasion would improve

the equity and efficiency implications of the public finances, given the cost of doing so, and if so

how best to go about it.

   If opportunities or predilections for evasion were systematically related to income, then the

income tax rate schedule or the relative reliance on tax bases could be adjusted to move toward

the degree of progressivity is deemed optimal. Of course, not everyone evades taxes by the same

proportionate amount or by an amount strictly related to income, both because of differences in

personal characteristics—like attitudes toward risk, the tax system, and honesty— and because of

different opportunities and potential rewards for evasion. Evasion thus creates horizontal inequity

because otherwise equally well-off people end up with different tax burdens. Attempts to reduce

tax evasion can themselves raise vertical equity concerns, as when the Internal Revenue Service

(henceforth IRS) is criticized for spending resources to reduce fraud related to the Earned Income

Tax Credit, whose recipients are low-income households, instead of devoting those enforcement

resources to the types of noncompliance more likely to be pursued by high-income households,

such as the use of unreported foreign accounts.

   Tax evasion also generates efficiency costs. The most obvious are the resources taxpayers

expend to implement and camouflage noncompliance, that third parties incur to put into effect

withholding and provide information reports, and that the tax authority uses to administer the

system and combat noncompliance. In addition, tax evasion generally provides a socially

inefficient incentive to engage in those activities that facilitate evasion. For example, because the



                                                                                                   5
income from house painting can be done on a cash basis and is therefore difficult for the tax

authority to detect, this occupation is more attractive than otherwise. Although a supply of eager

and cheap housepainters undoubtedly is greeted warmly by prospective buyers of that service, the

effort of the extra people drawn to house painting, or any activity that facilitates tax evasion, will

have higher social value in some alternative occupation. The same argument applies to self-

employment generally, as the enhanced opportunity for tax noncompliance inefficiently attracts

people who would otherwise be employees. The opportunity for noncompliance can distort

resource allocation in a variety of other ways, such as causing companies that otherwise would not

find it attractive to do so to set up operations in a tax haven in order to facilitate or camouflage

evasion.

       Of course, curtailing tax evasion is not costless, and its costs must be considered in

developing optimal policy. The mere presence of tax evasion does not imply a failure of policy.

Just as it is not optimal to station a police officer at each street corner to eliminate robbery and

jaywalking completely, it is not optimal to completely eliminate tax evasion. The recognition of

tax evasion focuses our attention on the set of enforcement policy instruments, the appropriate

setting of which can be illuminated by optimal tax reasoning and fleshed out with empirical

analysis; this is developed in Section 9.8. For instance, what should be the extent of audit

coverage, the strategy for choosing audit targets, and the penalty imposed on detected evasion?

The presence of evasion also alters the optimal setting of tax rates, because it affects the

marginal efficiency cost of so doing, and the choice of tax base, because different tax bases are

more or less susceptible to evasion.

   1.2 The Evasion Decision




                                                                                                       6
    Why would an individual or business evade taxes? To an economist, the natural starting point

is to consider the private costs and benefits of evasion. And indeed the standard framework for

considering whether and how much to evade taxes is a deterrence model, formulated by Allingham

and Sandmo (1972), who adapted Becker’s (1968) model of criminal behavior to tax evasion. In

this model, a risk-averse taxpayer decides whether and how much to evade taxes in a similar way

as she would approach any risky decision or gamble . 5

    The basic version of the model, for the case of a proportional income tax, can be written as

follows:

(1) Maxe (1-p(e,a))U((y(1-t) + te) + p(e,a)U(y(1-t) – fte),

where e is understated tax liability, p is the probability that evasion is penalized, a represents

enforcement intensity, U(.) is a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function, y is exogenous true

income, t is a linear tax rate and f is the proportional penalty assessed on detected evasion. Note

that in this model people are influenced by possible legal penalties no differently than any other

contingent cost: there is nothing per se about the illegality of tax evasion that matters. Nor is there

any intrinsic willingness to meet one’s tax obligations, sometimes referred to as “tax morale”,

discussed in Section 1.4.

    If dp/de is zero, the first-order condition for optimal evasion is as follows:

(2) U'N/U'A = fp/(1-p),

where the subscripts N and A refer to the audited and not audited states of the world, respectively.

This model predicts that a risk-averse agent will do some evasion as long it has a positive expected


5
  Recently, the Allingham-Sandmo framework has often been replaced by a simpler deterrence model that dispenses
with the expected utility framework, so that the maximand is just y(1-t) + te – c(e,α), where c represents the private
cost of evasion, which includes the utility cost of bearing risk and the expected value of punishment. This private
cost may depend on the amount of attempted evasion and certainly depends on the vector α of enforcement
instruments, including the extent of auditing and third-party information reporting.


                                                                                                                    7
value; i.e., if p(1+f) < 1, and that an increase in either the probability of detection or the penalty if

detected will reduce evasion.

    Of course, the model does not pin down how big these effects are, which depends on the

parameters and the shape of the utility function, so this is a task for empirical analysis. The effect

on evasion of a change in the tax rate is less clear, as even its sign depends on the form of the

penalty function, as shown by Yitzhaki (1974); as formulated here, where the penalty is

proportional to the tax evaded, the tax rate does not enter the first-order condition, as both the gain

in the audited state and the loss in the unaudited state are proportional to the tax rate, so that a

change in t causes only an income effect. Thus, an increase in t will decrease evasion as long as

there is decreasing relative risk aversion.

    With a nonzero dp/de, the first-order condition becomes

(3) UN'/UA' = fp/(1-p)+ (dp/de)(UN-UA)/UA'.

Not surprisingly, to the extent that the audit probability rises with evasion, the optimal amount of

evasion is lower.

    Much of interest is contained within the p(.) function. What matters, of course, is the perception

of taxpayers, which raises the question of how these perceptions are formed. Presumably,

perceptions are linked in some way to the reality. For one thing, enforcement policy can change

the reality itself—increase the actual p—by, for example, hiring and training more auditors or

more efficiently using the third-party information it routinely receives—and trust that the word

about the reality gets out. The tax authority can also selectively disseminate information about its

activities. 6 Much of the empirical work I discuss below tries to measure the effect on behavior of


6
  The IRS certainly does try. Blank and Levin (2010) show that the government issues a disproportionately large
number of tax enforcement press releases during the weeks immediately prior to Tax Day (generally April 15)
compared to the rest of the year, and conclude that government officials deliberately use tax enforcement publicity
to influence individual taxpayers’ perceptions and knowledge of the audit probability, tax penalties and the

                                                                                                                 8
communications from the tax authority to taxpayers designed to alter perceptions of the

enforcement environment.

    The idea that p increases with e—the more evasion one does, the more likely that the evasion

will be detected and punished—is a reduced-form notion, as the tax authority does not know e

without further action. Most tax authorities have some kind of risk management system that is used

to allocate resources toward cases where enforcement action is likely to be more effective. It may

also be that p depends positively on e/y, evasion relative to true income, in which case there is an

implicit subsidy to earning more y, because it reduces the chance of a given amount of evasion

being detected.

    The value of p depends on the type of evasion considered. For example, in most countries,

because of employer information reporting the probability of detection is close to one for

unreported employee income. It is generally much lower, but increasing with the magnitude, for

underreported self-employment income. For someone with multiple sources of income, the

probability of detection would rise with the total amount of income evaded, as one first

underreports those sources with the lowest probability of detection, and then moves on to

underreport those types of income with higher probability. There will also generally be interaction

among multiple evasions, within a period and across periods.

    The standard deterrence framework applies naturally to tax compliance decisions made by

individuals and small, single-owner businesses, but its applicability to big business is less clear.

Arguably, large public companies should act as if they are risk-neutral, rather than like the risk-




government’s tax enforcement efficacy while taxpayers are preparing to file their annual individual tax returns.
Whether taxpayers contemplating evasion are more influenced (or influenced at all) by news of a successful
enforcement action they learn of in April compared to one they learn of in November has not yet been
demonstrated.


                                                                                                              9
averse decision maker of the standard model. If this is true, one must look elsewhere for what

constrains positive-expected-value evasion. Some firms might be concerned that publicized tax

aggressiveness turns off some potential customers who would prefer to deal with civic-minded

companies. On the other hand, some investors might take tax aggressiveness as a signal that a

company is optimally aggressive both in its dealings with the tax authority but also with suppliers

and customers (but, ideally, not with investors themselves!). 7

        The basic Allingham-Sandmo model has been enriched and extended along many

dimensions, a literature that is not the subject of this survey. One extension worth mentioning

introduces a dynamic element to the decision, as in Lee and McCrary (2017), which implies that

it is harder to deter an impatient individual using a prison sentence, as most of the disutility is

borne in the future, and that people who are myopic and engage in hyperbolic discounting will be

less deterred by the threat of punishment, some of which occurs far in the future. This is likely to

be less important for the crime of tax evasion, as imprisonment is a relatively rare punishment,

but it correctly emphasizes that the punishment should be considered in a present-value sense.


1.3 The Informal Economy

    A related but distinct concept to evasion is the informal economy, also known as the

underground, hidden, or black economy. Many definitions of the informal economy have been

suggested, having in common the notion of small-scale economic activities that are unobserved by

official authorities. 8 The informal economy encompasses small firms that don’t register with the

relevant tax or labor regulation authorities, employees who are not on the payroll, freelancers who


7
  On this issue, see Hanlon and Slemrod (2009), who examine the stock-market response to publicized tax
aggressiveness to sort out empirically these potential two concerns of public corporations, finding that on average
stock prices decline when news about involvement in tax shelters becomes public. Stock price falls tend to be larger
for retail-sector firms, which may be due to a possible consumer/taxpayer backlash.
8
  Kanbur and Keen (2014) develop an insightful model of the relationship between informality and tax compliance.

                                                                                                                 10
don’t file tax returns, and so on. Many evasion activities are clearly not part of the informal

economy, such as overstating deductible charitable contributions or setting up a foreign bank

account and not reporting the taxable income it generates. Moreover, not all informal enterprises

are evading; for example, taxable income may be legitimately below the filing threshold at the

same time a firm is skirting labor and safety regulations. Whether illegal activities should be

included in the definition of the informal economy is controversial; if they were, one would have

to acknowledge that not all such operations are small, as witnessed by narcotrafficking.

     In situations where labor income in the formal sector is routinely reported by the employer to

the tax enforcement agency and can be successfully matched to the worker’s income report, the

only way to evade tax may be by “moonlighting”—working extra hours for oneself at a different

job—or by switching completely to the informal sector. The standard deterrence model can be

easily modified to address the choice between formal- and informal-sector work by supposing that

the taxpayer receives a higher pre-tax wage rate for formal-sector work but the income is taxed at

the statutory rate and cannot be evaded, while informal-sector income is untaxed unless detected

by a random audit. 9

     1.4 Non-deterrence Considerations

     Some social scientists have argued that the deterrence framework misses important elements

of the tax evasion decision, and question some of its central assumptions, including that nothing

per se about the illegality of evasion matters, and that everyone acts as a free rider, so that there is

no issue of intrinsic willingness to pay, or “tax morale.” 10 Some have gone further to suggest that,


9
  See Kesselman (1989).
10
   The evidence about the importance of nonpecuniary motivations for tax compliance, or tax morale, is nicely
reviewed in Luttmer and Singhal (2014). Steven Durlauf has pointed out to me that civic duty and morale can be
addressed as modifications of the standard model of preferences in that they introduce in the first case, utility from
actions rather than their consequences, and in the case of the latter, social interactions. I don’t want to stake out a
strong case on this semantic issue, but find it helpful to refer to these considerations as non-deterrence because

                                                                                                                    11
in thinking about tax evasion, it is necessary to abandon the expected utility maximization model

and incorporate “behavioral” considerations.

    One approach stresses that some people may fully comply with their legal obligation because

of a sense of civic duty regardless of, or in addition to, the possible expected pecuniary gains and

argue that the tendency to perform one’s duty is susceptible to aspects of the enforcement process.

Indeed, Frey (1997) argues that imposing more punitive enforcement policies may crowd out the

“intrinsic” motivation to comply by making people feel that they pay taxes because they have to,

rather than because they want to. Another approach suggests that some individuals’ behavior

depends on the process by which the tax and tax enforcement system are formulated and its

features, holding constant the incentives the system provides. For example, taxpayers may be more

willing to comply with a system whose formulation they had a part in through voting. Taxpayer

attitudes toward authority may also influence compliance behavior. Tyler (2006) argues that

citizens are more likely to be law-abiding if they view legal authorities as legitimate, and the degree

of legitimacy may itself be a function of the level of enforcement. When explicit enforcement is

weak (e.g., few audits), legitimacy may erode, undermining the intrinsic willingness of taxpayers

to comply with the law. People may be willing to comply with a law because they perceive it to

be just, quite aside from their beliefs regarding the authority government has to enforce it. Such

individual judgments can be complex; for example, expenditures on warfare might contribute to a

sense of fairness in a patriotic period, but rejected during another period characterized by

antimilitarism. Levi (1989) stresses the role of “reciprocal altruism,” in which some taxpayers’

behavior depends on the behavior, motivations, and intentions not of any subset of particular

individuals, but of the government itself: when citizens believe that the government will act in


they move the focus away from the probability of punishment and the extent and nature of the punishment for
detected noncompliance.

                                                                                                        12
their interests, that its procedures are fair, and that their trust of the state and others is reciprocated,

then people are more likely to become “contingent consenters” who cooperate in remitting taxes

even when their short-term material interest would make evading the best option.

    Much of the evidence related to these nonstandard behaviors comes from how people react to

other people’s behavior in lab experiments. But the psychological attitudes of individuals toward

government might be fundamentally different than their attitudes toward other people, or even

other organizations. Individuals might feel more dutiful and even obedient toward government.

Invocation of the word obedience, though, invokes a darker side of the relationship between

individuals and government as an authority figure. Indeed, notorious experiments conducted by

Milgram (1963) showed that unwitting subjects were willing to deliver what they thought were

substantial electric shocks when instructed to, and encouraged to, by authority figures.

        An alternative strand of scholarship outside of the Allingham-Sandmo deterrence model

tradition is rooted in behavioral economics. Early on, Benjamini and Maital (1985) built on the

work of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) by exploring the implications for tax evasion of subjective

probability bias, perception of other people’s behavior, and social stigma. Dhami and al-Nowaihi

(2007) argue that, compared to an Allingham-Sandmo model, a prospect-theory framework (with

the addition of a stigma cost for discovered evasion) can more satisfactorily explain the level of

observed evasion, the non-ubiquity of evasion, and the fact that tax rates negatively affect evasion.

Durlauf and Nagin (2011) argue that, in a world in which the perceived probability of detection is

very low, even small changes in that perceived probability can have a big effect.


    A recent offshoot of behavioral public economic focuses on the notion that individuals, and

perhaps also firms, are inattentive to certain aspects of a tax systems—aspects which are not

salient, in the language of Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009). In their model, inattention is


                                                                                                         13
measured by an under-reaction to a non-salient change in a tax rate relative to the response to a

salient tax change. This notion of salience makes sense in the setting they address—grocery store

items where the sales tax is not posted on the price tag—but does not generalize in a

straightforward way to tax evasion, where it seems unlikely that an inattentive taxpayer would

presume that, for example, there is zero chance of being caught. This is not to say that some

taxpayers in some settings are not familiar with their tax obligations and the consequences of not

meeting those obligations.



2. METHODOLOGY—HOW HAVE WE LEARNED NEW THINGS?

         Measuring tax evasion is highly challenging due to tax evaders’ incentive to conceal their

behavior. Of course, measuring any sort of crime is subject to similar concerns, but tax evasion

also has no identifiable victims, so no data can be obtained from victimization reports or victim

surveys. 11 On the other hand, in contrast to most other crimes, one can observe many traces of

changes in tax evasion, such as changes in reported tax bases.

     The threat of punishment and perhaps social shame makes many taxpayers unwilling to

respond accurately even to surveys done by organizations not associated with the tax authority.



11
   There are other important differences between tax evasion and alternative crimes. One is that, for other crimes,
differentiating between a deterrent effect and an incapacitation effect is key, called a “first-order issue” by Chalfin
and McCrary (2017). But incapacitation due to incarceration is not a major concern for tax evasion. To get a sense
of the difference in magnitude, according to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, in 2013 2,220,300 adults were
incarcerated in U.S. federal and state prisons, and county jails. In contrast, in fiscal year 2016 just 927 people were
incarcerated for federal tax evasion not related to illegal activity or narcotics. Moreover, one can in principle evade
taxes even while incarcerated, while this is more difficult for, say, auto theft. Indeed, in 2010 more than 91,000
inmate returns claimed $758 million in fraudulent refunds (Ellis 2013). In addition, the stigma from being involved
in tax evasion is qualitatively different from that associated with, say, murder. Finally, unlike many crimes, tax
evasion is not a phenomenon of youth, which has many implications, especially when the criminal choice is
considered in a life-cycle setting; for example, Anwar and Loughran (2011) argue that risk perceptions are more
sensitive to experience early in a person’s criminal career.



                                                                                                                    14
For this reason, almost all the empirical analyses of evasion, including the most credible ones

discussed below, don’t actually have a reliable measure of evasion. But scholars have risen to the

challenge, and there are several promising developments in ascertaining the magnitude, nature and

determinants of tax evasion as well as, most importantly, how different policies might affect tax

evasion. I discuss these developments next. Because the econometric issues are addressed

extensively elsewhere, here I only briefly address some of the tax-specific issues that arise with

these methodologies.

2.1 Random Audits

       Aggregating up from data on operational audits will not provide an accurate picture of tax

evasion, as by design these audits focus on those returns that are most suspected of noncompliance;

to the extent that this focus is successful, aggregation will overstate the magnitude of evasion. A

more accurate picture can be obtained from random audits. In the United States, the IRS National

Research Program (NRP) 12 provides a snapshot of compliance and evasion from annual stratified

random samples of approximately 13,000 returns combined over several years with the primary

objective of optimizing the IRS’s audit strategy, but also to better understand the tax gap. Each

return is classified according to one of three possible courses of action: accept the return as

corroborated by third-party information, write to the taxpayer for additional information on up to

three items that could not be corroborated, or conduct an in-person audit. The NRP oversamples

returns from high-income taxpayers and individuals who report sole proprietorship income.

Because the line-by-line audits can fail to uncover substantial amounts of noncompliance, the tax

gap methodology includes adjustments for income that is not detected during audits using a

technique known as detection-controlled estimation, discussed in Feinstein (1999). 13


12
     The NRP replaced a similar program known as the Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program (TCMP) in 2001.
13
     See Internal Revenue Service (2016).

                                                                                                          15
     Given the scale of the effort required (and perhaps its political sensitivity), tax authorities in

very few countries have done such studies. 14 Even for the United States, where these studies have

been done regularly since tax year 1963, it is difficult to draw inferences about changes in

noncompliance over time, because the methodologies used have varied. The limited usefulness of

these estimates for these purposes is not really a surprise, because their main objective is not to

come up with precise aggregate “tax gap” measures of the magnitude of evasion or of the nature

of evasion, but rather to help identify returns that are more likely to feature evasion, so as to guide

the allocation of enforcement resources.

2.2 Randomized Controlled Trials

     Randomized controlled trials 15 (RCTs) have been part of the “credibility revolution” (Angrist

and Pischke, 2010) in empirical economics because they enable identification of the causal impact

of, for example, a policy intervention. When executed properly, the researcher need not worry

about identifying an appropriate control group, because the control group is built into the

randomization; in the simplest case, there are two statistically identical groups, one that receives

the policy treatment of interest and the other that doesn’t.

     Although governments are unlikely to allow tax rates and bases to be randomized in the field,

for other tax-system instruments policy randomization is possible and, more important, has

become a reality. 16 Despite the unrivaled internal validity of well-designed randomized control




14
   A notable exception is the United Kingdom, where the HMRC has calculated tax gap estimates for many British
taxes; they use bottom-up estimates based on random audits to assess the magnitude of several aspects of
noncompliance for individual income tax, as well as business tax for small- and medium-sized enterprises. See HMRC
(2015) and IMF (2013). OECD (2015) discusses other countries’ tax gap studies.
15
   Such studies are also referred to as randomized field experiments, but my experience with tax authorities has
taught me that most, maybe all, governments do not want to experiment on their citizens. It is, though, arguably
prudent to run trials, or pilots, of a contemplated policy reform before rolling it out to the whole population.
16
   Hallsworth (2014) offers an insightful review of the early wave of these studies.

                                                                                                               16
trials, they are not without issues. 17 It is not always clear that the results can be “scaled up.”

General equilibrium effects may matter, and without understanding the causal channels through

which policy interventions affect taxpayers’ behavior, it may not be possible to predict the effect

of variations in the policy intervention without running repeated experiments. In addition, some

interventions that are credible in an experimental setting may not be credible in an economy-wide

setting. For example, Kleven et al. (2011) sent treatment groups letters asserting they are subject

to a 50 percent or 100 percent probability audit threat letters; savvy taxpayers would know that

either policy would be prohibitively expensive were either of these treatments to be expanded to

the entire population. Thus, it could be that taxpayers would react strongly to such a threat when

explicitly made on a small scale, when it is plausibly credible, but would not react if the threat

were made broadly, which would not be credible due to limited resources of the tax authority.

Another issue is the difficulty of establishing external validity, discussed at more length below.

2.3 Wider Availability of Administrative Data

     A very promising recent development is the wider availability for analysis of anonymized (also

called de-identified) administrative tax data, including but not limited to tax returns, sometimes

linked to other administrative records, often on the whole population of a country. These kinds of

data first became available in Nordic countries, but now they are also available under varying

protocols in Canada, in the United Kingdom, many other European countries, in the United States

(in this case not generally linked to other administrative data) and most recently in numerous low-

and middle-income countries including Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, India, Pakistan,

Rwanda, Tunisia, and Uganda. Compared to having small samples of tax-return data, when a

researcher has all returns she has much more (statistical) power to reach reliable conclusions about


17
  This is not the place to assess in detail the controversies about the internal and external validity of RCTs; the
interested reader might want to consult Deaton (2010), List (2011), and Banerjee et al. (2017).

                                                                                                                      17
the effect of taxation and to investigate such issues as the heterogeneity among groups defined by

geography or other demographic variables. Some current efforts in the U.S. have focused on

linking tax data sets, such as linking firm records with worker records, in ways that have not

heretofore been done, even by the IRS itself. The fact that tax-return data generally contain what

the taxpayer reported, rather than the “truth” about, say, income, is a disadvantage if it is the truth

one is hoping to learn about, but is a particular advantage when studying the elasticity of reported

taxable income, which crucially includes evasion and avoidance responses to tax policy

instruments. 18

     To be sure, some delicate issues arise with studies based on administrative data. 19 The data

must be anonymized to preserve taxpayer privacy, and other measures must be in place to prevent

misuse of the data. These concerns have led to a situation where only a small group of academics

get access to the data, 20 so that replication is not easy. One might also be concerned that results

that shed an unflattering light on the operations or decisions of the tax authority are less likely to

see the light of day.

2.4 Analysis of Administrative Data with Kink, Notch and Regression Discontinuity
    Research Designs
    Empirical analysis outside of the randomized control paradigm is by no means dead, nor should

it be, especially when making use of tax-return administrative data. But the bar for credible

identification strategies in research using administrative data (and randomized field experiments)

has gotten higher.




18
   A survey of the literature on the elasticity of taxable income is presented in Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012).
19
   These issues are discussed in greater detail in Slemrod (2016).
20
   In the United States, the access has been formalized through the Joint Statistical Research Program of the IRS’
Statistics of Income Division, which since 2012 has issued a call for proposals every two years, and accepts and
facilitates projects that meet explicit criteria. In the 2016 round, 18 proposals were approved. For details see
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/16jsrpprojects.pdf.

                                                                                                                18
   Two non-RCT-based research designs hold particular promise and have been widely exploited

recently in empirical tax analyses: regression discontinuity and “bunching” analysis of kinks and

notches in policy. In a regression discontinuity design, there is a threshold above or below which

a tax treatment applies. By comparing neighboring observations on either side of the threshold

and therefore arguably quite similar, one can estimate the average effect of the treatment in that

local area, even in environments where randomization is not feasible. In this setting it is crucial

that the assignment of cases to treatment is random, and that it is impossible for the decision makers

to manipulate their treatment status.

   When policy introduces kinks in budget sets, so that the marginal (but not average) tax rate

changes discontinuously around the kink, identification is aided because arguably in many cases

the people on either side of the kink are on average fairly similar. How many people “bunch” at or

very near the kink provides, under some assumptions, a measure of the average elasticity of choices

with respect to the tax rate. Even more compelling is the analysis of behavior in the presence of

policy-induced notches, where the budget set itself is discontinuous, so for instance reporting one

additional dollar of income increases one’s tax liability by a few hundred dollars. Ever since their

potential for identification was understood, an impressively high number of policy notches have

been discovered and analyzed, some pertaining to tax enforcement policy. One particularly

promising aspect of notches is that their presence often implies that there is some region of

behavior that is always dominated by behavior in another region regardless of one’s preferences:

earning one less dollar to get below the threshold of a tax-increasing notch in an income tax

schedule saves money and requires less labor, a win-win for the majority of folks who prefer more

leisure to less and more money to less. The so far ubiquitous finding that theoretically dominated




                                                                                                   19
region is not empty sheds light on the constellation of reasons that might explain such behavior

such as irrationality, cluelessness, and adjustment costs. 21

2.5 Traces of True Income and Evasion

     In a traces-of-income procedure, one compares an indicator of the true tax base, say income,

to reported income. 22 The classic paper is due to Pissarides and Weber (1989), who use food

consumption as an income indicator. They assume, reasonably, that although how much food

someone purchases is a function of income and other characteristics, it does not depend on what

kind of income, in particular salary versus self-employment income, a person has. Next they

examine the ratio of food purchases to reported income, separately for employees and self-

employed people, and find that it is larger for the latter group, implying given their assumption

that the self-employed understate their income. Thus, they infer (relative) true income from food

purchases, and compare this “trace” of true income to (relative) reported income.

     Under a traces-of-evasion technique, one seeks behavior that can reasonably only, or at least

largely, be explained by tax evasion, for instance the hoarding of high-value currency, which

facilitates both tax evasion and money laundering, or the maintenance of accounts in tax havens.

This approach is related to the broader topic of “anomaly detection” that is used to assist, for

example, in the detection of credit-card fraud, as discussed in Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar

(2009).

2.6 Other Promising Empirical Research Designs



21
  Kleven (2016) surveys bunching analysis, focusing on tax issues; Kleven and Waseem (2013) is a key application.
22
  More generally, this method focuses on traces of the true tax base, be it income, consumption, or some other
base. There is also a macroeconomic version of this methodology that has analyzed traces of true aggregate income
to shed light on the size of the informal economy across countries. For example, conditional on other determinants,
a high ratio of aggregate electricity use (a trace of true income) or cash use (a trace of evasion) to formal income
might indicate a relatively large informal sector. Slemrod and Weber (2012) critically discuss such estimates of the
informal economy.


                                                                                                                 20
     Some modern research designs that have provided insights into other questions have not yet

been applied to tax compliance and enforcement questions. One is the so-called “judges’ model,”

which takes advantage of random or quasi-random assignment of judges or other decision makers

as an instrument to assess the impact of the severity of punishment on subsequent behavior. An

excellent example of this approach is the study of Dobbie and Song (2015), who exploit the fact

that U.S. bankruptcy courts use a blind rotation system to assign cases to judges who are of

measurable heterogeneous “toughness” in order to study the impact of bankruptcy protection on

debtor outcomes. To the extent that tax auditors are randomly or quasi-randomly assigned to cases,

one might be able to learn about the impact on behavior of the intensity of evasion monitoring.

Many other taxpayer interactions with the tax authority, such as offers in compromise—taxpayer

proposals to settle tax liabilities for less than the full amount owed—or applications to enter an

amnesty program, have this character.



     3. THE MAGNITUDE AND NATURE OF EVASION

         3.1 Evidence from Random Audits

     The IRS’s most recent tax gap estimates were released in April, 2016 and pertain to an average

over tax years 2008 to 2010. 23 The overall gross federal tax gap is estimated as $458 billion, which

amounts to 18.3 percent of the estimated actual (remitted plus unremitted) tax liability; the IRS

calls the 81.7 percent of the total that is remitted the “voluntary compliance rate.” 24 The IRS

estimates that it would eventually collect $52 billion of the $458 billion gross tax gap estimate,




23
  IRS (2016).
24
  Of note is the fact that the IRS’ 2014-2017 strategic plan states a target voluntary compliance rate of 87 percent
by 2017, a substantial 23 percent decrease in the noncompliance rate. (IRS 2014).

                                                                                                                  21
which results in a “net tax gap” of $406 billion, so that the “net compliance rate” is 83.7 percent--

16.3 percent of the estimated tax liability will never be remitted. 25

     More telling than the overall compliance rate is the sharp variation in the compliance rate by

the extent of information reporting to the IRS. When there is little to no third-party-reported

information (such as self-employment income), the estimated noncompliance rate is 63 percent,

compared to 19 percent when there is “some” reporting, and 7 percent when there is “substantial”

information reporting. Small businesses, which comprise a major part of the first category,

represent a large portion of the tax gap in individual income; approximately 47 percent of

underreporting of individual income tax comes from business income. When there is both

withholding and substantial information reporting (such as for employee wages and salaries), the

estimated noncompliance rate is just 1 percent. Kleven et al. (2011) find a similar disparity in, but

lower overall, noncompliance rates in Denmark, with an estimated 14.9 percent for self-

employment income but less than one percent for third-party reported items. 26

     This variation is, in my view, stark and compelling evidence for the primary importance of

deterrence as an explanation of tax evasion. When information reporting renders the likelihood of




25
  The 16.3 percent is slightly higher than the previous net tax gap estimate of 14.5 percent for tax year 2006, but
the IRS attributes the difference to “improvements in the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the estimates” rather
than a trend toward more noncompliance.
         As a comparison, the HM Revenue & Customs (2015) recently calculated the overall tax gap in the United
Kingdom as of 2013-2014 to be 6.4 percent of true liability: 5.0 percent for the individual income tax, 6.4 percent for
the corporation income tax, and 11.1 percent for the value-added tax. Small and medium-sized enterprises account
for over half of the overall tax gap. Whether the much lower estimated noncompliance rate for the British income
tax compared to the U.S. income tax is real, or due to a different tax gap methodology, is not clear. Kleven et al.
(2011) report the results of a smaller-scale random audit tax gap exercise in Denmark, and find overall evasion to be
only 2.2 percent of net income.

26
   Unlike the US tax gap estimates, in the Danish study no correction was made to reflect that audits do not uncover
all evasion, so the extent of detected evasion between the two countries is not as stark as the figure in the text
suggest.

                                                                                                                    22
successful evasion to near zero (i.e., p is close to one), evasion is negligible; when that likelihood

is much lower, evasion proliferates.

     3.2 Traces

     The wide divergence between the compliance rates of employees and the self-employed has

attracted a lot of research interest and has focused attention on the latter group. Recall that

Pissarides and Weber (1989) pioneered the “traces-of-income” approach using UK Family

Expenditure Survey data on food consumption to estimate the extent of evasion, assuming that

only the self-employed evade and that the relationship between food consumption and true income

is independent of employment status. 27 With these assumptions, they are able to predict true

income—and therefore underreporting—for the self-employed survey respondents. Assuming

income reports in the survey match those given to the tax authority, they estimate that self-

employed people in the United Kingdom on average underreported their income by about one-

third. 28

     Feldman and Slemrod (2007) pursue a similar methodology, but avoid the need to use survey

data by instead using as the trace of true income charitable donations reported on U.S. income tax

returns. They conclude that reported positive self-employment income of $1 is associated with the




27
  A related traces approach is taken by Fisman and Wei (2004), who identify the response of evasion to product-
specific import tariffs and value added tax in China. They measure evasion as the difference between exports to
China from Hong Kong as reported in Hong Kong’s export data and in China’s import data, at the level of highly
disaggregated products. In principle, these figures should be identical, but in practice imports are consistently
underreported and the extent of underreporting is highly correlated with the return to evasion, the tax rate, such
that a one percentage point increase in the tax rate is associated with 3 percent more misreporting, most of which
seems to occur by mislabeling products as lower-taxed products. More recently, Handley and Moore (2017) show
that reported (deductible) transport costs vary positively with tariff rates, which they attribute to misreporting.


28
  Tax evasion estimates for other countries using this method include Schuetze (2002) for Canada, Paulus (2015) for
Estonia, Johansson (2005) for Finland, Martinez-Lopez (2013) for Spain, Engström and Holmlund (2009) and
Engström and Hagen (2015) for Sweden, Cabral and Gemmell (2018) for New Zealand, Cabral, Kotsogiannis, and
Myles (2014) for the United Kingdom, and Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2014) for the United States.

                                                                                                                23
same level of contributions as $1.54 of wage and salary income, which implies—assuming a

negligible wage and salary income noncompliance rate and that the self-employed are not

inherently more charitable than others—a self-employment noncompliance rate of 35 percent

(0.54/1.54), very similar to the Pissarides-Weber estimate but below the NRP figure discussed

above; for positive farm net income, the implied noncompliance rate is 74 percent. Intriguingly,

other things equal, negative reported values for self-employment income are associated with more

contributions than is zero reported self-employment income, suggesting that on average these

reported losses are associated with higher true incomes. Relative to Pissarides and Weber (1989),

two aspects of this study are particularly worthy of note, one good and one not so good for the

credibility of the estimates. It’s good that the method does not require the researcher to classify a

taxpayer as either an employee or self-employed, as discussed further below. It’s not so good that

the key assumption—that the conditional charity-income ratio does not vary by employment

status—is stronger than the comparable assumption about food; indeed, Glazer and Konrad (1996)

argue that some people donate to charities to signal wealth (or integrity), a motive that is arguably

more relevant for some self-employed people.

   Artavanis, Morse, and Tsoutsoura (2016) develop an ingenious research design that

analyzes household microdata from one of ten large banks in Greece to estimate the relative extent

of underreported income for self-employed Greek workers by type of occupation. They rely on the

fact that in an environment with widespread evasion the banks have had to become skilled at

inferring true income from reported income and other traces of income in order to remain

competitive. Assuming that income is accurately reported for wage and salary earners, they

estimate a credit supply equation for wage earners using reported income and information such as

credit history, borrower characteristics, and local economic growth available to the bank. If this



                                                                                                  24
credit supply equation to be valid for wage earners, they can infer the multipliers that the bank

implicitly applies to reported self-employment income to assess the credit risk of those seeking

loans. The authors estimate multipliers in excess of two for doctors, lawyers, engineers, scientists,

accountants and financial service agents, indicating that for these professions reported income is

less than half of true income. They note that even this may be an underestimate if the bank applies

a discount for any additional income or collection risk assessed, or if the credit supply equation is

biased because the bank applies a multiplier to wage earners’ reported income because of suspected

employee tax evasion.

    In summary, these studies using a traces-of-income approach corroborate the finding from the

tax gap analysis that evasion of self-employment income substantially exceeds that of employee

income. This is a first-order demonstration of the explanatory power of the deterrence model.

    Some of the underlying assumptions of this class of analyses have recently been re-examined.

For example, income reports in household surveys have usually been treated as free of systematic

misreporting, based on the reasoning that underreporting income on a survey does not reduce tax

liability. However, Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2014) argue that the benefit to a noncompliant

individual household of reporting accurately in a survey setting is so small that even a slight probability

that their report is not confidential could result in underreporting. Using a Pissarides-Weber-style

methodology, they estimate that the self-employed underreport income in both the U.S. Consumer

Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics by about 30 percent. This finding

suggests that evidence on traces of evasion from survey data can be informative just as can what

one observes in tax returns, as taxpayer reporting behavior may be similar in both settings.

    All of these studies have specifically addressed the behavior of self-employed individuals

relative to employees, who are assumed to not underreport their income. Clearly, a self-employed



                                                                                                        25
individual with the same amount of income as an employee faces more opportunities and stronger

incentives to evade taxes, as their income is not subject to third-party reporting. Nevertheless,

some recent research has questioned the assumption that employees do not underreport income to

the tax authorities. This could be particularly relevant for studies that do not identify taxpayers as

self-employed by their source of income. 29 Individuals who might be full-time or part-time

employees of a firm may also hold other jobs or perform freelance work and may self-identify as

employees in a household survey while also receiving income from self-employment. If they fail

to report this additional income, studies that assume no evasion among “employed” workers would

underestimate evasion by those identified as “self-employed.”

     Dunbar and Fu (2015) examine this issue by comparing imputations of households’ total

annual expenditure to their reported annual income, using data from the Canadian Survey of

Financial Security, the Survey of Household Spending, and income tax data reported by both

employers and employees. They find evidence that income underreporting is not confined only to

households that report some self-employment income; 30-40 percent of households that report

only salaried income under-reported income, although the underreported income might not be

wages and salaries. Paulus (2015) finds that Estonian private-sector employees underreport salary

income. Using a dataset that links information from tax forms to a more comprehensive household

survey, he estimates the extent of underreporting of income by employees whose income is subject

to third-party reporting, arguing that both the employee and the employer have an incentive to

coordinate and underreport income--the employer gains from owing lower payroll taxes and can

also credibly lower reported revenue to save on value-added-tax liability. Making the slightly less


29
  The papers vary in their definition of a self-employed individual. Pissarides and Weber (1989) treat anyone as self-
employed who reports more than 25 percent of their income as due to self-employment. Other research, such as Cabral,
Kotsogiannis, and Myles (2015), uses taxpayers’ own categorizations of themselves to determine employment status.


                                                                                                                   26
restrictive assumption that (only) public-sector employees must (and do) report truthfully, he uses

the correlation between income information in survey data and administrative data for these

employees as a benchmark to compare to private-sector employees. He estimates that about 20

percent of private-sector employees in Estonia underreport income. Finally, Best (2014) analyzes

matched tax administrative data on firms and salaried workers in Pakistan, and concludes that 19

percent of workers misreport their income.

          These studies consistently show that evasion is substantially higher for income that is not

subject to third-party reporting. The level of evasion, however, is more difficult to pin down. We

can consider estimates from studies like Pissarides and Weber (1989) and Feldman and Slemrod

(2007) as a lower bound of evasion by the self-employed. As Dunbar and Fu (2015) suggest, their

crucial assumption that employees do not underreport may not always hold: individuals identified

as “employees” in survey data underreport income earned outside of their primary job. Studies that

estimate evasion by source of income instead of the employment status of the worker can come

closer to a true estimate of the level of evasion. However, as Paulus (2015) finds, in some settings

employees may underreport some portion of their income that is subject to third-party reporting.

    The research into the level and nature of evasion informs policy because it illuminates “where

the money is.” More crucial to policy is knowing the impact (and cost) of enforcement initiatives

to reduce the level of evasion. From the perspective of the Allingham-Sandmo model, one might

conclude that means learning about how p and f affect evasion. Next I address what has been

learned recently about the impact of the principal linchpins of tax enforcement: audits, information

reporting, and remittance rules. I begin by discussing a recent wave of research has focused on

communication from the tax authority to the taxpayer, usually, but not always, in the form of a

letter.



                                                                                                  27
    4. LETTER, AND OTHER NOTIFICATION, INTERVENTIONS

    4.1 Effects of Letter Interventions

    The most prominent example of tax enforcement RCTs is letter interventions, where the tax

authority sends one or more types of letters to randomly selected groups of taxpayers, with a control

group receiving no letter. Because sending letters is a relatively inexpensive policy instrument, tax

authorities have been particularly willing to partner with academics to design RCTs that measure

their impact.

    Before discussing what these RCTs have taught us, it is worthwhile to consider what a letter

might say, what the words might convey to a taxpayer, and how this relates to the deterrence model

of tax evasion laid out above. The content loosely falls within four categories, although often a

particular intervention treatment combines aspects of more than one category.

    In the first category are messages that provide information about the enforcement environment

generally, such as the penalties for detected evasion (f). In principle a message in this category

could convey the chances of detection (p) or of audit, but information about this is very difficult to

convey precisely, especially as the probability depends on how much evasion is attempted, what

kind of evasion is attempted, and so on.

    In the second category are explicit audit threats—your return will be closely examined, or will

be examined with some stated probability. The behavioral response to receiving such messages has

the potential to shed light on the impact of changing p, but the interpretation is fairly subtle, because

the reaction will depend on how the message changes the taxpayer’s perceived p(.) function.

    The third category includes messages that convey that the tax authority possesses personalized

information that suggests that the taxpayer is, or has been, noncompliant. The information might



                                                                                                      28
come from third-party-provided forms, information known to another jurisdiction, or from filings

of other connected taxpayers. Possibly into this category would go the conveyance of apparently

unthreatening information—“just checking in”—because the taxpayer may interpret this as a

reminder that the tax authority knows of her existence and (potentially) her true tax liability.

   The fourth category appeals to factors outside of the deterrence model, appealing to a sense of

civic duty and norms of compliance, or else reminds the taxpayer of what programs tax revenue

supports. Such messages would presumably be irrelevant to the free-riding, amoral taxpayer of the

Allingham-Sandmo model, but might matter to the taxpayer who behaves in ways described in

Section 1.4.


    The studies track the reporting behavior (evasion is not directly observable), often relative to

previous reporting, of those in these treatment groups compared to a control group that received

no contact from the tax authority. With a few exceptions discussed below of studies that

investigate network spillover effects of such interventions, these are all cases of what might be

called specific dissuasion—where the intervention is intended to discourage noncompliance of

the specific individual or business receiving the letter. This term is a modification of the concept

of specific deterrence, which refers to a punishment intended to discourage criminal behavior in

the specific individual receiving the punishment, and contrasts to general deterrence, which refers

to inducing others tempted to commit this offence not to do so by changing the perceived chance

of detection of noncompliance or the consequences of being detected evading.

   In the first application to tax compliance of an RCT design, Slemrod, Blumenthal, and

Christian (2001) analyzed the results of a randomized controlled experiment conducted by the

State of Minnesota Department of Revenue (MDOR) and designed in cooperation with the




                                                                                                   29
authors. 30 Randomly selected taxpayers within six distinct categories (low, middle, and high

income, each with and without income not subject to employer withholding and information

reporting) who filed a return for tax year 1993 were sent a letter from the MDOR in January of

1995. A treatment group was informed that their not-yet-filed 1994 federal and state income tax

returns would be “closely examined” 31 for any irregularities. The letters were sent after the tax

year had ended, so that individuals generally could only respond by changing their reporting

behavior. The authors compared the change in reported income (compared to tax year 1993) of

this treatment group to that of a control group that did not receive any communication from the

MDOR. Low- and middle- income taxpayers who received a letter promising a certain audit

reported slightly, but statistically significantly, more, income than those who did not receive such

a letter, and the difference was larger for those with better opportunities to evade in the form of

income not subject to withholding and information reporting.

     What do we learn from this result? First of all, if taxpayers surmised from this letter that any

and all evasion would be discovered and penalized, then the conditional change in reported income

is arguably a measure of the previous year’s evasion, as no rational taxpayer would evade if they

believed the probability of detection to be 100 percent. More generally, the effect of receiving this

letter on the beliefs of the treatment group depends on their prior beliefs about the probability of

an audit. If the individual expected that their returns were routinely examined every year, then

there might be little or no change in behavior. Others may have revised their probability of

detection upward, but not to one. Thus, the measured increase in compliance does not reveal

anything definitive about de/dp, even just in Minnesota in the mid-1990s, because the perceived


30
   Blumenthal, Christian, and Slemrod (2001) describe an appeal-to-conscience treatment arm of the same RCT,
discussed in Section 8.3.
31
   This language was chosen after careful consideration. Given the very limited auditing resources of the state, to
say that returns would be “audited”, as the term is commonly understood, would probably have been deceptive.

                                                                                                                  30
value of dp is not known. It does, though, suggest that this type of intervention can reduce

noncompliance, at least in the short run. It does not immediately inform about the longer-term

impact for two reasons. First, the study did not track subsequent behavior. Second, even if it did,

the effect in later periods would depend on whether changed perceptions persisted, and the

promised interventions were perceived to be credible; an appropriate research design could in

principle measure the latter, but the result might not be externally valid for other apparently similar

interventions whose perceived credibility differed.

     One other striking finding of Slemrod, Blumenthal, and Christian (2001) is worth mentioning:

high-income taxpayers with self-employment or farm income receiving this audit-threat letter on

average reported lower income, a seemingly perverse response from the perspective of the

deterrence model. The authors speculate that more sophisticated taxpayers (and their accountants)

understand an audit to be a negotiation, and view reported taxable income as the opening (low) bid

in a negotiation that does not necessarily result in finding and penalizing all noncompliance; thus,

the initial lower reported tax liability report might not indicate that the eventual tax remittance was

lower, as well. 32 This result offers a caveat that the compliance response to enforcement initiatives

for very high-income individuals may be different than for others, and in particular may be very

intervention-specific.

     Kleven et al. (2011) conduct a similar audit experiment in Denmark. Randomly chosen

individuals, some of whom had been (randomly) audited the previous year, received letters

announcing either a 100 percent probability of audit or a 50 percent probability of audit, while a



32
   In addition, if the taxpayer believes that there will be an audit regardless of what is on the return, then dp/de is
zero rather than positive, and this reduces the optimal report, ceteris paribus. Conceivably, the letter could have
induced people to seek out professional tax preparers, who alerted the taxpayer to legal means to reduce tax
liability. However, receiving an audit-threat letter did not increase the fraction of these taxpayers that hired
professional help (it was already above 90 percent), but perhaps the content and tone of the interaction changed.

                                                                                                                    31
control group received no letter. As the authors note, this is not the same as exposing taxpayers to

a varying probability of detection, which is likely to be lower for self-reported income. The threat-

of-audit experiment was conducted only on a sample of employees (i.e., it excluded any self-

employed individuals). The individuals received the letter shortly after they received their pre-

populated returns from the government with all relevant information known to the government

from third-party information reports, and had one month to make adjustments to the return.

Individuals who were threatened with a 50 percent probability of audit were about 1.1 percentage

points more likely (14.5 percent versus 13.4 percent) to adjust net income upwards than those who

received no letter, and those who received the 100 percent probability of audit were 0.9 percentage

points more likely than the 50 percent threat of audit to do so. 33

        Meiselman (forthcoming) uses an RCT to understand what messages from the tax authority

are effective for eliciting a return from suspected resident nonfilers of the Detroit local income tax,

assessing the efficacy of messages related to penalty salience, punishment probability, compliance

cost, and civic pride. He finds that a penalty salience message that stated the statutory penalty for

failing to file a return tripled response rates from 3 percent to 10 percent and raised the fraction of

filed returns that admitted tax due from 39 percent to 52 percent. Compliance cost mailings that

enclosed a blank tax return and punishment probability mailings that stated the recipient’s federal

income also raised response rates relative to the basic mailing, but civic pride mailings did not.


        In an ambitious recent attempt to more closely tie the results of a letter intervention to the

Allingham-Sandmo deterrence theory, Bergolo et al. (2018) carried out a large-scale field

experiment involving value-added-tax compliance of over 20,000 Uruguayan small- and medium-



33
  The impact did not vary significantly depending on whether the taxpayers had received a random audit the year
before, so no evidence of intertemporal cross-effects was discovered.

                                                                                                             32
sized firms. Firms in a control group received a letter from the tax authority with generic

information about taxes. Firms in the main treatment arm received the same letter with an added

paragraph, conveying information about past audit rates and the penalty levels for tax evasion,

based on historical means from a firm-specific sub-sample. Although in the main body of the letters

these statistics are referred to as the “likelihood” of being audited and the likely penalty if evasion

is determined to have occurred, elsewhere in the letter exactly how the figures were calculated is

described in detail. In separate treatment arms, they measure the effect of varying the actual audit

probability communicated to a firm between 25 percent and 50 percent, a letter stating that evasion

increases the chance of being audited, and a public-goods letter listing a set of government services

that could be provided if evasion in Uruguay ceased. They supplement these treatments with

information on taxpayers’ subsequent perceptions about audits, measured with survey data, as well

as on the actual taxes paid.


       Bergolo et al (2018) find that adding to the baseline letter a paragraph with statistics about

the probability of being audited and the penalty rates increased tax compliance by about 6.3 percent

(about one-fourth of its current level), and adding a paragraph that informs firms that evading taxes

increased the probability of being audited increases tax compliance by about 7.4 percent. In

contrast, the message about public goods did not have a statistically significant and robust effect

on tax compliance. Intriguingly, among firms who were sent the audit-statistics letter, those who

received higher signals of the audit probability or penalty rates did not remit significantly higher

taxes, nor did the variation in actual audit probabilities induce a significant change in reporting

behavior; this contrasts to the result in Kleven et al. (2011) discussed just above. The authors

conclude that these results cast doubt on whether firms are making an optimal cost-benefit

calculation as in Allingham and Sandmo (1972); perhaps instead, they argue, taxpayers are


                                                                                                    33
reacting to the information because it makes the cost of evading more salient, without any changes

in beliefs about p(.). They argue that the results from the survey also favor the salience channel,

because they suggest that on average the audit-statistics letter reduced the perceived probability of

being audited and, thus, rational Allingham-Sandmo taxpayers would have reduced, rather than

increased, their tax compliance, which did not happen.


       These studies consistently indicate that letter interventions can substantially reduce

noncompliance in the short term. They are less definitive regarding exactly what the mechanism

is, with one recent study arguing that the letter affected the salience rather than the perception of

the enforcement environment.


   4.2 Mode of Intervention

   One natural question that arises is the extent to which the delivery mechanism matters for a

given message or, in other words, how the delivery mode affects what message is received. Ortega

and Scartascini (2017) investigate this question by conducting a field experiment in Colombia that

varies the way the National Tax Agency contacts taxpayers with tax delinquencies to deliver

information about the account balance, the type of tax, the year or month it had not been paid, plus

information on methods of payment and the cost that the taxpayer was incurring by not paying as

well as a short moral suasion message. Taxpayers were randomly assigned to a control group, or

to one of three possible delivery mechanisms: letter, email, or personalized visit by a tax inspector.

The authors find sizable differences across delivery methods. Personal visits by a tax inspector are

more effective than the impersonal methods; they are, alas, also much more expensive. In a follow-

up study, Ortega and Scartascini (2015) find that the effect of phone calls falls between those of

the impersonal methods and the personal visits.



                                                                                                   34
       Boning et al. (2018) investigate, using an RCT design, how U.S. businesses at risk of being

delinquent in their tax remittances for IRS Form 941 (for withholding and social insurance taxes)

respond to letters versus Revenue Officer visits. They find very large and immediate positive

effects on remittance of the Revenue Officer visits that persist for at least four quarters thereafter,

and a positive but substantially smaller and less persistent effect of the letter treatment. This study

and the Ortega-Scartiscini one speak with one voice that in-person contact has a larger effect on

behavior than a letter. It is not obvious whether this differential response is due to a personal visit

convincing recipients that the tax authority has become more serious about enforcement, and

thereby increasing the perceived value of p, or whether it is a more successful in getting taxpayers

to pay closer attention to an unchanged set of enforcement parameters.

   4.3 Other than Income Taxes

   Some recent research involving randomized controlled trials addresses the enforcement of taxes

other than income tax. Castro and Scartascini (2015) focus on remittance of a municipal property

tax in Argentina that differs from an income tax in some important ways relevant for enforcement.

For one, revenue is directly linked to visible provision of public goods like street lights and trash

collection, so that taxpayers may be more likely to connect their remittances to provision of these

public goods. Second, payments are calculated on the basis of length of the property facing the

street, number of street lights and trash collection services received at the property, and there is

arguably little room for successfully misreporting these measures. The authors send three types of

letters to test the effect of appeals to fairness, equity, and deterrence. They find that the deterrence

messages have the strongest effect; informing taxpayers of the penalties of nonpayment increases

the probability of remittance by 5 percentage points from a base of 40 percent.




                                                                                                     35
        In a field experiment in Austria, Fellner, Sausgruber, and Traxler (2013) use a randomized

design to test the effect on compliance with Austrian television and radio licensing fees of

various mailings to potential non-compliers. Austrian households owning a radio or television are

required to remit a licensing fee; collection of the annual fee relies on self-reporting and individuals

can access public broadcasting channels without paying the fee. In 2005, 94 percent of households

were registered and paid a licensing fee, but only 1 percent of households owned neither a TV nor

a radio, suggesting the presence of evasion. The authors sent letters emphasizing different

messages to five treatment groups within a population identified as potential evaders by the

enforcement authority. One publicized the threat of detection and sanction, another was a moral

appeal equating compliance with fairness, and a third variant provided social information on

the overall high level of compliance. Two others interacted the threat of detection with the moral

appeal treatment and with the provision of social information. Those receiving any type of mailing

were significantly more likely to make a payment within 50 days of receiving the letter, but only

the variant emphasizing the threat of punishment induced an additional increase in compliance.

The authors interpret the generic effect of the mailing as an “alert effect” signaling that

nonpayment had been noticed, with the consequences of noncompliance amplified by the threat

variant. The fact that any contact from the tax authority might affect compliance, at least in the

short term, is a common finding in recent compliance research.


        Using a randomized controlled trial in Philadelphia, Chirico et al. (2016) study the extent

to which property tax delinquency can be attributed to lack of salience, deterrence or tax morale.

The study compares seven treatment arms of 19,000 newly delinquent taxpayers delivered through

letters. These treatments range from a simple reminder of the liability, including accrued interest

and penalties, to threats of a sanction and moral appeals. They find that moral appeals have no


                                                                                                     36
more effect on payment than a simple reminder. Like other papers in this literature, Chirico et al.

find the threat of sanctions to be most effective, raising more than $65 for each additional dollar

of administrative costs at the margin. Although the simple reminders increased taxpayer

compliance in the immediate tax cycle, they did not in subsequent cycles, suggesting that the

salience effect is short-lived.


5. AUDITS

    Distinct from the impact on evasion of a change in the perceived probability of detection of

noncompliance is the effect of audits on the audited--the specific deterrence effect. Why might an

audit of this year’s income tax return affect future reporting behavior? In the deterrence

framework, it would matter only to the extent it affects the audited taxpayers’ perceptions about

p(.) or f, and exactly how they would be affected is ambiguous. A taxpayer may presume that the

probability of getting audited a second time is low, sometimes referred to as the “crater effect,”

which would mean that taxpayers are less likely to comply in the years following an audit. Or, a

taxpayer may revise upwards her prior on the probability of an audit, and would therefore be more

likely to comply in the years following an audit. Of course, what matters is taxpayers’ perceptions

of the chance of evasion being detected and punished, not the chance of an audit per se, and an

audit may change one’s perceptions of what an auditor knows and can reasonably find out, whether

an audit is akin to a negotiation, and so on; some taxpayers may be impressed with the information

and skill of the auditor, and so revise upward their perceived p, while others may realize that at

least for some sources of income the auditor knows little or nothing and does not have the resources

to learn much more, and thus revise their perceived p downward.




                                                                                                 37
     Three recent studies have examined this issue.34 DeBacker et al. (2015) use IRS data from the

National Research Program (NRP) to study the behavior of audited individuals in the years

following an audit. They construct a control group by randomly selecting (unaudited) returns from

the same sampling pool as the NRP and who thus have similar characteristics to the randomly

audited NRP sample. They find that an audit increases reported wage income over three years after

the audit by 0.45 percent and increases self-employment (Schedule C) income by 7.51 percent.

However, this large estimated effect on reported self-employment income is short-lived; indeed,

five or six years following the audit, the treated group actually reports lower Schedule C income

as compared to the control group. When they compare the reporting behavior of the same

individual pre- and post-audit, they find the same positive effect of an audit. Kleven et al. (2011)

also found, in Denmark, a positive deterrence effect of audits on subsequent evasion, with the

effect being entirely composed of changes in self-reported income, with no effect found on third-

party-reported income.

     The external validity of these results is an issue. Because taxpayers audited under the NRP are

informed that they have been randomly selected for research purposes, these audits may not have

the same impact as an operational audit on the perceived probability of a future audit—the taxpayer

learns nothing about whether the tax authority is “on to them.” Moreover, these taxpayers are not

representative of those who are typically subject to audit, and their behavioral response behavior

may not be representative of those who are normally targeted for operational audits. 35

     Advani, Elming, and Shaw (2017) pursue a similar research strategy using data from the United

Kingdom. The HM Revenue & Customs conducts a random audit each year similar to the NRP.



34
  Earlier studies include Long and Schwartz (1987) and Erard (1992), both of which did not find significant results.
35
  This raises a methodological Catch-22, of course, because the regular, operational, audits are not randomly
chosen, raising difficult sample selection problems.

                                                                                                                   38
Instead of resampling the subject pool as DeBacker et al. (2015) do, the authors use individuals

who appear in the treatment group in future years as the control group for those audited in the

current year. For instance, individuals who were selected for random audit in 2006 and beyond are

used as the control group for those audited in 2005. Consistent with the DeBacker et al. findings,

those who are audited increase their reported tax liability more than the control group in years

following the audit. Also based on UK audit data, Gemmell and Ratto (2012) found the response

to depend on the results of the audit. In particular, those who were found to be compliant, reduced

their subsequent compliance, while those found to be noncompliant increased their subsequent

compliance.

       There is one important difference between these two sets of studies of the specific effect

of audits that makes the results difficult to compare. An American (or Danish) taxpayer who

receives one of the random audits is informed that the return was chosen randomly—nothing about

the return as filed triggered the audit, or increased its likelihood. In contrast, in the UK study the

taxpayer was not told whether it was a random or targeted audit (Advani, Elming, and Shaw, 2017,

p. 9). It follows that the US and UK audits would likely trigger very different re-evaluations of

how likely a future audit is, and therefore induce different behavioral changes.

       That audits matter other than for their general deterrent effect is also suggested by

taxpayers’ efforts to sidestep them. Almunia and Lopez-Rodriguez (2018) study the behavior

of Spanish firms in response to a notch in enforcement intensity that arises because the Spanish

Large Taxpayer’s Unit (LTU) monitors firms with revenues above €6 million for all major taxes.

Even though the compliance requirements and tax rates are the same above and below this

threshold, enforcement changes discontinuously because the LTU has the resources to conduct

more audits and to effectively utilize technology to cross-check reported information. Revenues,



                                                                                                   39
and certainly reported revenues, are subject to firm choice, so that in the absence of prohibitive

costs to changing firm size, one would expect a hole in the distribution of firms that report revenues

just above the €6 million cutoff and bunching just below it: firms can earn the same expected after-

tax income if they remain smaller and escape the intensive monitoring by the LTU. Sure enough,

there is significant bunching of firms just below the threshold. The bunching is more pronounced

for firms that produce intermediate goods, which makes sense because their transactions create

more of a paper trail than firms that sell to final consumers and thus the discontinuous increase in

enforcement intensity affects these firms more than retailers.

    To combat sales and profit tax evasion by small firms and the self-employed, many developing

countries have adopted some form of “reverse withholding,” where large firms withhold and remit

to the tax authority a fixed share of their purchases from small firms (and individuals), who can

then apply the withheld amount as a credit against their self-reported tax liability. While withholding

does not change the firms’ true tax liability, there is typically a discontinuity in the audit probability

at the withholding rate; firms seeking tax refunds (because self-reported tax liability is lower than

the withheld amount) are audited at a higher rate than firms making additional tax remittances.

Examining data from Ecuador, Carrillo, Emran, and Rivadeneira (2012) find evidence of bunching

in reported tax liability just above the withholding threshold, suggesting that some firms manipulate

their self-reported tax liability and possibly real economic choices to minimize expected tax

payments subject to the discontinuity in the audit probability. The pattern of bunching changed

dramatically in 2007 only for firms subject to a change in the required withholding rate, ruling out

the possibility that the withholding rate had been chosen to match the distribution of true tax

liabilities. Third-party data on sales and intermediate input costs reported by large firms who act as




                                                                                                       40
withholding agents indicate bunching is indeed associated with tax evasion: self-reported sales are

smaller than third-party reports for more than 10 percent of firms.

   In principle, quantifying the extent to which taxpayers will alter their behavior to lower the

probability of an audit can help reveal the expected cost of an audit, which according to expression

(1) is (1+f)te, and this is proportional to the amount of evasion as well as the penalty for detected

evasion. This exercise has not yet been attempted.



   6. INFORMATION REPORTING

   In Section 4 one objective was to understand the effect of changing the perceived enforcement

parameters via a direct communication (usually a letter) from the tax authority to the taxpayer.

Another set of studies makes explicit why the probability has gone up. I next review research

where the reason that p(.) increases is increased third-party information reporting, where entities

(usually firms) report to the tax authority information relevant for someone else’s tax liability.

Information reporting by employers for employee wages and salaries is pervasive, and is also

widespread for dividends, interest, share sales and real estate sales. Information reporting is also

built into some invoice-credit value-added tax (VAT) systems, when credits for purchases from

other firms are allowed only if accompanied by information on the seller, which can in principle

be checked against the VAT returns of those sellers.

   6.1 Firms

   Field evidence on Chilean firms’ compliance with the VAT highlights the connection between

information reports received by the tax authority and levels of evasion. Because firms can only

claim tax credits for inputs bought from tax-compliant suppliers, the invoice-credit VAT system

has a built-in (albeit imperfect) self-enforcement mechanism for firm-to-firm transactions.



                                                                                                  41
Pomeranz (2015) tests this hypothesis by mailing increased-audit-threat letters to over 100,000

randomly selected Chilean firms, using a sample of over 300,000 firms receiving no letter as the

control group. Consistent with theoretical predictions on the self-enforcement mechanism, the

increase in VAT receipts (and therefore the inferred level of evasion) induced by the letters is

concentrated at the level of sales from firms to final consumers, for which there is no paper

trail.

    Carrillo, Pomeranz, and Singhal (2017) examine the effect of a change in the tax authority’s

use of third-party information on reported corporate tax revenues. In Ecuador, the government has

a few sources it can use to check firms’ self-reports of revenue, including other firms’ reports of

purchases from the firm in question, credit-card sales from credit-card companies, as well as export

and import information from the Ecuadorian customs authority. Although for a few years the tax

authority had collected such third-party reports of firm revenues, it had not utilized this

information. In the episode the authors study, the Ecuadorian tax authority informed some firms

of the discrepancy between the two reports and offered them the opportunity to file an amended

return. The authors compare the reporting behavior of firms before and after notification, and

find that 24 percent of firms underreported revenue in the years when the government did not use

the third-party-verified information. In the three rounds of the experiment, between 11 and 19

percent of notified firms filed an amended return.

    One striking finding of this study is that, in amended returns, firms correctly report their

revenues but also increased their reported costs almost one-for-one with the increase in reported

revenues (96 cents for each dollar!), nearly eliminating any impact on apparent tax liability. The

offset of reported expenses is similar to the finding of Slemrod et al. (2017) regarding the US Form




                                                                                                 42
1099-K requiring credit-card companies to report business receipts, discussed below. 36 Because

the tax authority does not have a comprehensive picture of firms’ costs and revenues through third-

party information, many firms apparently continued to reduce their tax liability through channels

not covered by third-party reporting.                 The experience in Ecuador suggests that the

comprehensiveness of third-party information is crucial and that, in the context of many

developing countries where such comprehensive information is not available, one might not

observe a sharp fall in overall evasion from using an additional source of third-party

information. This study also reveals that reported costs were lower than third-party information

on costs, which at first blush seems to be at odds with a model of firms that seek to maximize after-

tax profits. The authors propose that this behavior is consistent with firms who may believe that

the probability of an audit is a function of firm size and profits. In order to appear small, and lower

the odds of being audited, some firms may underreport both revenues and costs.

     6.2 Involving Charitable Contributions and Other Deductions

     Two recent papers examine the impact on charitable contributions of altering the information

reporting system involving charities. Fack and Landais (2016) do so by exploiting a change in the

French tax treatment of charitable donations. Since the early 1970s, charities in France had been

required to issue standardized receipts to donors but, starting in 1983, the reporting rules began to

require taxpayers to attach these receipts to their tax filing when they claim deductions, lowering

the cost to the tax authority of verifying claimed deductions. Fack and Landais find that reported

donations fell by a stunning 75 percent after the introduction of this change, and argue that this

decline resulted from a sharp drop in over-reporting rather than a decline in actual donations.

Because the new rule only required donors to attach receipts they were presumably already


36
  In the same vein, Asatryan and Peichl (2017) find that for every dollar of audit-driven increase in reported
revenue, firms in Armenia increase reported deductions by 70 to 80 cents.

                                                                                                                 43
receiving, it is not plausible that the decline was due to increased compliance costs. The authors

also calculate the net-of-tax price elasticity of contributions before and after this increase in

enforcement intensity, and conclude that the estimated elasticity before the enforcement change is

about three times larger than the estimate after 1983. This is an illustration of the endogeneity of

the elasticity of (one component of) taxable income to the vector of tax policy instruments, as

stressed by Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) and investigated empirically by Kopczuk (2005): a more

effective enforcement regime apparently reduced the tax-price elasticity substantially.

   Gillitzer and Skov (2016) examine the effect of a different kind of change in third-party

reporting on claims of charitable contributions in Denmark. Starting in 2008, charities in Denmark

were required to report contributions to the tax authority, which would then pre-populate

individual tax returns with the information; individual taxpayers could either accept this

information or amend it. This reduced compliance costs to individual donors, while also increasing

the probability that a false claim by an individual would be detected. Gillitzer and Skov find that

the number of claims actually increased substantially after 2008. Apparently, the effect of lower

compliance costs far outweighed the effect of increased enforcement from third-party reporting,

inducing people on average to report some tax-deductible contributions that they otherwise would

not have bothered to claim. On the surface, this result appears to contradict the findings of Fack

and Landais (2016), who found that requiring receipts from donors greatly reduced claims. It is

possible that over-reporting of charitable contributions as a means of tax evasion is not as pervasive

in Denmark as in France due to the difference in the cost of this channel of evasion.

   Research by Kotakorpi and Laamanen (2016) sheds light on the response of deductions other

than charity to a change in information reporting. They evaluate the impact of a policy experiment

in Finland in the 1990s under which a proportion of taxpayers received a pre-filled income tax



                                                                                                   44
return, whereas other taxpayers had to file a full return. They concluded that receiving a pre-filled

income tax return led to a significant reduction in the number of individuals claiming deductions.

Although which return one received did not affect the actual chance of evasion being detected, the

authors argue that considerations related to tax evasion might have been in play if the reform

affected individuals’ perceived probability of detection: individuals receiving the pre-filled form

might have become worried that the authorities also had information on other items that were not

printed on the form. If this is the mechanism behind the results, it would imply that in the new

system some individuals who would otherwise have claimed some unwarranted deductions did not

do so upon receiving a pre-filled return.

   6.3 Involving Credit-Card Companies

   In an effort to reduce understatement of revenues, the US Housing Assistance Act of 2008

required that, as of January 1, 2011, payment settlement entities such as credit-card companies and

other third-party payment organizations had to report on a new Form 1099-K electronic payments

received by businesses. Analyzing administrative data on the universe of individual income tax

returns that report sole proprietor income, Slemrod et al. (2017) find a large increase in the number

of businesses reporting income that is exactly equal to the amount in the 1099-K report, consistent

with a simple model of optimal reporting behavior. The new reporting requirement increased

reported receipts of this relatively small group by up to 24 percent, although this was offset

somewhat by a 13 percent increase in reported expenses. They also find that more than 20 percent

of the affected group were induced by the introduction of Form 1099-K to file a Schedule C for

self-employment income. Thus, information reporting seems to have had the intended effect of

inducing more accurate reporting of business receipts, but the overall effect on evasion was




                                                                                                  45
dampened by increased reported expenses, which are not directly observable to the tax authority; 37

the revenue effect may also have been offset by firms moving to cash receipts that are not covered

by this information-reporting regime.

     The phenomenon of one type of misreporting increasing when another declines due to

increased enforcement has now been demonstrated multiple times, and calls out for more

theoretical and empirical investigation—under what conditions will it happen, and under what

conditions will legal avoidance displace evasion when it becomes less attractive? Yang (2008)

documents another example of this phenomenon, where in the Philippines increased enforcement

against a specific method of evading import duties reduced this type of behavior, but resulted in

substantial displacement to an alternative method that had not been targeted, such that a zero

change in total duty evasion could not be ruled out.

     6.4 Involving Consumers and Workers

     On the grounds of administrative efficiency, modern tax systems have for the most part largely

excluded people in their role as consumers from remittance responsibility or even information

reporting, relying on tax remittance from firms even for consumption taxes; neither retail sales tax

nor value-added taxes generally involve consumer participation. Modern systems have also de-

emphasized the role in remittance of people in their role as employees, looking to employers via

withholding for the bulk of tax collection, and in exact withholding systems for all of collection.

In general it is more efficient to rely on firms, especially larger firms that can take advantage of

economies of scale and accounting systems already in place for non-tax reasons, to take the lead

role in remittance. This system precludes using consumers and workers as a check on firm




37
   Note, though, that in the United States in an audit the burden of proof for expenses rests on the taxpayer, while
it rests on the IRS for receipts.

                                                                                                                  46
compliance, however, and some recent research explores the possibility of making use of such

checks.

     Beginning in 2007, in an effort to reduce VAT evasion by retail firms, the São Paulo tax

authority provided monetary incentives to customers to report evasion by retail firms in a program

called the Nota Fiscal Paulista (NFP). Consumers receive tax rebates and are entered into lotteries

in exchange for requesting receipts, and can also check online firms’ reports of their transactions

with the consumer and report any discrepancies. Programs with some similar features exist in

China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Portugal, Puerto Rico, Slovakia, and Taiwan. 38 Naritomi (2016)

finds that over a four-year period after the introduction of the NFP, retail firms increased their

reported revenues by 22 percent compared to a control group of wholesale firms (who are not

affected by the NFP). In addition, on average a firm’s reported receipts go up by 14 percent right

after they receive their first consumer complaint. 39 Consumers are encouraged to utilize what they

know to check against what firms reported, facilitated by the fact that each retail purchase receipt

contains the Social Security number of the purchaser.

     Kumler, Verhoogen, and Frias (2013) study the effects on evasion of a 1997 pension reform in

Mexico that tied younger workers’ retirement benefits more closely to the wage reported by

employers. This reform provided a new incentive for this group of workers to ensure that their

employers accurately reported their wages, which in turn might lower payroll tax evasion by

firms. To examine the impact of this initiative, the authors combine two sources of data on wages:

administrative data from the Mexican Social Security agency (IMSS) and household survey data

from the Encuesta Nacional de Empleo Urbano (ENEU). The authors find that, consistent with a



38
  See Marchese (2009).
39
  Note that this policy involves changes both to the information-reporting and remittance regimes, as discussed in
Section 7.

                                                                                                                47
decline in evasion, the gap in median or mean wage within a cell between the ENEU data and the

IMSS data fell for younger age groups after the pension reform but, as predicted, for older workers

not affected by this reform there was no decrease in the gap between the two income reports.

       6.5. Involving Other Countries

       The US Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) initiative takes information reporting

to another level, by inducing 40 foreign financial institutions to report to the IRS, directly or through

their home government, about the foreign accounts and income accruing of US citizens. Much

anecdotal evidence suggests that the compliance costs of this effort (mostly borne initially by

foreign institutions) are substantial, so (at least from a global perspective) the hurdle should be

high for its compliance impact. However, because this crackdown on noncompliance applies

mostly to high-income households, due to distributional concerns the dollar-against-dollar hurdle

might be somewhat lower than otherwise. Notably, much of the world has committed to implement

something similar to FATCA, called the Common Reporting Standard, by 2018.



       7. THE REMITTANCE SYSTEM

       Although public finance textbooks downplay its importance and assert, usually without any

proof, that who or what entity remits a given tax—say the buyer versus the seller of a good—has

no effect, the remittance system can in some settings be of first-order importance in efficiently

enforcing and administering a tax system. Getting the money from what Logue and Slemrod (2009)

call the “low-cost remitters” can matter. The textbook remittance invariance result depends, inter

alia, on an assumption that evasion opportunities are essentially the same for all remitters, which

is often not true. 41 That this lesson has been widely recognized is exhibited most clearly in the


40
     As of July 1, 2014, failure to comply can trigger a 30 percent withholding tax on U.S.-source payments.
41
     See Slemrod (2008) for further discussion of remittance invariance.

                                                                                                               48
system of employer withholding almost all countries use for income and payroll taxes: it is more

cost-effective to deal with collecting tax liability from a small number of organizations with

relatively efficient bookkeeping done for non-tax reasons. It is also evident in the near-universal

(the United States being the prominent holdout) adoption of the value-added tax, which diffuses

remittance responsibility of a consumption tax to all firms—rather than just retailers—but almost

always induces self-enforcement because business inputs are only creditable if purchased from

verifiably tax-compliant firms. Some recent research has sought to quantify the effects of changes

to a country’s remittance regime. 42

        Brockmeyer and Hernandez (2017) study the impact on compliance of tax withholding on

business sales done by credit-card companies in Costa Rica. Credit card companies report all card

transactions to the Costa Rican tax authority, as with the Form 1099-K in the United States, but

also withhold (i.e., remit to the tax authority) a fraction of the sales, which can be credited against

firms’ sales tax liability in the same or future fiscal periods; firms with zero tax liability may

request a refund, but this process is slow and onerous. A reform in August 2011 changed the

withholding rate, on average doubling it but altering the rate with considerable heterogeneity. The

study analyzes the change in the amount of tax remitted by firms that experienced an increase in

the predicted withholding rate, compared to the change in tax remitted by firms that either

experienced no change or were not subject to withholding. If fully and immediately credited by all

firms, the change in remittance system should not change total tax collections. But it did, such that

doubling the rate of withholding increased sales tax collection from those subject to withholding


42
  Dusek and Bagchi (2017) examine the staggered adoption of employer withholding for US state income taxes in
the 1940s through 1970s, and conclude that on average it led to an immediate and permanent increase in income
tax collections of about 25 percent, holding tax rates constant, but they do not pursue the role of evasion in this
response.



                                                                                                                49
by 33 percent. The authors investigate two possible reasons for this result. The first is that

reclaiming the withheld tax either as a credit against their tax liability or as a refund is costly; for

some firms (especially small ones) these costs outweigh the benefits, and so they ended up over-

remitting. These small firms were also more likely to under-remit or fail to remit their reported tax

liabilities prior to the reform, and thus the introduction of withholding raised compliance as well.

In the second channel, firms whose tax liability was not withheld previously but would be after

the reform now see an added column in their credit card statements for tax withheld. Firms whose

withholding rate increases from zero exhibit a larger increase in their reported tax liability than

firms that experience an equivalent withholding rate increase at higher initial values, suggesting

that noticing the application of withholding for the first time may raise the salience of possible

enforcement interventions, and thus lead firms to increase compliance. Notably, the analysis found

no evidence that firms suddenly stopped accepting credit cards, although firms with low sales

volume that accept credit cards had a small decline in the value of credit card transactions.


        Another case where the remittance system apparently matters is diesel fuel taxation.

Kopczuk et al. (2016) present empirical evidence that the identity of the remitting party in the U.S.

diesel fuel market affects both evasion and therefore collections as well as the pass-through of

taxes. Retail diesel prices are higher, and diesel taxes are passed through to retail prices to a greater

extent, in states where the point of collection is at the distributor or prime supplier level rather than

at the retail level, suggesting that these collection regimes reduce evasion compared to collection

at the retailer stage.   Note that some of the information-reporting initiatives discussed in this

paper also shift the remittance pattern. The São Paulo system of involving final consumers in the

VAT offers rewards to those who participate; in essence, the corroborative information comes with

a negative remittance from consumers, which must ultimately be offset by larger remittance


                                                                                                      50
elsewhere in the VAT chain, in other taxes, or lower expenditures. Another example is the dual

landlord-tenant remittance system of the Italian TASI property tax (now mostly abolished), which

assigned the remittance responsibility to both landlords and tenants and thereby generated

information from two sources that could be compared. A crucial difference between classifying,

say, Uber drivers as employees or as independent contractors is that only in the former case would

Uber be responsible for withholding an approximation of the income tax liability for the drivers.

Recently, Airbnb, Inc. has entered into agreements with certain cities to remit the hotel tax liability

rather than relying on the compliance of the property hosts. Wilking (2017) examines the impact

of these agreements on the prices of Airbnb properties, and finds that shifting the remittance

obligation from the property host to the platform increases after-tax prices, suggesting that the

change in remittance regime increased compliance.


          Thus, a number of studies have shown that the tax remittance regime can in some settings

affect the extent of evasion. Indeed, the remittance regime is an aspect of the enforcement regime.

To be sure, in many settings variations in the remittance regime will not be of first-order

importance, and future research should aim to clarify the conditions when remittance details

matter.




   8. OTHER ENFORCEMENT TOOLS

          8.1 Public Disclosure

          In Sections 5, 6, and 7 I have discussed the most important components of tax enforcement.

But many other aspects of the enforcement environment can impact compliance, and I discuss a

couple next, beginning with public disclosure of tax information. Public disclosure could

complement deterrence by encouraging people with relevant information about others’ true tax

                                                                                                    51
liability to come forward as whistleblowers, and the fear of this occurring and subsequent tax

noncompliance penalties (monetary as well as shaming) may constrain evasion. Opponents cite

privacy concerns for individuals, and some businesses complain that complicated tax situations

may be misunderstood or that proprietary information may be revealed. In principle, disclosure

could backfire if some taxpayers reduce reported taxable income in order to minimize the attention

of the press and those seeking to take advantage of their economic situation. On the other hand,

some people might derive utility (bragging rights, if you will) from public appreciation of their

apparent level of affluence, and may be willing to pay for it in the form of a higher tax liability. 43

     Which incentives predominate is an empirical question. Hasegawa et al. (2013) study the

impact of the Japanese income tax disclosure system that was abolished in 2004/2005 on tax

reports of individuals and businesses. They focus on the fact that the disclosure regime applied

only to taxable incomes above ¥40 million (about $400,000), and find strong evidence based on

“missing returns” with reported taxable income just above the disclosure threshold that, on

average, individuals and businesses prefer to avoid disclosure. For businesses, this is consistent

with the local characterization of so-called “39 companies,” whose reported taxable income was

kept just below the ¥40 million disclosure cutoff so as not to provide evidence about their

profitability, which might (so the story went) negatively affect the deals they could make with

other companies. However, this study uncovered no evidence that disclosure increased reported

taxable business income generally, and thus did not demonstrate its effectiveness as a compliance

policy instrument.

     Bø, Slemrod, and Thoresen (2015) explore the effect of public tax-return disclosure in Norway,

which has a long history of disclosing tax filings, but in 2001 experienced a drastic expansion of


43
  The pros and cons of public disclosure are discussed at length in Lenter, Shackelford, and Slemrod (2003) and
Blank (2014b).

                                                                                                                  52
effective public disclosure when anyone with access to the Internet could obtain information on

other Norwegians’ taxable income and income tax liability, taxable wealth and wealth tax liability.

The authors exploit this change in the accessibility of the tax return data to measure the effects of

public disclosure on income reporting. However, because this change happened in all of Norway

at the same time, its aggregate effect may be conflated with the effect of other events happening

contemporaneously. In this paper, identification of the deterrence effects of increased public access

is facilitated by the fact that, prior to the shift to the Internet in 2001, in some municipalities easy

access already existed because tax information was distributed widely through paper catalogues

that were locally produced and disseminated as a fund raiser. The authors observe reported income

changes that are consistent with public disclosure deterring tax evasion: an approximately 3

percent higher average increase in reported income is found among business owners living in

(catalogue-free) areas where the switch to Internet disclosure represented a relatively large change

in access. Thus, increased public disclosure was apparently an evasion deterrent to some taxpayers.

       Malik (2017) studies the impact of the Pakistani government’s decision to publish income

tax records of all legislators several months after the tax returns had been filed. Using a differences-

in-difference research, Malik finds evidence that the pressure to respond by reducing tax evasion

was highest for competitively elected legislators and directly elected legislators.

       Hoopes, Robinson, and Slemrod (forthcoming) investigate the impacts of public disclosure

of information from corporate tax returns filed in Australia in 2014 and 2015 on consumers,

investors, and the corporations themselves that were subject to disclosure. The results show that

large private companies are likely to experience consumer backlash and are also, perhaps as a

consequence, more likely to act to avoid disclosure. But the analysis does not reveal any material

increase in tax remittances, one objective of legislating the disclosure regime. Investors, however,



                                                                                                     53
apparently did react negatively to anticipated and actual disclosure of tax information, most likely

due to anticipated policy backlash than the revelation of negative tax information.

           In sum, the compliance-promoting effectiveness of public disclosure has not yet been

widely demonstrated, and has not been shown in any setting for business tax compline. There is

some indication that it can be particularly effective for taxpayer groups that are especially sensitive

to shaming.

       8.2 Simplified Tax Regimes

       It is often argued that the complexity of the tax system contributes to tax noncompliance. 44

Many countries offer smaller firms some form of a minimum alternative tax with a more easily

measurable tax base, where the tax regime changes at a revenue or profit rate threshold. In

Pakistan, corporations either pay a tax on profits or on turnover depending on which liability is

greater. This effectively implies that at a profit rate lower than the ratio of the turnover tax rate to

the profit tax rate, firms cannot deduct costs. Because in Pakistan a large portion of evasion is

through misreporting of costs, this tax regime trades off loss in production efficiency (as firms

move from a neutral profit tax to a distorting output tax regime) for a gain in revenue collection.

Best et al. (2015) use administrative data on the universe of corporations in Pakistan to estimate

the elasticity of taxable income using the bunching of firms below the threshold profit rate. They

find clear evidence of such bunching, whose location shifts along with changes in tax rates that

move the threshold. Using the analysis-of-bunching methodology, they estimate that turnover

taxes reduce evasion by between 60 and 70 percent.

       The introduction of the value-added tax in Japan in 1989 allowed firms with sales below ¥500

million in sales to opt for a simplified filing regime under which they could claim a fixed portion



44
     Ulph (2015) discusses the aspects of tax complexity, and addresses this claim.

                                                                                                     54
of their sales (usually 80 percent) as input costs. Firms whose true input costs were below this

threshold had an incentive to manipulate their size or structure to be eligible for this simplified

filing. Firms could accomplish this through tax-motivated “splitting”—either transferring a portion

of their operations to an existing small firm, or spinning off a portion of their firms as a new firm

below the size threshold—or simply misreporting their sales. Onji (2009) studies the behavioral

response to this system by constructing a counterfactual density of firms that allows one to separate

changes in the density due to changes in the distribution of characteristics of firms from those due

to the introduction of the tax benefit threshold. He finds that there is a bunching of firms below

the threshold as well as a missing mass of firms right above the threshold, implying that Japanese

firms did respond to the new tax incentive by, in part, masquerading as smaller firms.

       Asatryan and Peichl (2017) study firms’ responses to size-dependent notches in the tax

system of Armenia, a country with high rates of tax noncompliance. They study firms’ response

by analyzing bunching in the distribution of firm size with respect to three notches: (1) the VAT

registration threshold, (2) the threshold between quarterly and monthly filing and remittance

requirements, and 3) the size determining whether international financial accounting standards or

simplified rules are required. The authors find little responsiveness to the VAT registration

notch, more to the filing and remittance frequency, and a large response to the accounting regime

notch. Because they also have data on tax audit results, they can estimate that most of this

response (at least 60 percent) occurs through under-reporting of income; firms escape the

compliance costs of stricter accounting rules by understating their income.


   8.3 Non-Deterrence Policies to Reduce Noncompliance

   Enforcement policy could also attempt to enhance tax morale, and several studies have

addressed how a government might try to achieve this. Many of the threat-of-audit letter RCTs


                                                                                                  55
discussed earlier also contained a non-deterrence treatment. In the first tax RCT discussed earlier,

Blumenthal, Christian, and Slemrod (2001) find no evidence that either of two written appeals to

taxpayers’ consciences had a significant effect on compliance; one letter stressed the benefits of

tax-funded projects, while the other conveyed the message that most taxpayers were compliant.

Based on a controlled field experiment in Switzerland, Torgler (2004) also found that moral suasion

had hardly any effect on taxpayers’ compliance behavior, nor did Fellner, Sausgruber, and Traxler’s

(2013) study of compliance with Austrian television and radio licensing fees. Pomeranz (2015) and

Bergolo et al. (2017) found that a letter appealing to tax morale, but promising no increased

enforcement, had little effect on VAT remittances. In Castro and Scartascini (2015), messages that

emphasized reciprocity (taxes are used to pay for public services benefiting individuals) or peer

effects (most citizens fulfill their tax obligations) did not have a significant effect. Bhargava and

Manoli (2015) also find that a message about social stigma did not affect the take-up rate of the

earned income tax credit.

   In sum, a plethora of studies have failed to find evidence that appeals to tax morale, defined

broadly, affect taxpayer behavior in the short run when delivered via a one-time mailing. Part of

the reason could be the wording of these appeal-to-conscience letters; psychological research

suggests the standard letter-based appeal-to-conscience wording such as “the entire community

suffers” might affect behavior less than using terms wording such as “cheater,” as in “Please don’t

be a cheater:” whether any government would be willing to employ such loaded terms remains to

be seen. It is also important to keep in mind that, as Luttmer and Singhal (2014) argue, finding no

effect is consistent with either tax morale not mattering, or these messages not effectively changing

it. This point applies more generally to the broad class of interventions, as discussed more below.




                                                                                                  56
   The failure of such letters to affect compliance on the margin is not inconsistent with the

existence of a substantial amount of “pathological honesty,” where taxpayers comply against their

apparent self-interest. Two recent studies shed light on this phenomenon. LaLumia and Sallee

(2013) examine panel data of tax returns before and after the United States required that dependent

exemption claims be accompanied by a Social Security number, which resulted in a fall of between

five and seven million dependent exemption claims. They focus on the vast majority of people

who apparently did not claim a bogus exemption, and conclude that those that did not cheat were

less likely to be heads of household and more likely to be married filing jointly; surprisingly,

cheaters and non-cheaters faced similar benefits from falsely claiming a dependent. Dwenger at

al. (2016) study motivations for tax compliance in the context of a legally binding, but unenforced,

local church tax in Germany. Based on a randomized field experiment that introduces either

positive deterrence or the provision of recognition and other non-pecuniary incentives, they find

that about 20 percent of individuals remitted their true taxes tax liability in the baseline case with

no deterrence in place. Recognition through social rewards for compliance caused some people to

further increase their payments, but the provision of information on social norms or moral appeal

had no impact.

   Recently, a few studies have broken the previously solid set of field-experimental evidence

finding no effect of such appeals. Bott et al. (2017) reports the results from a randomized field

experiment in Norway conducted with more than 15,000 taxpayers who the tax authority deemed

were likely to have misreported their foreign income. Shortly after sending the pre-populated tax

returns for 2012, the tax administration in Norway mailed a letter to these taxpayers with

information about how to report foreign income that randomly included two types of moral

appeal—a fairness argument and a societal benefits argument. They find that including either



                                                                                                   57
moral appeal in this letter almost doubled the average foreign income reported compared to a base

letter without such an appeal, an effect similar in size to the effect of including a sentence that

increased the perceived probability of detection by stating that the tax administration had received

information that the taxpayer had income or assets abroad in previous years. The moral appeals

mainly worked on the intensive margin, by increasing the amount reported of those who report

any foreign income while the probability of detection mainly worked on the extensive margin, by

increasing the share of tax subjects who report any foreign income. Neither moral appeal

treatments had a statistically significant effect in the subsequent year, while the detection treatment

still increased the share of taxpayers self-reporting some foreign income; the authors speculate that

this might be due to the moral treatments affecting short-term salience but not causing a

fundamental change in preferences, while the detection treatment caused a sustainable long-term

updating of beliefs about detection probabilities.

   Hallsworth et al. (2017) investigate whether letters that appeal to individuals’ sense of social

norms and public goods induce individuals to remit in a timely way taxes already declared. They

run two large field experiments using administrative data from more than 200,000 individuals in

the United Kingdom, and conclude that including social norms and public goods messages in

standard tax payment reminder letters can considerably enhance tax compliance. The authors

found wording that emphasized that the individual was in the minority of people who have not

paid yet was the most effective in getting individuals to remit their taxes. They also find that

mentioning financial penalties and remittance plans significantly increased the likelihood of

compliance. Of note is that the outcome variable is the timing of liabilities that have been admitted,

but not yet remitted, while most letter-based interventions look at the effect on initial reporting

behavior. It might be that a taxpayer who is simply procrastinating on paying their taxes is more



                                                                                                    58
likely to be persuaded by social norms to accelerate remittance than a firm or individual who is

contemplating evasion. Finally, there are important differences in how the treatment might have

been perceived by the recipients. In Hallsworth et al. (2017), the letter informs the taxpayer that

the UK tax authority is aware of their delinquency. It says, “Nine out of ten people in the U.K.

remit their tax on time. You are currently in the very small minority of people who have not paid

us yet.” In contrast, the letter in the Blumenthal, Christian, and Slemrod (2001) Minnesota

experiment says, “people who file tax returns report correctly and pay voluntarily 93 percent of

income taxes they owe […]; a small number of tax payers who deliberately cheat owe the bulk of

unpaid taxes.” In this case, unlike in the Hallsworth et al. experiment, the letter does not convey

to the taxpayer that the tax authority is aware of any wrong-doing by the individual. Thus the

difference in results could be due to the distinction between informing an individual that the

government has evidence pertaining to their actual evasion and appealing to their sense of duty

without revealing any information it has regarding their avoidance behavior.

   Del Carpio (2014) examines the role of norms and enforcement perceptions on tax compliance

through a field experiment on property taxes in Peru. Randomly chosen subsets of residents in two

municipalities in the Lima province were informed, through an official letter from the

municipality, about the average rate of compliance, the average level of municipal enforcement,

or both, while a third group was only reminded of the payment deadline. Analysis of the

administrative data reveals that disclosing information on the level of compliance had a large

positive impact on compliance (20 percent relative to the control group), while the payment

reminder also raised compliance by 10 percent. Notably, the enforcement treatment did not have

a significant effect on compliance net of the reminder effect, corroborating other evidence that any




                                                                                                 59
contact from the tax authority to the taxpayer increases compliance, and additional treatments may

or may not.

   This set of results has somewhat moved my pre-2013 assessment that the evidence

overwhelmingly supported that deterrence inhibits noncompliance but that manipulation of norms

has no measurable effect. In some settings, norm-directed letter interventions do seem to matter.

It now behooves us to understand better why this works in some, but not most, settings.

   In the standard deterrence model, one’s political affiliation should not affect evasion,

conditional on one’s perceptions of p, f, and one’s risk aversion. And yet Cullen, Turner, and

Washington (2018) find evidence in a quasi-experimental setting that political alignment with the

party of the presidential administration in the United States has a positive impact on compliance.

They analyze data from 1999, 2001, 2007 and 2009 – years surrounding the turnover elections of

2000 and 2008 to study how counties that consistently vote either Democrat or Republican change

their evasion behavior following a change in the party of the President. They measure evasion at

the county level using information from the IRS on reported income by category of income,

including some types of income subject to third-party reporting (such as wages) and others such

as business income that are not. The authors examine changes in reported income at the county

level by source of income as a function of “political alignment” of the county, controlling for

predictors of county-level income, where political alignment is measured as the average vote share

in the county for the party of the sitting president over the past several elections. They find that

moving into alignment results in a 0.4 percent increase in reported AGI (i.e., evasion declines),

coming mostly from a 3.5 percent increase in business income. The authors interpret these results

as consistent with taxpayers’ approval of government activity affecting evasion, which is clearly

inconsistent with the simple deterrence model that assumes free-riding behavior. As the authors



                                                                                                 60
note, they cannot rule out or investigate the possibility that some taxpayers perceive that the

probability of or cost of an audit also changes with alignment, although a simple story would

suggest that it varies inversely, rendering their estimates lower bound on the impact of improved

tax morale.

       One recent paper, Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2015), compares the effect on tax debt

repayment behavior of shaming versus financial penalties in a field experiment in three of the

twenty-three U.S. states that publish online the names and amount of some tax debtors. The

authors sent letters to delinquents that were worded to emphasize either shaming or the penalties.

While all delinquents are informed by the states that their names will appear in the online list of

delinquents, in the shaming treatment some individuals were randomly chosen to receive a letter

giving details about how to access the online delinquent list along with a list of 10 delinquents in

the neighborhood, including themselves. Some of these individuals are additionally told that their

neighbors will receive a similar letter, to increase the salience of shaming. The authors investigate

whether people will be more likely to pay off their debt if their perceived shaming adversely

impacts their social capital, and if shaming might shift their motivation to pay from an intrinsic to

an extrinsic one and therefore decrease the likelihood that they will remit. The authors find that

both shaming and financial penalties increase the likelihood of payment within ten weeks of

receiving the letter. Shaming mattered most for those with small amounts of debt, increasing the

likelihood of payment by 2.1 percentage points, suggesting that there is a limit to the value of

preventing social stigma. Because the tax authorities in these states generally give individuals an

opportunity to clear their debts before publishing their names online, one may consider this effect

as a lower bound of the total effect on tax debt payments.




                                                                                                  61
9. UNDERSTUDIED EMPIRICAL ISSUES

   Clearly during the last 15 years economists have produced much exciting empirical research

about tax compliance and enforcement, using a variety of credible research designs. As is natural,

there is a flavor of searching for one’s lost keys at night under the few working lampposts. For

example, we have learned much more about the short-term compliance effect of various letter

interventions than the role of penalties in tax enforcement because tax authorities have been willing

to undertake them, in part because they are inexpensive and non-disruptive. On the plus side, for

the same reason the research can have a real and fairly immediate effect on policy. It is also worth

noting that the lamppost technology is improving rapidly, so that as time passes we will be able to

search in previously dark areas. In the spirit of providing some guidance for that search, in what

follows I discuss a few topics that I think deserve some more attention.

   9.1. The Role of Tax Professionals

   One understudied issue is the role of professional tax preparers in tax administration and

enforcement. Their role is potentially important given their ubiquity. In the United States, 63

percent of individuals and 97 percent of corporations use some professional assistance. An earlier

literature, notably Klepper, Mazur, and Nagin (1991), using summary tabulations of line-item tax

return data from the IRS’s 1982 randomized audit study, found evidence consistent with preparers

discouraging noncompliance on legally unambiguous income sources, but encouraging

noncompliance on ambiguous sources. Countries vary substantially in how the law treats

professional preparers, from no official contact to significant regulation. In the United States, as

part of the Professional Preparer Initiative, about 750,000 tax preparers registered with the IRS by

2011, but no evaluation has yet been made of registration’s impact on tax compliance.




                                                                                                  62
   For the most part, modern empirical methods have not been brought to bear on the impact of

preparers and how they might be regulated. One noteworthy exception is Zwick (2018), which

examines the role of paid preparers in the take-up of a tax refund for corporate losses, in part to

explain why only 37 percent of eligible firms claim their refund. He finds that, relative to preparers

without a professional license, certified public accountants are 6.8 percentage points more likely

to claim the carryback refund for their clients. The data do not support the possibility that firm

selection—savvier firms hire savvier accountants—explains the observed preparer effect with a

research design based on firms switching their preparer following the death or relocation of their

previous one (arguably an exogenous event). However, they do not apply this method to

compliance behavior.

   9.2 Networks

   The role of networks in tax evasion and enforcement is no longer unstudied, but given its

importance economists have just begun to scratch the surface. These networks might involve

families, as in Alstadsӕter, Kopczuk, and Telle (2014)), who use detailed administrative data from

Norway to identify family networks and describe how take-up of tax avoidance progresses within

a network. As discussed above, networks might also involve tax preparers. They might involve the

Internet. Hoopes et al. (2015) examine data on capital-gains-tax-related information search—on

Google, Wikipedia, and IRS information platforms—to determine when and how taxpayers

acquire information, and find increases in information search around tax deadlines, suggesting that

taxpayers seek information to help them comply with the tax law. Positive correlations between

stock market activity and search as well as year-end spikes in information search on capital losses




                                                                                                   63
when the market performs poorly indicate that taxpayers seek information for tax-planning

purposes. 45

     Drago, Mengel, and Traxler (2015) and Rincke and Traxler (2011) study the spread of

compliance behavior in neighborhood networks in the context of the Austrian TV license fee

regime, discussed earlier. The first study involves a randomized field experiment run that varied

the content of mailings sent to potential evaders. The authors first provide survey evidence

showing that the communication intensity of neighbors in rural areas is strongly correlated with

spatial distance, and then document that households who were not part of the experimental sample

(and were therefore untreated) were more likely to switch from evasion to compliance in response

to the mailings received by their neighbors in the same network. Rincke and Traxler, using

snowfall as an instrument for local inspections, also find that compliance rises significantly among

those who had no exposure to field inspections. In another Austrian setting, Paetzold and Winner

(2016) investigate the effect of one’s work environment on the improper claiming of commuter

tax allowances in Austria, and find an asymmetric effect: once individuals learn from co-workers

that over-reporting of the allowances goes undetected, they are more likely to start cheating, but

being exposed to an environment of compliance does not reduce previous cheating behavior.

         The Boning et al. (2018) RCT, mentioned briefly earlier, investigates how enforcement

efforts might have spillover deterrence effects on firms within a network. They study three kinds

of networks: firms in close geographic proximity (5- or 9-digit ZIP code endings), firms that share

a tax preparation company or the same tax preparer, and firms that have a common ownership link.

In the experiment, the IRS sent letters and made in-person visits to businesses whose individual


45
   Another aspect of networks is the type of chains that form in value-added tax regimes, wherein firms out of the
tax net tend to sell to other firms outside of the tax net (and consumers), while firms in the tax net tend to sell to
other firms in the tax net, because only purchases from tax-compliant firms can be credited against revenues by
firms. See De Paula and Scheinkman (2010).

                                                                                                                   64
income tax withholding and payroll taxes had declined. They find that firms that share the same

tax preparer with a firm that received an in-person visit show an increase in tax remittance relative

to firms in tax preparer networks that did not receive a visit. However, they do not find a similar

network effect among businesses that use the same tax preparation company as a treated firm, or

among businesses in close geographic proximity to a treated firm. 46 Strikingly, subsidiaries of

firms that get a Revenue Officer visit report less tax subsequently, due either to a cash-flow effect

or a substitution of evasion toward a now perceived-to-be less likely target audit; this effect is,

though not symmetric: the parent companies of firms that get a visit do not change their remittance

pattern.


        Understanding more about these networks has the potential to address an important gap in

our understanding of the impact of tax enforcement initiatives. Nearly all of the research discussed

in this survey attempts to estimate the “specific” or “direct” deterrent effect that operates solely on

those subject to enforcement action. But these studies do not take account of the “general” deterrent

effect in the population as a whole that operates on all taxpayers through the effect of a policy

action on the perceived probability of detection and punishment, which is after all the effect that

Allingham and Sandmo (1972) stress. General deterrence is arguably the most important channel

through which tax enforcement initiatives work, as in principle it applies to the whole population,

but it is difficult to measure because it works via the perceptions of potentially noncompliant (i.e.,

nearly all) taxpayers. Although the general deterrent effect is much more difficult to measure than

the specific deterrent effect, networks may shed light on how particular enforcement actions




46
  Nor did Meiselman (forthcoming) find evidence of geographic spillovers in his RCT regarding nonfilers with the
Detroit city income tax.

                                                                                                                   65
diffuse into the population and affect perceptions broadly. 47 Taxpayers connected in some way to

those directly subject to enforcement action may learn of the enforcement action, which changes

their perception of the enforcement environment, which may in turn spread to their connections.

Thus, the network deterrent effect captures the word-of-mouth spread of information about a

change in enforcement policy, a plausible mechanism that could result in general deterrence.


        The presence of spillover effects of course has a potential downside, that it might pollute

what otherwise would be a control group. On this issue, there is voluminous work in the

development literature about how to design RCTs to limit the bias.


     9.3 The Role of Firms

     Information reporting and the remittance regime are crucial to tax enforcement, and firms are

the linchpin of both of these functions. Recent work by OECD (2017) and Slemrod and

Velayudhan (2018) reveals that, in both developed and in at least one developing country (India),

firms remit on average about 85 percent of all taxes. The welfare implications of this issue are

fascinating, because it implies that in the presence of taxes the equilibrium pattern of firm borders

and size is not optimal, contrary to the suggestion of Coase (1937). Taxes can be collected with

less cost when the tax authority can make use of information generated (and reported) by arms-

length transactions between firms, and between firms and employees. Sole proprietorships and

small businesses, especially family firms, 48 are difficult for the tax authority to penetrate,




47
   Sah (1991) formalizes the endogenous determination of the perception of p based on the available information,
including from acquaintances, and the true probability; it addresses crime in general, and not tax evasion in
particular.
48
   Kopczuk and Slemrod (2010) provide a sketch of how to model the taxation of family firms, stressing that in some
developing countries the weakness of legal institutions encourages the formation of family firms, whose family
bonds informally enforce against theft; these bonds have a social cost because they increase the opacity of firms,
making tax enforcement more difficult.

                                                                                                                66
providing an example of when production efficiency may not be desirable when taxes must be

raised, contrary to the classic result of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971).

   We should take a closer look at the relationship of tax compliance and self-employment. When

we say that modern tax systems rely heavily on firms, we are referring to medium-sized and large

firms, because small firms and the self-employed are ubiquitously problematic. Theory suggests

why this might be so, but in an over-identified way (i.e., there are too many theories). Third-party

information reporting for non-employee income is not easily done. Self-employed enterprises are

by definition small, and the agency argument formalized by Kopczuk and Slemrod (2006) and

Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez (2016) suggests that for this reason evasion is more sustainable. Self-

employed people choose that status, and may be less risk-averse to all forms of uncertainty,

including potentially costly detection of evasion. Future empirical analysis should aim at sorting

out these issues, perhaps by leveraging the fact that some people, and some families, have both

employee income and self-employment income.

   A mountain of micro evidence, using multiple methodologies, documents a strong association

between self-employment and noncompliance and between self-employment and the “flexibility”

of reported taxable income locally to kinks and notches in tax schedules. Kleven (2014, p. 82)

plots for over 80 countries the fraction of workers who are self-employed against the tax/GDP

ratio, and documents a strong negative relationship: countries that have more self-employed people

collect less tax. Although he rightly cautions that no causal inferences can be drawn from such a

graph, I agree with his conclusion that the availability from employers of third-party information

on employee income plays a key role in tax compliance and in explaining a country’s overall tax

take. Consistent with this conclusion, Jensen (2016) shows that, as countries develop, their

employment structure shifts from self-employment to employees and exemption thresholds for



                                                                                                 67
income tax liability fall, a pattern that is consistent with tax authorities setting the threshold at a

level that justifies enforcement costs.

   We also need to focus more on the compliance by firm-withholders which, with just a few

exceptions such as Boning et al. (2018), has nearly been ignored and often implicitly assumed to

be perfect. Of interest is the fact that, in the United States, withheld income and employment taxes

such as Social Security taxes are called trust fund taxes as recognition that legally the firm holds

the employee's money in trust until it makes a federal tax deposit. Noncompliance can trigger a

“trust fund recovery penalty” that pierces the corporate veil, and can be levied on any person who

has the duty to perform and the power to direct the collecting, accounting, and paying of trust fund

taxes, including but not restricted to officers or an employee of a corporation as well as a corporate

director or shareholder. Whether this qualitatively different penalty feature has a qualitatively

different deterrent effect is not known.

   Finally, firms and workers may in some situations collude to facilitate evasion, as was explored

theoretically by Yaniv (1988). Best (2014) finds that firms in Pakistan aggregate the preferences

of workers and facilitate tax avoidance by bunching their salary offers around kinks in the tax

schedule. If and under what circumstances they facilitate evasion is worth exploring. One setting

in which this is suspected is firms’ reclassifying workers as independent contractors rather than

employees. As discussed in Section 7, this eliminates their role as withholder/remitters, and may

induce more evasion, which in turn could reduce the cost of labor to the firm.

       9.4 The Distributional Impact of Evasion and Enforcement

   Paying attention to the distributional implications of compliance and enforcement policies is

another logical extension of the recent wave of empirical analysis. Johns and Slemrod (2010)

assess the distributional consequences of income tax noncompliance in the US federal income tax



                                                                                                    68
for the tax year 2001 using data from the National Research Program. 49 They find that, when

taxpayers are arrayed by their estimated “true” income, defined as reported income adjusted for

the underreporting estimated by the IRS, the ratio of aggregate misreported income to true income

generally increases with income, although it peaks among taxpayers with adjusted gross income

in the 99.0 to 99.5 percentile. In sharp contrast, the ratio of underreported tax to true tax is highest

for the lowest-income taxpayers, reflecting the fact that a given percentage reduction in taxable

income corresponds to a particularly high percentage reduction in tax liability for taxpayers with

taxable income just above the taxpaying threshold. Much of the distributional pattern of

noncompliance is associated with the fact that, on average, high-income taxpayers receive their

income from sources, such as business income, that have higher noncompliance rates. But this is

not the whole story because similar, although not identical, patterns apply to the misreporting

percentages of given income sources.

     Nygård, Slemrod, and Thoresen (forthcoming) examine the distributional implications of off-

the-tax-books transactions between service providers and consumers in Norway, wherein the

supplier reduces her tax burden by underreporting income and the consumer may gain from buying

an untaxed and therefore perhaps lower-priced product. The distributional implications of such

joint tax evasion depend on the amounts evaded, on where the evaders on both sides of the market

are found in the income distribution, and how the financial gain is split between the suppliers and

demanders. The authors use multiple data sources to identify tax evasion among sellers and buyers

of goods and services, and conclude that the tax-evasion-adjusted estimate of disposable income

inequality in Norway exhibits more dispersion than official estimates.



49
  Matsaganis and Flevotomou (2010) address this question for pre-crisis Greece by comparing a sample of income
tax returns to data from a household budget survey, concluding that tax evasion produces higher income inequality
and lower effective tax progressivity.

                                                                                                              69
   An old saw goes “the poor evade, and the rich avoid,” suggesting that there are enough legal

ways for sophisticated, wealthy taxpayers to reduce their tax obligations that they need not resort

to illegal evasion. Both the recent direction of policy focused on evasive foreign accounts, the U.S.

components of which are summarized and analyzed in Johannesen et al. (2017), and some new

empirical research, suggest that the old saw is wrong. Zucman (2014), relying on anomalies in

global investment statistics caused by offshore fortunes (i.e., more liabilities than assets show up

in global investment data), estimates that U.S. residents hold about $1.2 trillion of wealth offshore,

equal to about 4 percent of their financial wealth, resulting in an annual revenue loss of $36 billion.

Evasion amongst the very top of the income distribution is difficult to uncover through traditional

means like random audits, as the auditor typically lacks the resources to trace the sophisticated

means of evasion often involving layers of financial intermediaries. However, high-profile leaks

from these intermediaries, such as the 2007 leak from HSBC Private Bank in Switzerland and the

2015 “Panama Papers” from the firm Mossack Fonseca, have recently allowed researchers to gain

some insight into tax evasion by the richest. Alstadsæter, Johannesen and Zucman (2017) use data

from these leaks along with administrative data on income and wealth from Norway, Sweden and

Denmark to show that evasion rates rise across the income distribution, and conclude that the top

0.01 percent evade about 30 percent of the income and wealth taxes they owe. The authors link

the account names from the HSBC leak with individual tax data, and find that 95 percent of these

foreign account holders did not report the existence of the account on their tax forms, which they

classify as evasion.

       9.5 Penalties

        The severity and nature of the punishment for detected evasion is the neglected sibling

among the two central policy parameters of the Allingham-Sandmo deterrence model; little



                                                                                                    70
empirical research has been devoted to this topic, even in the new wave of research covered in this

article. The relative neglect arises in part because governments have not so far proven willing to

experimentally vary the extent of punishment, although some have participated in RCTs that

randomly “remind” taxpayers about existing penalties. One exception is Bergolo et al. (2017),

which in an RCT informs firms about the average penalty imposed for detected evasion among a

sample of similar firms. The effect of providing information about penalties cannot be discerned,

however, because the relevant treatment informs VAT taxpayers about both the average penalty

and the average chance of being audited.

        The nature of punishment has received almost no attention. For example, although the

literature on other types of crime has addressed the impact of the certainty or celerity (i.e.,

swiftness) of punishment, the tax evasion literature has not focused on it. Recently, Blank (2014a)

and Kuchumova (2015, 2017) have discussed “collateral tax sanctions” such as revoking from

individual tax evaders drivers’ licenses, professional licenses, and passports (as the IRS is now

legally able to do) and from business evaders the ability to obtain government contracts. Blank

argues that such sanctions may be especially effective if, for example, they are more salient or

create greater economic costs than monetary penalties, but no empirical evidence yet exists to

evaluate their impact.

        The flip side of penalties for evasion is rewards for compliance. Dunning et al. (2016)

report that as many as 25 percent of municipalities in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay,

and many localities in Argentina, Peru, and Mexico offer reward programs such as prize lotteries

to compliant taxpayers. 50 Since 2004, Montevideo has raffled a year free of tax payments to



50
  Of possible interest to some readers note is the fact that in 2010 Stockholm experimented with a “speed camera
lottery” such that if your vehicle comes in at or below the speed limit, the driver was automatically entered into a
lottery; see Hagerty (2010).

                                                                                                                  71
eligible “good” taxpayers who have been punctual compliers over the previous year. The authors

use the random awarding of these tax holidays to investigate the impact of habit on tax remittance,

and find that winning the lottery reduces the winners’ future tax payments for up to three years.

           Not enough has been done to learn about the effect of this type of reward program on

compliance, including whether the effect is symmetric to the impact of penalties for

noncompliance. One notable exception is Carrillo, Castro, and Scartiscini (2017), who study the

impact of a randomized natural experiment in an Argentine municipality, where 400 compliers

with property tax were provided with a new sidewalk in front of their property and public

recognition. They found that being selected as a lottery winner had a positive and persistent direct

effect on future compliance as well as a geographic spillover effect on neighbors. However, they

find no evidence that taxpayers with pending liabilities paid them off in order to become eligible

for the lottery; thus, there is evidence of a specific, or direct, effect, but no evidence of a general

reward (i.e., the opposite of a deterrent) effect. Ahmed et al. (2012) describe a first step in learning

about the compliance impacts of a program of social recognition of tax compliance in Bangladesh.

       9.6 Policies Aimed at Evasion-Facilitating Behavior

       Countries use a wide range of policies to inhibit actions that facilitate tax evasion, but few have

been evaluated rigorously. Many such policies are aimed at the use of cash. For example, some

governments have introduced a ceiling for cash transactions: DKK 10,000 in Denmark, €1,000 in

France and Italy, $10,000 in Australia as of July 1, 2019, €5,000 in Belgium, €1,500 in Greece

and, as of November, 2016, India banned its highest-value 500 and 1,000 rupee notes. 51 Others

have required point-of-sale terminals in, for example, taxis. Although it has been suggested that




51
     See Williams (2014, p. 103).

                                                                                                       72
(evasion-facilitating) cash be directly taxed, 52 this has not been widely implemented. There was a

tax on cash withdrawals in India from 2005 to 2009, designed primarily as an audit trigger. 53

Alternatively, one could consider providing incentives to use credit cards, as countries such as

Argentina and South Korea do. 54 From this perspective, the U.S Form 1099-K initiative discussed

earlier is counterproductive in that it cracks down on underreporting of credit-card sales while

leaving cash sales untouched. In many European countries, certified cash registers are required, in

part to counter the use of zappers, software installed on electronic cash registers or other electronic

point of sale systems that allows users to erase recorded transactions. 55 All of these policies are

costly, and future policy would be informed if their benefits could be credibly quantified.

     9.7 External validity of tax enforcement RCTs

     I will confess that about fifteen years ago, when it became clear that RCTs would play a leading

role in the credibility revolution in empirical economics, I despaired that tax analysis would be left

behind because no government would randomize tax rates levied on their citizens. That remains

true, but I have been thrilled that many governments have proven willing to randomly vary the

enforcement of their tax systems. Although there are now scores of such RCTs, this field is in its

infancy compared to the use of RCTs in development economics, where there are several hundred.

     But it is time for the infant inquiry to address the challenges of a mature inquiry. Although

partner governments are usually quite happy to learn only about whether a given policy would

achieve a valued goal in their own jurisdiction, as scholars it is important to design studies that




52
   See Benshalom (2012). Macroeconomists are also interested in this notion as a way to facilitate a negative interest
rate; see, for example, the discussion in Rogoff (2015) regarding the costs and benefits of phasing out paper currency.
53
   See Tax Administration Reform Commission (2014).
54
   Note that the United States has recently gone in the opposite direction, as witnessed by the 2017 Supreme Court
ruling against New York’s state anti-card-surcharge law.
55
   These policies are discussed in greater detail in Williams (2014, pp. 101-103). Zappers and appropriate policy
responses are discussed by Ainsworth (2010).

                                                                                                                    73
will shed light on tax enforcement more generally, i.e., that have external as well as internal

validity. That requires paying attention to the mechanisms that underlie observed effects, so we

can learn why—ideally with a formal theory—some policies work better in seems settings versus

others. The follow-up survey methodology used by Bergolo et al. (2017) is promising as a way to

learn about how a given policy intervention affected perceptions of the fundamental parameters of

the Allingham-Sandmo model. We also know almost nothing about the special problems that

might arise when scaling up tax enforcement from pilot to population policies.

   Some of the threats to external validity that are concerning in other settings are probably not

as important for tax enforcement. For example, the general equilibrium effects seem less serious,

although some enforcement compliance might affect the tax professional industry. Randomization

bias, the issue that the governments that facilitate research are likely to be special is a concern. A

citizenry that tolerates such government experimentation and monitoring is undoubtedly different

from other citizenries in ways that are relevant to the questions at hand: the magnitude and nature

of noncompliance, the norms that matter, and the institutional environment. But this issue loomed

larger at the beginning of this new wave when most of the research occurred in developed

countries, and particularly in the Nordic countries. I am happy to report that this is no longer true,

as much recent research is happening in developing countries, where the issues of compliance and

enforcement are especially critical. But, governments in both developed and developing countries

probably share the incentive to demonstrate the wisdom of existing policies and of carrying out

pilots of contemplated new policies.

   9.8 Optimal enforcement policy

   Finally, it is time to better connect the new empirical literature on tax compliance and its more

credible estimates of the effect of enforcement policies to the bread-and-butter normative issues



                                                                                                   74
of taxation: efficiency and equity. Regarding efficiency, the focus on evasion may seem puzzling

to those who are steeped in the idea of the elasticity of taxable income (or more generally, the

elasticity of tax base), which holds that under some conditions this elasticity is a sufficient statistic

for the marginal welfare cost of changing tax rates, and therefore understanding the anatomy of

the behavioral response (e.g., labor supply versus evasion) is irrelevant. How evasion fits into this

framework has been the subject of some controversy, 56 but in any event knowing how evasion

contributes to the behavioral response helps focus policy discussions; in the extreme, if we were

to discover that there is no evasion under any circumstances, pondering optimal enforcement

would be a waste of time. Regarding equity, studies of the effect of taxation on income inequality

must address the apparent disproportionate presence of certain kinds of tax evasion.

       Integrating compliance and enforcement into optimal tax requires attention to the effect of

evasion and enforcement on real decisions such as labor supply and business formation.

Sometimes in policy debates this is ignored, when supporters imply that cracking down on evasion

can raise revenue while avoiding the real behavioral responses we associate with raising tax rates.

But this argument is logically flawed. Increased enforcement of, say, income taxes raises the

expected tax rate (only for prospective evaders), and will trigger similar real responses as an

explicit tax rate increase. Certainly many of the empirical papers discussed here investigate both

real and compliance responses, but they generally do not focus on this interaction. This is a

particular challenge in the case of labor supply, because most of the administrative data sets

naturally contain information on reported taxable income, but do not match it with data on labor

supply, although in some cases data on job flows exist. In the same vein, we need to know more

about the substitutability between evasion and (legal) avoidance: if an enforcement policy cracks



56
     Compare Chetty (2009) with Gillitzer and Slemrod (2016).

                                                                                                      75
down on evasion, to what extent will people respond by increasing (untaxed or lightly taxed)

avoidance behavior?

   Increased enforcement is just one way to raise revenue, with the obvious alternatives being to

raise tax rates or broaden the tax base. In formulating optimal policy one needs to consider the

marginal social costs of enforcement relative to the costs of alternative ways to raise revenue.

Thus, the overall objective of this aspect of tax policy is not different than the objective of choosing

tax rates, bases, and other elements of a tax system. The costs of increased enforcement include

administrative costs (that show up in the IRS budget), compliance costs (that don’t show up in the

IRS budget), excess burden (due to behavioral responses of all kinds), and the extra uncertainty to

taxpayers that the “tax audit lottery” creates.

   Consideration of the social costs of tax evasion highlights the difference between the

“recoverable” portion of the tax gap and the “economically recoverable” portion, borrowing

language usually applied to oil reserves. The optimal tax gap is not zero any more than it is socially

optimal to extract every last drop of oil beneath the ground, or to put a police officer at every

corner to eliminate all street crime. For this reason ascertaining the size of the tax gap is not as

helpful for policy design as is the susceptibility of the gap to alternative tax-system policies.

   Two separate policy issues arise: (1) how big should the IRS enforcement budget be, and (2)

how best to allocate a given budget. Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1987) show that one superficially

intuitive rule for the former—increase the probability of detection until the marginal increase of

revenue thus generated equals the marginal resource cost of so doing—is incorrect. Although the

cost of hiring more auditors, buying better computers, and the like, is a true resource cost, the

revenue brought in does not represent a net gain to the economy, but rather a transfer from private

(noncompliant) citizens to the government. The correct rule equates the marginal social benefit of



                                                                                                     76
reduced evasion (which is not well measured by the increased revenue) to the marginal resource

cost. The social benefit includes the reduced risk-bearing that comes with reduced tax evasion, and

any reduction in the inefficiencies discussed earlier. Cowell (1990, p. 136) suggests another

complication: perhaps a specific social welfare discount should apply to the utility of those who

are found to be guilty of tax evasion and thus “are known to be antisocial.”

   For the allocation question, a useful rule of thumb is that all tax policies should equalize the

marginal efficiency cost of funds, a simple expression that accounts for all the costs of raising

revenue, which should in turn equal the marginal social benefit of raising revenue (Mayshar, 1991;

Slemrod and Yitzhaki, 1996, 2002; Slemrod and Gillitzer 2014). Distributional considerations can

be introduced into this framework in a straightforward way.

   A framework for integrating empirically estimated parameters regarding tax enforcement into

welfare analysis is provided by Keen and Slemrod (2017). In the model, the planner sets

enforcement parameters and an income tax rate on reported income to maximize social welfare,

equivalent to the welfare of a representative individual. In the simplest setting, enforcement is a

single, continuous parameter, but the results extend to settings with multiple enforcement

instruments and to enforcement actions that are inherently discrete, such as the existence of a large

taxpayers’ unit. Given the tax rate and level of enforcement, individuals choose their labor supply

and how much income to conceal subject to convex concealment costs. The model characterizes

the answer to three core policy questions: (1) What information does the policy maker require

about cost and effectiveness of administrative interventions to set optimal policy? (2) What is the

optimal setting of enforcement instruments, for any given tax rate? (3) What is the optimal




                                                                                                  77
compliance gap? Analogous to the now-standard elasticity of taxable income (with respect to the

income tax rate) 57, it develops sufficient statistics for optimal administrative intervention.

     At the optimal level of enforcement, 𝜙𝜙 = 𝐸𝐸(𝑧𝑧, 𝛼𝛼), where E(z,α) is the enforcement elasticity

of tax revenue with respect to the administrative instrument α (the percentage change in tax

revenue with respect to a percentage increase in enforcement resources), and 𝜙𝜙 is the adjusted

marginal cost-revenue ratio, where the costs include both compliance costs and administrative

costs, with a larger weight on the latter because these costs must first be raised by distorting taxes.

This result suggests that tax authorities should identify the enforcement elasticity, which can be

thought of as the goal of many of the empirical analyses discussed in this paper, and the marginal

cost and revenue associated with a potential enforcement action rather than the average or total

costs, even though the latter are easier to estimate and widely used as benchmarks. 58


     The tax gap has traditionally been used a performance measure for tax administration, with

little theoretical rationale. Keen and Slemrod (2017) show that the tax gap is not a sufficient

statistic for the optimal level of enforcement, although there is a close relationship between the

compliance gap and the enforcement elasticity of tax revenue. At an optimum, the compliance gap

                          𝐺𝐺         −𝜙𝜙
is characterized by            =               , where G is the compliance gap expressed as a ratio of true
                        1−𝐺𝐺       𝐸𝐸(𝑒𝑒,𝛼𝛼)

liability and E(e, α) is the enforcement elasticity of evasion. The optimal compliance gap is thus

characterized by a simple inverse elasticity rule, with the relevant elasticity being the enforcement



57
  See Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012).
58
  The Detroit RCT in Meiselman (2018), discussed earlier, combines all the ingredients needed to apply the approach
set out above. Employing a discrete version of this framework, it concludes that there was a negative direct welfare
effect of the average experimental letter, driven by the large proportion of taxpayers for whom estimated
compliance costs exceeded the incremental net tax remittance.



                                                                                                                 78
elasticity of evasion and the factor of proportionality being the adjusted marginal cost-revenue

ratio. 59 The optimal compliance gap is inversely proportional to the enforcement elasticity of tax

evasion. The higher the enforcement elasticity, the lower the optimal compliance gap. However,

the behavioral impact of enforcement also depends on the adjusted marginal cost-revenue ratio.

Expending effort to reduce the compliance gap is warranted if the gap exceeds the ratio of adjusted

marginal cost-revenue ratio to enforcement elasticity of evasion. This condition shows how the

kind of tax gap estimates discussed in Section 3 can be combined with information on cost-revenue

ratios and behavioral responses to provide actionable advice: increasing enforcement to reduce the

compliance gap is warranted if and only if the gap measure on the left-hand side of this expression

exceeds the inverse elasticity on the right-hand side.


     10. CLOSING THOUGHTS

     The explosion of empirical research into tax compliance and enforcement is welcome news, as

it was high time that the modern arsenal of empirical methods be applied to the second and third

pillars of a tax system, remittance and enforcement, to complement the long-standing and

continuing analysis of tax rates and bases.

     What do we know? That raising the chance of getting caught high enough deters evasion is

incontrovertible, as evidenced for example by the difference between the U.S. noncompliance rate

of 63 percent for income not covered by third-party information reports (or withholding) compared

to 1 percent for wages and salaries, covered by both. This evidence in favor of the Allingham-

Sandmo deterrence model of evasion is as powerful as comes from the stark natural experiments

concerning other crimes discussed in Nagin (2013) and Durlauf and Nagin (2011), such as the



59This expression holds under the simplifying assumption that enforcement does not affect labor supply, although it
can be relaxed.

                                                                                                                  79
increase in crime in Nazi-occupied Denmark after the German officials dissolved the entire Danish

police force (Andenaes 1974).

   Finding compliance responses to stated changes in the probability of audit in an RCT has

proven more elusive, with mostly positive but mixed results, perhaps because a given change in

the chance of audit corresponds to vastly different changes in the chance of detection and because

the prior perceptions may vary vastly depending on the setting. Little is known about the effect of

changing penalties, mostly because of the difficulty of designing an RCT to measure this effect.

   The leading alternative, but not mutually exclusive, paradigm to the Becker-Allingham-

Sandmo model is one that relies on duty, conscience, and adherence to norms. A large number of

RCTs have investigated whether appeals to these factors affects compliance. In most cases the

answer is no, but in a few recent cases such appeals seem to have worked to reduce evasion or

accelerate remittance of tax debt. We need to know more why this (only) occasionally seems to

work.

   What emerges more clearly is that contacts from the tax authority to the taxpayer can increase

compliance in the short run. Sometimes even an anodyne, placebo contact has this effect, perhaps

because it signals to the taxpayer that she is on the tax authority’s “radar.” In-person delivery of

a given message is much more powerful, but it is also much more expensive, so the welfare

superiority of that mode of delivery is not clear. Providing concrete evidence that the government

has information indicating the presence of evasion consistently works to reduce evasion,

apparently because it combines a you’re-on-our-radar message with actionable information about

noncompliance. As this literature moves from infancy to maturity, it should focus on clarifying the

mechanism underlying effectiveness, so as to establish the external validity of claims about policy

impact.



                                                                                                 80
   Knowing the effect on tax noncompliance of p (and f) is by no means sufficient information

for guiding policy decisions. We also need to know what policies deliver effective deterrence, by

obtaining verifiable information through third-party information reporting and information trails

more broadly, and by optimizing the remittance regime to get the money from the low-cost

remitters. We need to know much more about the social costs of such policies, including the

administrative and compliance costs as well as intangible costs such as intrusions on privacy. This

suggests that, as the empirical project matures, researchers should hew to the venerable tradition

in public economics of drawing out the welfare implications of the empirical findings, for which

a sufficient-statistics-based framework is now available. By so doing, this literature can inform the

ongoing debates around the world about the design of tax-system policies: rates, bases, remittance

rules, and the broad panoply of enforcement instruments. This is especially true because of the

interaction between imperfect compliance and tax policy design, and specifically how compliance

problems can justify a fundamentally different set of policy instruments than recommended by

traditional public finance models.




                                                                                                  81
References

Advani, Arun, William Elming, and Jonathan Shaw. 2017. "The Dynamic Effects of Tax Audits?"

IFS Working Paper W17/24.

Ahmed, Nasiruddin, Raj Chetty, Mushfiq Mobarak, Aminur Rahman, and Monica Singhal. 2012.

"Improving Tax Compliance in Developing Economies: Evidence from Bangladesh." Working

paper.

Ainsworth, Richard. 2010. “Zappers – Retail VAT Fraud.” International VAT Monitor: 175-182.

Allingham, Michael, and Agnar Sandmo. 1972. “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis.”

Journal of Public Economics 1 (3-4): 323-338.

Alm, James, and Sarah Jacobson. 2007. "Using Laboratory Experiments in Public

Economics." National Tax Journal 60 (1): 129-152.

Almunia, Miguel, and David Lopez-Rodriguez. 2018. “Under the Radar: The Effects of

Monitoring Firms on Tax Compliance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1): 1-

38.

Alstadsӕter, Annette, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. 2014. “Social Networks and Tax

Avoidance: Evidence from a Well-Defined Norwegian Tax Shelter.” Working Paper, University

of Oslo.

Alstadsӕter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman. 2017. “Tax Evasion and

Inequality.” NBER Working Paper.

Andenaes, Johannes. 1974. Punishment and Deterrence. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan

Press.

Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein. 1998. "Tax Compliance." Journal of

Economic Literature 36 (2): 818-860.



                                                                                         82
Angrist, Joshua, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2010. "The Credibility Revolution in Empirical

Economics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics.” Journal of

Economic Perspectives 24 (2): 3-30.

Anwar, Shamena, and Thomas A. Loughran. 2011. "Testing a Bayesian Learning Theory of

Deterrence among Serious Juvenile Offenders." Criminology 49 (3): 667-698.

Artavanis, Nikolaos, Adair Morse, and Margarita Tsoutsoura. 2016. "Measuring Income Tax

Evasion using Bank Credit: Evidence from Greece." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2): 739-

798.

Asatryan, Zareh, and Andreas Peichl. 2017. “Responses of Firms to Tax, Administrative and

Accounting Rules: Evidence from Armenia.” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 6754.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji,

Marc Shotland, and Michael Walton. 2017. "From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies:

Challenges and Solutions, With an Application." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (4): 73-

102.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political

Economy 76 (2): 169-217.

Benjamini, Yael, and Shlomo Maital. 1985. “Optimal Tax Evasion & Optimal Tax Evasion

Policy: Behavioral Aspects.” In Wulf Gaertner and Alois Wenig (eds.), The Economics of the

Shadow Economy. Studies in Contemporary Economics, vol. 15. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg:

245-264.

Benshalom, Ilan. 2012. "Taxing Cash." Columbia Journal of Tax Law 4 (1): 65-93.




                                                                                            83
Bergolo, Marcelo, Rodrigo Ceni, Guillermo Cruces, Matias Giaccobasso, and Ricardo Perez-

Truglia. 2017. “Tax Audits as Scarecrows: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment.”

Working Paper, University of California, Los Angeles.

Best, Michael C. 2014. “The Role of Firms in Workers’ Earnings Responses to Taxes: Evidence

from Pakistan.” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Best, Michael C., Anne Brockmeyer, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Mazhar

Waseem. 2015. “Production vs. Revenue Efficiency with Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and

Evidence from Pakistan.” Journal of Political Economy 123 (6): 1311-1355.

Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. "Psychological Frictions and Incomplete Take-

up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 105

(11): 3489-3529.

Blank, Joshua D. 2014a. "Collateral Compliance." University of Pennsylvania Law Review 162:

719-800.

Blank, Joshua D. 2014b. "Reconsidering Corporate Tax Privacy." New York University Journal of

Law and Business 11 (1): 31-121.

Blank, Joshua D., and Daniel Z. Levin. 2010. “When is Tax Enforcement Publicized?” Virginia

Tax Review 30 (1): 1-38.

Blumenthal, Marsha, Charles Christian, and Joel Slemrod. 2001. “Do Normative Appeals Affect

Tax Compliance? Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota.” National Tax Journal

54 (1): 125–138.

Bø, Erlend, Joel Slemrod, and Thor Olav Thoresen. 2015. "Taxes on the Internet: Deterrence

Effects of Public Disclosure." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1): 36-62.

Boning, Will, John Guyton, Ronald Hodge, Joel Slemrod, and Ugo Troiano. 2018. “Heard it



                                                                                           84
through the Grapevine: A Randomized Experiment Assessing Direct and Network Effects of Tax

Treatment Strategies.” NBER Working Paper 24305.

Bott, Kristina M., Alexander W. Cappelen, Erik Ø. Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2017.

"You’ve Got Mail: A Randomised Field Experiment on Tax Evasion." NHH Department of

Economics Discussion Paper 10/2017.

Brockmeyer, Anne, and Marco Hernandez. 2017. “Fiscal Capacity, Information and Taxation.”

World Bank Working Paper.

Cabral, Ana Cinta G., and Norman Gemmell. 2018. "Estimating Self-Employment Income-Gaps

from Register and Survey Data: Evidence for New Zealand." Victoria University of Wellington

Working Paper No. 07/2018.

Cabral, Ana Cinta G., Christos Kotsogiannis, and Gareth Myles. 2015. “Self-Employment

Underreporting in Great Britain: Who and How Much?” Tax Administration Research Centre,

University of Exeter Discussion Paper No. 010-14.

Carrillo, Paul, Edgar Castro, and Carlos Scartascini. 2017. “Do Rewards Work? Evidence from

the Randomization of Public Works.” Working paper, Inter-American Development Bank,

Carrillo, Paul, Dina Pomeranz, and Monica Singhal. 2017. “Dodging the Taxman: Firm

Misreporting and Limits to Tax Enforcement.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9

(2): 144-164.

Carrillo, Paul, M. Shahe Emran, and Anita Rivadeneira. 2012. “Do Cheaters Bunch Together?

Profit Taxes, Withholding Rates and Tax Evasion.” Working Paper, George Washington

University.

Castro, Lucio, and Carlos Scartascini. 2015. "Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas:

Evidence from a Field Experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 116: 65-82.



                                                                                         85
Chalfin, Aaron, and Justin McCrary. 2017. “Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the Literature.”

Journal of Economic Literature 55 (1): 5-48.

Chandola, Varun, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. 2009. “Anomaly Detection: A Survey.”

ACM Computing Surveys 41 (3): 1-58.

Chetty, Raj. 2009. “Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Sufficient to Calculate Deadweight Loss?

The Implications of Evasion and Avoidance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1

(2): 31-52.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. "Salience and Taxation: Theory and

Evidence." American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145-1177.

Chirico, Michael, Robert P. Inman, Charles Loeffler, John MacDonald, and Holger Sieg. 2016.

"An Experimental Evaluation of Notification Strategies to Increase Property Tax Compliance:

Free-Riding in the City of Brotherly Love." Tax Policy and the Economy 30 (1): 129-161.

Clausing, Kimberly A. 2009. "Multinational Firm Tax Avoidance and Tax Policy." National Tax

Journal 62 (4): 703-725.

Coase, Ronald H. 1937. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica 4 (16): 386-405.

Cowell, Frank. 1990. Cheating the Government. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Cullen, Julie Berry, Nicholas Turner, and Ebonya Washington. 2018. "Political Alignment,

Attitudes toward Government and Tax Evasion." NBER Working Paper 24323.

Deaton, Angus. 2010. "Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development." Journal

of Economic Literature 48 (2): 424-455.

DeBacker, Jason, Bradley T. Heim, Anh Tran, and Alexander Yuskavage. 2015. "Once Bitten,

Twice Shy? The Lasting Impact of IRS Audits on Individual Tax Reporting.” Journal of Financial

Economics 117 (1): 122-138.



                                                                                            86
De Paula, Aureo, and Jose A. Scheinkman. 2010. "Value-added Taxes, Chain Effects, and

Informality." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4): 195-221.

Del Carpio, Lucia. 2014. "Are the Neighbors Cheating? Evidence from a Social Norm Experiment

on Property Taxes in Peru." Working Paper, Princeton University.

Dhami, Sanjit, and Ali al-Nowaihi. 2007. "Why Do People Pay Taxes? Prospect Theory versus

Expected Utility Theory.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 64 (1): 171-192.

Diamond, Peter A., and James A. Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:

Production Efficiency." American Economic Review 61 (1): 8-27.

Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2015. “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of

Consumer Bankruptcy Protection.” American Economic Review 105 (3): 1272-1311.

Drago, Francesco, Friederike Mengel, and Christian Traxler. 2015. "Compliance Behavior in

Networks: Evidence from a Field Experiment." IZA Discussion Paper 9443.

Dunbar, Geoffrey R., and Chunling Fu. 2015. “Sheltered Income: Estimating Income Under-

Reporting in Canada, 1998 and 2004.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2015-22.

Dunning, Thad, Felipe Monestier, Rafael Pineiro, Fernando Rosenblatt, and Guadalupe

Tunón. 2016. “Is Paying Taxes Habit Forming? Experimental Evidence from Uruguay.” Working

paper, University of California, Berkeley.

Durlauf, Steven N., and Daniel S. Nagin. 2011.       "Imprisonment and Crime: Can Both Be

Reduced?" Criminology & Public Policy 10 (1): 13-54.

Dusek, Libor, and Sutirtha Bagchi. 2017. “Third-party Reporting, Tax Collections, and the Size of

Government: Evidence from Withholding.” Working paper, Villanova University.




                                                                                              87
Dwenger, Nadja, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Imran Rasul, and Johannes Rincke. 2016. "Extrinsic

and Intrinsic Motivations for Tax Compliance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in

Germany." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3): 203-232.

Ellis, Blake. 2013. “Prisoners Rake in Millions from Tax Fraud.” CNN Money, January 30.

Engström, Per and Johannes Hagen. 2015. “Income Underreporting among the Self-Employed: A

Permanent Income Approach.” European Economic Review 92: 92-109.

Engström, Per, and Bertil Holmlund. 2009. "Tax Evasion and Self-Employment in a High-Tax

Country: Evidence from Sweden." Applied Economics 41 (19): 2419-2430.

Erard, Brian. 1992. “The Influence of Tax Audits on Reporting Behavior.” In Joel Slemrod (ed.),

Why People Pay Taxes: Tax Compliance and Enforcement. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan

Press.

Fack, Gabrielle, and Camille Landais. 2016. "The Effect of Tax Enforcement on Tax Elasticities:

Evidence from Charitable Contributions in France." Journal of Public Economics 133: 23–40.

Feinstein, Jonathan S. 1999. “Approaches for Estimating Noncompliance: Examples from Federal

Taxation in the United States.” Economic Journal 109 (456): 360-369.

Feldman, Naomi, and Joel Slemrod. 2007. “Estimating Tax Noncompliance with Evidence from

Unaudited Tax Returns.” Economic Journal 117 (518): 327-352.

Fellner, Gerald, Rupert Sausgruber, and Christian Traxler. 2013. “Testing Enforcement Strategies

in the Field: Legal Threat, Moral Appeal, and Social Information.” Journal of the European

Economic Association 11 (3): 634–660.

Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from

‘Missing Imports’ in China.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2): 471-496.




                                                                                             88
Frey, Bruno. 1997. "A Constitution for Knaves Crowds Out Civic Virtues." Economic Journal 107

(443): 1043-1053.

Gemmell, Norman, and Marisa Ratto. 2012. "Behavioral Responses to Taxpayer Audits: Evidence

from Random Taxpayer Inquiries." National Tax Journal 65 (1): 33-57.

Gillitzer, Christian, and Peer Ebbesen Skov. 2018. “The Use of Third-Party Information Reporting

for Tax Deductions: Evidence and Implications from Charitable Contributions in Denmark.”

Oxford Economic Papers.

Gillitzer, Christian, and Joel Slemrod. 2016. “Does Evasion Invalidate the Welfare Sufficiency of

the ETI?” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 16 (4).

Glazer, Amihai, and Kai A. Konrad. 1996. "A Signaling Explanation for Charity." American

Economic Review 86 (4): 1019-1028.

Hagerty, Elizabeth. 2010. “Speed Camera Lottery Pays Drivers for Slowing Down.” Toronto Star,

December 9.

Hallsworth, Michael. 2014. “The Use of Field Experiments to Increase Tax Compliance.” Oxford

Review of Public Policy 30 (4): 658-679.

Hallsworth, Michael, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ivo Vlaev. 2017. “The Behavioralist

as Tax Collector: Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance.” Journal of

Public Economics 148: 14-31.

Handley, Kyle, and Timothy J. Moore. 2017. “Tariffs, Transport Costs, and Tax Evasion.”

Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Hanlon, Michelle, and Joel Slemrod. 2009. "What Does Tax Aggressiveness Signal? Evidence

from Stock Price Reactions to News about Tax Shelter Involvement." Journal of Public

Economics 93 (1): 126-141.



                                                                                              89
Hasegawa, Makoto, Jeffrey L. Hoopes, Ryo Ishida, and Joel Slemrod. 2013. "The Effect of Public

Disclosure on Reported Taxable Income: Evidence from Individuals and Corporations in

Japan." National Tax Journal 66 (3): 571-608.

HM Revenue & Customs. 2015. Measuring Tax Gaps 2015 Edition: Tax Gap Estimates for 2013-

14.

Holtzblatt, Janet. 2007. “Implications of Return-free Tax Systems for the Structure of the

Individual Income Tax.” FinanzArchiv/Public Finance Analysis 63 (3): 327-349.

Hoopes, Jeffrey L., Daniel Reck, and Joel Slemrod. 2015. “Taxpayer Search for Information:

Implications for Rational Attention.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3): 177-

208.

Hoopes, Jeffrey L., Leslie Robinson, and Joel Slemrod. Forthcoming. “Tax-Return Disclosure.”

Journal of Accounting and Economics.

Hurst, Eric, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley. 2014. “Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms?

Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed.” Review of Economics and

Statistics 96 (1): 19-33.

Internal Revenue Service. 2014. Strategic Plan FY 2014-2017. Washington, DC, IRS Publication

3744.

Internal Revenue Service, Research, Analytics & Statistics. 2016. Federal Tax Compliance

Research: Tax Gap Estimates for Tax Years 2008-2010. Publication 1415 (Rev. 5-2016),

Washington, DC.

International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Affairs Department. 2013. “United Kingdom Assessment of

HMRC’s Tax Gap Analysis.” IMF Country Report No. 13/314, Washington, DC.




                                                                                           90
International Monetary Fund. 2015. Current Challenges in Revenue Mobilization: Improving Tax

Compliance. Washington, DC.

Jensen, Anders. 2016. “Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System.” London

School of Economics Working Paper.

Johannesen, Niels, Patrick Langetieg, Daniel Reck, Max Risch, and Joel Slemrod. 2017. “Taxing

Hidden Wealth: The Consequences of U.S. Enforcement Initiatives on Evasive Foreign Accounts.”

Working Paper, University of Michigan.


Johansson, Edvard. 2005. "An Estimate of Self-Employment Income Underreporting in

Finland." Nordic Journal of Political Economy 31 (1): 99-109.


Johns, Andrew, and Joel Slemrod. 2010. "The Distribution of Income Tax Noncompliance."

National Tax Journal 63 (3): 397-418.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under

Risk.” Econometrica 47 (2): 263-292.

Kanbur, Ravi, and Michael Keen. 2014. "Thresholds, Informality, and Partitions of

Compliance." International Tax and Public Finance 21 (4): 536-559.

Keen, Michael, and Joel Slemrod. 2017. “Optimal Tax Administration.” Journal of Public

Economics 152: 133-142.

Kesselman, Jonathan R. 1989. "Income Tax Evasion: An Intersectoral Analysis." Journal of Public

Economics 38 (2): 137-182.

Khan, Adnan Q., Asim I. Khwaja, and Benjamin A. Olken.           2016. "Tax Farming Redux:

Experimental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors." Quarterly Journal of

Economics 131 (1): 219-271.



                                                                                            91
Klepper, Steven, Mark Mazur, and Daniel Nagin. 1991. "Expert Intermediaries and Legal

Compliance: The Case of Tax Preparers." Journal of Law and Economics 34 (1): 205-229.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. 2014. “How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much?” Journal of Economic

Perspectives 28 (4): 77-98.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. 2016. “Bunching.” Annual Review of Economics 8: 435-464.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Martin B. Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Søren Pedersen, and Emmanuel

Saez. 2011. “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark.”

Econometrica 79 (3): 651-692.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Claus T. Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2016. “Why Can Modern

Governments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries.” Economica 83

(330): 219-246.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. "Using Notches to Uncover Optimization

Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan." Quarterly Journal of

Economics 128 (2): 669-723.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2005. “Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income.” Journal

of Public Economics 89 (11-12): 2093-2119.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, Justin Marion, Erich Muehlegger, and Joel Slemrod. 2016. “Does Tax-

Collection Invariance Hold? Evasion and the Pass-through of State Diesel Taxes.” American

Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (2): 251-286.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Joel Slemrod. 2006. "Putting Firms into Optimal Tax Theory." American

Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96 (2): 130-134.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Joel Slemrod. 2010. “Taxation of Family Firms.” Working Paper,

University of Michigan.



                                                                                            92
Kotakorpi, Kaisa, and Jani-Petri Laamanen. 2016. “Prefilled Income Tax Returns and Tax

Compliance: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Working Paper, University of Turku.

Kuchumova, Yulia. 2015. “Tax Debt Collection Enforcement: When Does Suspension of a

Driver’s License Help?” Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Kuchumova, Yulia. 2017. “A Collateral Tax Sanction: When Does it Mimic a Welfare-Improving

Tag?” Higher School of Economics Research Paper No. WP BRP 181/EC/2017.

Kumler, Todd, Eric Verhoogen, and Judith A. Frias. 2013. “Enlisting Employees in Improving

Payroll-Tax Compliance: Evidence from Mexico.” National Bureau of Economic Research

Working Paper No. 19385.

LaLumia, Sara, and James M. Sallee. 2013. "The Value of Honesty: Empirical Estimates from the

Case of the Missing Children." International Tax and Public Finance 20 (2): 192-224.

Lee, David S., and Justin McCrary. 2017. "The Deterrence Effect of Prison: Dynamic Theory and

Evidence." Advances in Econometrics, Volume 38, Chapter 3: 73-146.

Lenter, David, Douglas Shackelford, and Joel Slemrod. 2003. “Public Disclosure of Corporate Tax

Return Information: Accounting, Economics and Legal Issues.” National Tax Journal 56 (4): 803-

830.

Levi, Margaret. 1989. Of Rule and Revenue. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California

Press.

List, John A. 2011. "Why Economists Should Conduct Field Experiments and 14 Tips For Pulling

One Off." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 3-16.

Logue, Kyle D., and Joel Slemrod. 2009. “Of Coase, Calabresi, and Optimal Tax Liability.” Tax

Law Review 63: 797-866.




                                                                                             93
Long, Susan B., and Richard D. Schwartz. 1987. "The Impact of IRS Audits on Taxpayer

Compliance: A Field Experiment in Specific Deterrence." Annual Meeting of the Law and Society

Association.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P., and Monica Singhal. 2014. "Tax Morale." Journal of Economic

Perspectives 28 (4): 149-168.

Malik, Rabia. 2017. “Transparency, Elections, and Pakistani Politicians’ Tax Compliance.”

Working paper, New York University Abu Dhabi.

Marchese, Carla. 2009. “Rewarding the Consumer for Curbing the Evasion of Commodity Taxes?”

FinanzArchiv 65 (4): 383-402.

Martinez-Lopez, Diego. 2013. "The Underreporting of Income by Self-employed Workers in

Spain." SERIEs 4 (4): 353-371.

Mascagni, Giulia. 2018. “From the Lab to the Field: A Review of Tax Experiments.” Journal of

Economic Surveys 32 (2): 273-301.

Matsaganis, Manos, and Maria Flevotomou. 2010. “Distributional Implications of Tax Evasion in

Greece.” London School of Economics Hellenic Observatory Papers on Greece and Southeast

Europe GreeSE Paper 31.

Mayshar, Joram. 1991. “Taxation with Costly Administration.” Scandinavian Journal of

Economics 93 (1): 75-88.

Meiselman, Ben. Forthcoming.        “Ghostbusting in Detroit: Evidence on Nonfilers from a

Controlled Field Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics.

Milgram, Stanley. 1963. "Behavioral Study of Obedience." The Journal of Abnormal and Social

Psychology 67 (4): 371-378.




                                                                                           94
Nagin, Daniel S. 2013. "Deterrence: A Review of the Evidence by a Criminologist for

Economists." Annual Review of Economics 5 (1): 83-105.

Naritomi, Joana. 2016. “Consumers as Tax Auditors.” Working Paper, London School of

Economics.

Nygård, Odd E., Joel Slemrod, and Thor O. Thoresen. Forthcoming. “Distributional Implications

of Joint Tax Evasion.” Economic Journal.

OECD. 2015. Tax Administration 2015: Comparative Information on OECD and Other Advanced

and Emerging Economics. OECD Publishing, Paris.

OECD. 2017. Legal Tax Liability, Legal Remittance Responsibility & Tax Incidence: Three

Dimensions of Business Taxation. Centre for Tax Policy and Administration, Committee on Fiscal

Affairs.

Onji, Kazuki. 2009. “The Response of Firms to Eligibility Thresholds: Evidence from the Japanese

Value-Added Tax.” Journal of Public Economics 93 (5): 766-775.

Ortega, Daniel, and Carlos Scartascini. 2015. “Who’s Calling? The Effect of Phone Calls as a

Deterrence Mechanism.” Working Paper, Inter-American Development Bank.

Ortega, Daniel, and Carlos Scartascini. 2017. “Don’t Blame the Messenger: A Field Experiment

on Delivery Methods.” Working Paper, Inter-American Development Bank.

Paetzold, Jörg, and Hannes Winner. 2016. “Taking the High Road? Compliance with Commuter

Tax Allowances and the Role of Evasion Spillovers.” Journal of Public Economics 143: 1-14.

Paulus, Alari. 2015. “Tax Evasion and Measurement Error: An Econometric Analysis of Survey

Data Linked with Tax Records.” Institute for Social and Economic Research, University of Essex

Working Paper No. 2015-10.




                                                                                             95
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo, and Ugo Troiano. 2015. “Shaming Tax Delinquents: Evidence from a

Field Experiment in the United States.” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2558115.

Pissarides, Christopher A., and Guglielmo Weber. 1989. "An Expenditure-based Estimate of

Britain's Black Economy." Journal of Public Economics 39 (1): 17-32.

Pomeranz, Dina. 2015. “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in

the Value Added Tax.” American Economic Review 105 (8): 2539-2569.

Rincke, Johannes, and Christian Traxler. 2011. "Enforcement Spillovers." Review of Economics

and Statistics 93 (4): 1224-1234.

Rogoff, Kenneth S. 2015. “Costs and Benefits of Phasing Out Paper Currency.” NBER

Macroeconomics Annual 29 (1): 445-456.

Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz, 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income With

Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1): 1-50.

Sah, Raaj K. 1991. "Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime." Journal of Political Economy 99 (6):

1272-1295.

Schuetze, Herb J. 2002. "Profiles of Tax Non-Compliance among the Self-employed in Canada:

1969 to 1992." Canadian Public Policy/Analyse de Politiques 28 (2): 219-238.


Slemrod, Joel. 2008. "Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The Economics

of Tax Remittance." National Tax Journal 61 (2): 251-275.


Slemrod, Joel. 2016. “Caveats to the Research Use of Tax-Return Administrative Data.” National

Tax Journal 69 (4): 1003-1020.




                                                                                            96
Slemrod, Joel. 2017. “Tax Compliance and Enforcement: An Overview of New Research and its

Policy Implications.” In Alan Auerbach and Kent Smetters (eds.), The Economics of Tax Policy,

Oxford University Press: 81-102.

Slemrod, Joel, Marsha Blumenthal, and Charles Christian. 2001. "Taxpayer Response to an

Increased Probability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota." Journal

of Public Economics 79 (3): 429-453.

Slemrod, Joel, Brett Collins, Jeffrey Hoopes, Daniel Reck, and Michael Sebastiani. 2017. “Does

Credit-Card Information Reporting Improve Small-Business Tax Compliance?” Journal of Public

Economics 149: 1-19.

Slemrod, Joel, and Christian Gillitzer. 2014. Tax Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Slemrod, Joel, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2002. "The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income." Journal

of Public Economics 84 (1): 91-112.

Slemrod, Joel, and Tejaswi Velayudhan. 2018. “Do Firms Remit At Least 85% of Tax

Everywhere? New Evidence from India.” Journal of Tax Administration 4 (1): 124-137.

Slemrod, Joel, and Caroline Weber. 2012. “Evidence of the Invisible: Toward a Credibility

Revolution in the Empirical Analysis of Tax Evasion and the Informal Economy.” International

Tax and Public Finance 19 (1): 25-53.

Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 1987. “The Optimal Size of a Tax Collection Agency.”

Scandinavian Journal of Economics 89 (2): 183-192.

Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 1996. "The Costs of Taxation and the Marginal Efficiency

Cost of Funds." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 43 (1): 172-198.




                                                                                            97
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 2002. "Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration." In

Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3 (Amsterdam:

North-Holland): 1423-1470.

Tax Administration Reform Commission. 2014. Tax Administration Reform in India: Spirit,

Purpose and Empowerment. Government of India.

Torgler, Benno. 2004. “Moral Suasion: An Alternative Tax Policy Strategy? Evidence from a

Controlled Field Experiment.” Economics of Governance 5 (3): 235–253.

Tyler, Tom R. 2006. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Ulph, David. 2015. “Measuring Tax Complexity.” In Chris Evans, Rick Krever, and Peter Mellor

(eds.) Tax Simplification, Kluwer Law International: 41-54.

Wilking, Eleanor. 2017. "Hotel Tax Incidence with Heterogeneous Firm Evasion: Evidence from

Airbnb Remittance Agreements.” Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Williams, Colin C. 2014. Confronting the Shadow Economy: Evaluating Tax Compliance and

Behaviour Policies. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.

Yang, Dean. 2008. "Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context of Customs

Reform in the Philippines." Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (1): 1-14.

Yaniv, Gideon. 1988. "Withholding and Non-withheld Tax Evasion." Journal of Public

Economics 35 (2): 183-204.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo. 1974. “A Note on ‘Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis.’” Journal of

Public Economics 3 (2): 201-202.

Zucman, Gabriel. 2014. "Taxing across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate

Profits." Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (4): 121-148.

Zwick, Eric. 2018. “Do Experts Help Firms Optimize?” NBER Working Paper No. 24382.



                                                                                          98
99
