                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             A THEORY OF MULTIHOMING IN RIDESHARE COMPETITION

                                         Kevin A. Bryan
                                         Joshua S. Gans

                                       Working Paper 24806
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24806


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24806.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kevin A. Bryan and Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Multihoming in Rideshare Competition
Kevin A. Bryan and Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 24806
July 2018
JEL No. L13,L51

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine competition amongst ridesharing platforms where firms compete by choosing both
the price of rides and the extent of idleness. Idleness means drivers who are compensated without
picking up passengers, instead acting to reduce passenger wait time. We show that when
consumers are the only agents who multihome, idleness falls compared with when they face a
monopoly ridesharing platform. When drivers and consumers multihome, idleness further falls to
zero as it involves costs for each platform that are appropriated, in part, by their rival.
Interestingly, socially superior outcomes may involve monopoly or competition under various
multihoming regimes, depending on the density of the city, and the relative costs of idleness
versus consumer disutility of waiting.


Kevin A. Bryan
University of Toronto
Canada
kevincure@gmail.com

Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
1    Introduction

Since Uber’s introduction in 2009, ridesharing platforms like Uber, Didi, Grab, and Lyft have

radically transformed the taxi and limo industry. These services, which allow consumers to order

a car to their location via a smartphone application, now control roughly 1/3 of the international

taxi market. In other words, a ridesharing firm acts as a platform matching drivers to riders and

setting the pricing terms between them. Like other platforms, the incentives of each group to join

a platform are molded by those pricing terms as well as overall liquidity. Specifically, riders value

reduced wait times which comes from more driver availability on a platform. Likewise, the cost of

attracting drivers is lower, the greater the density and availability of riders. Rideshare platforms can

influence such wait times and hence, the nature of cross-group effects. Here we propose a tractable

model of competition in ridesharing designed to understand how this shapes platform choices, and

show that welfare generated in this industry has rather subtle properties.

      Subtleties in ridesharing welfare arise for three reasons. First, consumer demand depends both

on price and wait time. Second, wait time depends on a two-sided match between platforms and

consumers. Third, whether rideshare platforms compete using price or wait time depends critically

on whether consumers, drivers, or both multihome. Wait times will be reduced either because more

consumers are bound to a single platform, firms want to attract consumers from a rival platform,

or firms want to make heterogeneous consumers more homogeneous in their demand and, hence,

extract more consumer surplus with a fixed price. A social planner will pay to reduce wait time only

when it increases consumer surplus, not when it simply permits business stealing or homogenizes

demand. We will show that these different motives for competing on wait time versus price imply

that welfare may be maximized in any of four different market structures: monopoly, consumer-only

multihoming duopoly, driver-only multihoming duopoly, or full-multihoming duopoly.

      In conducting this examination, we make several simplifying assumptions. First, we assume

away any interaction between competition and driver welfare by fixing driver wages per ride and

fixing the cost of employing idled drivers. This is justified in part by the empirical findings of Cook

et al. [2018] and Hall et al. [2017], who note that driver supply is so elastic that earnings per hour




                                                   2
of work at Uber are constant in the effective payment per ride drivers are offered.1 That is, there is

some empirical reason to believe that driver earnings may be first-order unaffected by competition.

We further assume that city density and consumer demand are thick enough that all potential

consumers are served, perhaps at a high price and with a long wait time, under any of multihoming

regimes we examine. We, therefore, abstract away from issues examined by Nikzad [2018] on how

the size of the labor pool interacts with ridesharing matching technology and competition.

        Second, we do not consider dynamic pricing considerations that are the focus on Levin and

Skrzypacz [2016] and Castillo et al. [2017]. Rather, we consider a static reduced form of the inter-

actions between wait time and the costs of recruiting drivers. Finally, in considering both consumer

and driver multihoming, we compare these as if they have exogenously arisen and, for instance,

do not consider the mixed multihoming options that have been studied in other platform markets

(see Athey et al. [2018] and Anderson et al. [2018]). In so doing, we understand that we may be

providing abilities – especially on the driver side – that are not necessarily possible with current

apps and information provision by ridesharing companies.2

        The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we provide a model with endogenous wait

time. The most tractable way to model these features in the context of a well-understood duopoly

model is by modifying the Hotelling line such that the length of the line is a function of city density

and idled drivers permit firms to shrink the effective length of their “side” of the line. We will then

compare surplus under monopoly versus duopoly with each multihoming configuration. A final

section relates our findings to current policy debates and offers suggestions as to future research.



2       Model

We being by introducing a stylized model of ridesharing platform competition in price and wait

time. With this basic model in hand, we will introduce, in the following subsection, definitions of

consumer and driver multihoming in terms of the basic model’s parameters.
    1
     In particular, preliminary follow-up analysis by Cook et al suggests that adding tipping to Uber did not change
wages at all because of the supply response. See the discussion at http://freakonomics.com/podcast/what-can-uber-
teach-us-about-the-gender-pay-gap/.
   2
     Most notably, while consumers can compare alternative prices quite readily, they may not be able to see wait
times – these may come from experience. For drivers, it may be technically difficult to be logged on to two platforms
at the same time and, indeed, may be contractually prohibited. That said, apps such as the Y Combinator-backed
Mystro are able to automate ride-sharing among multiple platforms at present.



                                                         3
                              0          δ1                `   ` − δ2                  `
                                                           2

                           Figure 1: A Hotelling line with “idleness" δ1 and δ2



       Consider the adapted Hotelling line in Figure 1. Two ridesharing firms i ∈ {1, 2} are exoge-

nously located at either end of the line [0, `].3 Rather than choose location and then price, as in a

standard Hotelling model, these firms first simultaneously choose “idleness” parameters δi and then

simultaneously choose prices pi . After idleness and prices are chosen, a consumer location, drawn

uniformly on [0, `], is realized and the consumer with unit demand buys a ride from at most one

service. We assume that firms cannot price discriminate on the basis of consumer location nor can

they charge conditional on wait times.

       Idleness δi decreases a consumer’s “wait time” - the ridesharing analogue of travel time in a

traditional Hotelling model - in the following manner. For firm 1, a consumer located at x would

normally need to wait for a period x for the driver at 0 to reach them. When firm 1 idles some

drivers δ1 , we assume that the wait time is 0 if the consumer is in [0, δ1 ], and is x − δ1 otherwise.

Likewise, a consumer wishing to ride with firm 2 has zero wait time if they happen to be located

in [` − δ2 , `], and wait time ` − δ2 − x otherwise. Since expected profit calculations operate under

the assumption that a consumer is born uniformly on [0, `], this model of idleness represents a

particularly tractable way of modeling the fact that idling drivers drops the expected wait time of

consumers.

       The cost of idleness is c(δi ) where c(0) = 0, c0 > 0, c0 → 0 as δ → 0, c00 > 0 and c is continuously

differentiable. This cost is convex even when additional drivers can be hired at a constant wage

because, intuitively, in order to reduce the wait time to zero (δi = `) for all passengers, an infinite

number of idled drivers would need to be engaged. That is, δ is not the absolute number of idle

workers, but rather the extent to which idled workers reduce wait times a given amount.

       In addition to paying for idleness, firms also pay an exogenously determined wage w to drivers
   3
     One interpretation of these locations is that if two ridesharing services evenly spaced their drivers throughout a
city, and chose prices so that all consumers desiring a ride, in fact, demanded a ride, and had precisely enough cars
that demand exactly equaled supply, then the maximal wait time of any consumer for the nearest car would be 2` .




                                                          4
per ride. Firm profit is, therefore,


                                             Πi = (pi − w)Qi − c(δi )


where quantity Qi is the probability firm i makes a sale.

       Consumer demand is determined as follows. A consumer at position x has unit demand,

getting utility from the service on the right equal to u − p2 − tD2 (x), where t parameterizes the

disutility of waiting and, as described above, wait time D2 (x) = 0 if x ≥ ` − δ2 and ` − δ2 − x

otherwise. Analogously, utility from the service on the left is u − p1 − tD1 (x) where wait time

D1 (x) = 0 if x ≤ δ1 and x − δ1 otherwise. This is simply the Hotelling line with linear transport

costs, along with potential to compete on wait time in addition to price. Note that for (p, δ), as usual,

there is a cutoff agent who is indifferent between 1 and 2. Note also that since expected consumer

wait times, holding δ constant, are increasing in `, the length of the line ` can be interpreted as an

exogenous measure of density of demand in a particular region.

       We assume that u is high enough that, under all multihoming scenarios below, all consumers

buy, and assume that wait time disutility t is low enough to avoid the equilibrium existence problem

in d’Aspremont et al. [1979].4 Further, we restrict our attention to pure strategy equilibria.

       The nature of driver payments in our model is highly stylized, and meant to clearly draw the

distinction between the supply a ridesharing firm needs in order to provide minimum acceptable

wait times to riders, and the additional cost needed to reduce wait times with increased supply.

In practice, ridesharing firms tend to pay drivers per ride completed, and not to pay anything for

idleness. Paying drivers a wage v per ride and engaging them on a ride at any given time with

probability ρ gives the drivers a wage per unit of time of v2 = vρ . In that setting, increasing idleness

means decreasing ρ, which is done by directly increasing the price v per ride, and letting elastic

driver supply adjust. Under the assumption that drivers cannot take actions to increase demand

(by, e.g., choosing better routes or better parts of the city to wait for riders), this is identical to the

contract where engaged and idled drivers are both paid w = v2 whether they are engaged or not.

Our model can, therefore, be reinterpreted without loss of generality, but with some loss of clarity,
   4
    In particular, we assume that u is high enough and t is low enough, given the cost function c(.), that in the first
stage both firms locate on the outer quartile of the Hotelling line. This ensures that a second-stage price equilibrium
exists in pure strategies.



                                                          5
to one where rideshare services choose wage per ride and, hence, induce an equilibrium probability

a given driver is engaged. However, by modeling idleness directly with the generic convex cost

function c(δ), we avoid having to specify analytically the precise link between additional drivers,

wait time, and the probability a given driver is engaged. Further, by separating w and c(δ), we can

directly examine the extent of idleness under various market structures, rather than try to back out

the implied equilibrium idleness a wage per ride v generates.


2.1    Modeling Multihoming

With the basic model in mind, we turn to alternative multihoming scenarios. By restricting param-

eters in the above model, we can generate competition under monopoly, and under duopoly with

consumer multihoming, driver multihoming, both forms of multihoming, or neither. In particular,

if consumers multihome, then there is strategic competition by firms to attract these consumers

by lowering wait time or decreasing price. If consumers do not multihome, they are assumed to

be exogenously locked into a particular app with equal probability, and as there is no strategic

interaction, firms will lower wait time only in order to increase the price that can be charged to

“their” consumers.5 If drivers multihome, we will assume that drivers pick up the closest customer

demanding a ride on either app, and hence that idleness paid for by either firm “spills over” to the

other firm. If drivers do not multihome, then idled drivers paid for by a given firm only reduce

wait time for that firm’s customers. Figure 2 shows the parameter assumptions in each scenario

graphically.

       Pure monopoly: In a monopoly setting, there is a single firm located at both ends of the line,

δ1 = δ2 = δ and p1 = p2 = p. Firms maximize (pi − w)Qi (pi , δi ) − c(δi ), where Qi ≤ 1 represents

the probability of making a sale given prices and induced wait times.6

       Duopoly with no multihoming: In a duopoly with no multihoming, we analyze outcomes

identically to the monopoly case, except that each firm faces a measure .5 of potential customers,
   5
     What of the case of strategic single-homers, who choose a platform given the price/wait bundles offered by various
services? While our main reason for omitting endogeneity of market structure is that we want to examine the welfare
consequences of structures that arise for whatever reason, we also note that for an individual strategic consumer,
multihoming weakly dominates singlehoming if one is free to choose either. The same is true for drivers.
   6
     Recall that firm locations being at the end of the line is an assumption exogenous to the model. Intuitively, 2` is
the maximal distance a car needs to travel to pick up a rider when the supply of cars and number of riders demanding
rides is exactly equal, and a firm optimally spaces their drivers across a city. For this reason, the usual result that a
multiproduct monopolist would locate at .25 and .75 does not apply: firms are not choosing their location.



                                                           6
                                                            Monop: 1 firm chooses p and δ
0                 δ      `        `−δ             `
                         2
                                                      Duop, no multihome: each face this, σ = .5
0                 δ      `        `−δ             `
                                                      Duop, C multihome: compete on this, σ = 1
0         δ1             `   ` − δ2               `
                         2
                                                      Duop, D multihome: each face this, σ = .5
0               δ1 +δ2   `
                                `−    δ1 +δ2      `
                   2     2               2
All sales to cheaper service                                Duopoly, both multihoming

 Figure 2: Hotelling line under five multihoming assumptions, where σ is measure of consumers


and the length of the line is 2`. This assumption models the situation where consumers and drivers

are effectively allocated exogenously to rideshare firms, and where neither price nor wait time

differences induce substitution. That is, there is no strategic interaction between firms but the total

number and density of potential customers are both halved compared to monopoly.

      Duopoly with consumer multihoming: When consumers multihome while drivers do not, δi

and pi are independently chosen by each firm, line length is `, and consumers buy from the platform

that provides the highest utility, which is a function of both wait time and price. That is, duopoly

with customer multihoming is precisely the game described in the previous subsection, with no

restrictions.

      Duopoly with driver multihoming: When drivers can multihome and supply both firms, but

consumers do not multihome, we again analyze outcomes identically to the monopoly case except

that idled drivers spill over (δDM = (δ1 + δ2 )/2) and the measure of potential customers on the line

is .5 instead of 1. That is, if firm 1 adds an idle driver, and that driver happens to be closer to a

potential customer endowed with firm 2’s app than any of firm 2’s idled drivers, the multihoming

driver can simply switch apps and picks up the customer. Even though consumers do not multihome,

the fact that drivers multihome means that consumers, nonetheless, are picked up by drivers from

the “closer” service, and, hence, the length of the line is ` and not 2` as in the case of duopoly with

no multihoming.

      Both sides multihome: When both drivers and consumers multihome, then all idled drivers

spill over (δDM = (δ1 + δ2 )/2), all consumers have identical wait time from all drivers no matter

what platform is offered, all consumers have access to both apps, and hence all rides go to the firm


                                                  7
which sets the lowest price.

      We will assume that these market structures are exogenous, and will examine the welfare,

consumer surplus, and profit differences between each. This exogeneity is maintained because our

core interest is in understanding how different market structures - whether imposed by law or

otherwise - affect outcomes, rather than investigating the emergence of those market structures per

se. Further, to the extent profit varies, comparing profit levels gives insight as to what might drive

the emergence of a particular market structure.


2.2   Equilibrium Outcomes

To begin, we consider outcomes where there is no multihoming (N M ) on either side of the market.

In doing this, we can prove the following two propositions.

Proposition 1. Under monopoly, prices are pM ON = u+δM ON t− `t2 , where the equilibrium idleness

satisfies t = c0 (δM ON ). If c(δ) = δ 2 , under monopoly, the price is pM ON = u + t t−`
                                                                                       2 and idleness

δM ON = 2t .

Proof. The monopolist maximizes 2[(pi −w) Q2i −c(δi )], where the term inside the brackets represents

profits on either [0, 2` ] or [ 2` , `]. In the second stage, the monopolist chooses pi . Without loss of

generality, the cutoff consumer x on the left side of the interval [0, `] buys if and only if u − pi −
                                                              u−pi
t(x − δi ) ≥ 0. Therefore, all consumers on [0, 2` ] buy if    t     + δi ≥ 2` . As noted, assume u high
                                                                 u−pi            `
enough that monopolists sell to all consumers. In this case,      t     + δi ≥   2   holds with equality, and
                        `t
hence pi = u + δi t −   2.

      In the first stage, the monopolist chooses δi to maximize 2[(pi − w) Q2i − c(δi )]. If x =      `
                                                                                                      2   and,

therefore, Qi = 1, the first order condition requires that t = c0 (δ).

Proposition 2. Under duopoly with no multihoming, prices are pN M = u + δN M t − `t, and the

equilibrium idleness satisfies   t
                                 4   = c0 (δN M ). If c(δ) = δ 2 , under duopoly with no multihoming,

pN M = u + t( 8t − `) and δN M = 8t .

Proof. In the duopoly case, with no multihoming, each rideshare platform is endowed with half

of all potential consumers, and there is no strategic interaction across platforms. Following the

above proof, but noting that selling to all consumers for a given duopolist means Qi = .5 and


                                                    8
inducing demand from consumers ` away from the edge of the Hotelling line, we have that price pi

is u + δi t − `t. Via the first order condition                            t
                                                                           4   = c0 (δi ), the extent of idleness and, therefore, the

equilibrium price falls.

       Intuitively, by increasing δ, the demand of consumers at the middle and at the edge of the

Hotelling line become more similar. With more homogenous demand, the fraction of surplus that

can be extracted with a fixed price increases. The benefit of more homogeneous demand for the

monopolist is weighed against the marginal cost of idled drivers. Under duopoly, since the measure

of potential customers is smaller, idleness is lower and, hence, wait time higher for all consumers,

while total quantity demanded remains 1. Industry profit is, of course, lower under this duopoly

than under monopoly.

       Now consider what happens when there is consumer multihoming (CM ).

                                                                                                                                              (δi −δ−i )t
Proposition 3. Under duopoly with consumer multihoming (only), prices pi = t` + w +                                                                3

and idleness δCM solves                 t
                                        3   = c0 (δi ). If c(δ) = δ 2 , price is pCM = t` + w while idleness is δCM = 6t .

Proof. Consumers buy from i only if u − pi − t(` − δi − x) ≥ max(0, u − pj − t(x − δj ). Again, assume

u is high enough that in equilibrium all consumers buy from at least one service. In that case, the
                                            δj −δi       pj −pi                                              `−x∗                    δ1 −δ2       p2 −p1
cutoff consumer x∗ =                `
                                    2   +      2     +     2t .    Quantities are, therefore, Q1 =             `    =        `
                                                                                                                             2   +     2`     +     2t`
               `−x∗         `       δ1 −δ2       p2 −p1
and Q2 =         `    =     2   +     2`     +     2t` .

       Taking the first order condition of profit Πi = (pi − w)Qi − c(δi ) with respect to p1 holding
                                                                                                                         (δ1 −δ2 )t
p2 constant, and solving for equilibrium prices, we have that p∗1 = t` + w +                                                 3            and p∗2 =
             (δ2 −δ1 )t                                                    δ1 −δ2
t` + w +         3      .   Therefore, Q∗1 (δ1 , δ2 ) =            1
                                                                   2   +     6`     and likewise for Q∗2 (δ2 , δ1 ).
                                                                                                        (δ1 −δ2 )t 1             δ1 −δ2
       Substituting into the profit equation, we have that Π1 = (t` +                                       3     )( 2   +         6` )   − c(δ1 ) =

2t`Q21 − c(δ1 ). To solve for first stage choice of δ, we take the first order condition of Π1 with respect
                                                   δ1 −δ2
to δ1 holding δ2 constant:                  1
                                            3 (1+2t 6` )          = c0 (δ1 ). In the symmetric equilibrium,              t
                                                                                                                         3   = c0 (δ1 ) = c0 (δ2 ).

Recall from d’Aspremont et al. [1979] that there is no equilibrium price solution in the second stage

until the firm location is in the outer quarter of the Hotelling line, so we require that t,c are such

that   t
       3   = c0 (δi ) is solved with δ < 4` . Finally, note that since equilibrium δ1∗ = δ2∗ , equilibrium prices

are simply t` + w.

       Note that vis-a-vis monopoly, idleness δ is lower. While higher idleness allows the platform


                                                                               9
to capture more consumer surplus by making customers more homogeneous, it also increases price

competition in the second stage for the same reason: homogenized demand is more valuable for

a monopolist, who is merely concerned with the ability to extract surplus under a uniform price

constraint, than for competing duopolists, who worry about incentivizing rivals to steal customers

by undercutting on price.

      When there is driver multihoming (with driver-only, DM , or full, F M ), these outcomes change

dramatically, as the following two propositions show.

Proposition 4. Under duopoly with driver multihoming (only), prices pDM = u + δi +δ
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    −i
                                                                                       t − `t2 and
                                                                                  t
                                                                                      −`
idleness δDM solves     t
                        2   = c0 (δi ). If c(δ) = δ 2 , price is pDM = u + t( 2 2 ) while idleness provided by
                   t                                                          δ1 +δ2
each firm δDM =    4   and hence equilibrium effective idleness δ =              2     also equals 4t .

Proof. With driver-only multihoming, idled drivers paid by one platform can pick up consumers on

any platform and, hence, idleness spills over such that demand-effective idleness δ = (δ1 + δ2 )/2.

Further, selling to all customers on a given platform generates Qi = .5. Following the proof in
                                                    δi +δ−i         `t
Proposition 2, we have that price pi = u +              2   t   −   2,   and hence the first order condition for

idleness implicitly solves    t
                              2   = c0 (δi )

      When only drivers multihome, more idleness is generated then when only consumers multi-

home. On the one hand, some of the benefits of idleness spill over to the other firm when idled

drivers pick up a customer on a rival’s app, and hence this positive externality is undersupplied.

On the other hand, since customers do not directly multihome, there is no strategic interaction in

pricing between the platforms. This encourages the use of idleness to homogenize the demand curve

without worrying that the more-homogenous demand will prove tempting to rivals looking to steal

business.

Proposition 5. When both drivers and consumers multihome, p = w and δ1 = δ2 = 0.

Proof. When both consumers and drivers multihome, the distance between a given consumer and

the nearest car on either platform is identical regardless of δ. Therefore, all consumers buy from

the lowest price platform, δ1 = δ2 = 0, and Bertrand competition pushes prices to w.

      What this demonstrates is that when both sides of the market fully multihome, in equilibrium,

ridesharing platforms choose to have no idleness. Consequently, consumers must wait longer in order

                                                       10
to obtain a ride. In other words, the equilibrium outcome is the same as the standard Hotelling model

with maximal differentiation. The intuition for this is as follows: because drivers multihome, they

will opt to accept rides from either platform. Thus, if one platform is ‘paying’ them for idleness, that

payment has a positive spillover on their competitor platform. Each platform, therefore, because

it only appropriates part of the return to idleness, chooses to reduce their chosen level. This sets

in motion a form of unraveling, driving idleness to zero. This result is, of course, extreme, and

is a consequence of the fact that all consumers and all drivers multihome. In real world settings,

this extent of multihoming is perhaps unlikely, yet for the purposes of theoretical analysis, we find

it cleaner to show precisely how stark the competitive effects of full multihoming are likely to be.

Note also that while strong price competition is unambiguously positive, strong idleness competition

forces both firms to omit spending resources reducing wait time. That latter effect may be socially

harmful, as we note in the following subsection.


2.3   Surplus and Profit Comparisons

Comparing these outcomes, we have the following:


                              δM ON > δDM > δCM > δN M > δF M = 0


                                pM ON > pDM > pN M > pCM > pF M

                                    ΠM ON > ΠDM , ΠCM > ΠF M

      Price is highest under monopoly and lowest when both consumers and drivers multihome.

Profit is, by definition, maximized under monopoly, and profit is competed to zero when both

consumers and drivers multihome.

      Turning to the impact on overall social welfare, note that, since by assumption u is high

enough that in all competitive structures, all consumers are served, they are also all served in the

social optimum. Any social planner optimally does this by choosing idleness which minimizes the
                                                              `        `
                                                                  −δ     −δ
sum of idleness cost 2c(δ) and consumer transport cost 2t( 2 2         2
                                                                         `    ). The first term is the average
                                                                         2

transport cost paid by customers on [δ, ` − δ], and the second term is the fraction of customers who

lie in that interval. Recall that customers on [0, δ] and [` − δ, `] pay no transport cost. Taking


                                                   11
the first order condition with respect to δ, we have that equilibrium δ solves the implicit equation

2t = c0 (δ) +   4tδ
                 ` .

       The planner solution often involves less idleness than the monopolist but more than the

competing duopolists under any multihoming structure. Unlike the monopolist, the planner is not

willing to pay for idleness that merely homogenizes demand, making it easier to extract consumer

surplus with a uniform price. The planner is, however, willing to pay for idleness without regard

to how it affects the strength of “price” competition. For example, if c(δ) = δ 2 , the planner chooses
       `t                           t                                                  t
δ =   `+2t ,   the monopolist δ =   2,   the driver-multihoming duopolists δ1 = δ2 =   4,   the consumer-

multihoming duopolists δ1 = δ2 = 6t , and full-multihoming duopolists δ1 = δ2 = 0. Note that the

social planner’s optimal idleness δ can take arbitrarily small non-negative values. Hence, any of

those four market structures can be socially optimal for a given set of parameters.

       If the disutility of waiting t is small relative to wait times parameterized by `, monopoly is

socially optimal compared to any of the duopolistic market structures. Intuitively, when ` is larger,

the fraction of potential riders who are currently waiting a nonzero amount of time is higher for any

given δ. Therefore, the reduction in wait time from a small increase in δ is higher, and hence the

planner chooses more idleness. Neither the monopolist nor duopolists care about consumer disutility

from waiting. Yet, the incentive of the monopolist to homogenize demand using wait times, and

hence to extract more consumer surplus with a fixed price ride, is stronger than the incentive

of any duopolist to either steal business by providing lower wait times (in the case of consumer

multihoming) or homogenize a smaller measure of demand (in the case of consumer singlehoming).

On the other hand, when ` is small relative to the disutility of waiting, fewer consumers are waiting

a nonzero amount of time for any given δ, hence the planner does not want to use resources reducing

wait time with many idled drivers. In this case, the monopolist will be overproviding idled drivers

out of her attempt to homogenize demand, while the duopolists will be providing less idleness in

line with the social optimum.



3     Conclusion and Future Research

Multihoming in ridesharing is potentially a significant policy issue. In 2016, a California court found

that Uber drivers were employees and hence, were entitled to various benefits under labor law. If


                                                     12
this were to become universal, then drivers would be tied to platforms and multihoming by them

would not be possible. Our analysis here demonstrates that a labor policy of this type also has

non-trivial consumer market implications, and, in particular, it is possible that restricting driver

multihoming can reduce total surplus, by affecting both equilibrium price and wait time.7

       Given the importance of wait time in determining the nature and, indeed, social desirability

of ridesharing competition (recall that monopoly can be socially superior to competition here), our

results here suggest that moving beyond a simple Hotelling model would be a useful direction for

further analysis. Our own forays into this suggested substantial technical difficulties with providing

analytically tractable extensions which do not run in the d’Aspremont et al. [1979] equilibrium

existence problem. However, perhaps in a more structural framework, these issues could be examined

more fruitfully. This may also allow matching with empirical analyses. For instance, in a structural

exercise, Frechette et al. [2016] show that the reduction in wait time from more efficient matches

when taxis are replaced by rideshare services benefits both consumers and drivers. Extending

analyses of this type to account for multihoming choices is fundamental to understanding how

platforms will trade-off price and wait-time competition, and hence whether policymakers ought

permit, or facilitate, multihoming on the consumer or driver margins.
   7
    Hagiu and Wright [2018] examine the classification of sharing economy workers as independent contracts or
employees and argue for an intermediate classification. Examining this intermediate classification would be a fruitful
area for research along the lines of the present paper as well.




                                                         13
References

Simon P Anderson, Øystein Foros, and Hans Jarle Kind. Competition for advertisers and for viewers

  in media markets. Economic Journal, 128(608):34–54, 2018.

Susan Athey, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S Gans. The impact of consumer multi-homing on

  advertising markets and media competition. Management Science, 64(4):1574–1590, 2018.

Juan Camilo Castillo, Dan Knoepfle, and Glen Weyl. Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase. EC

  ’17 Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 2017.

Cody Cook, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Hall, John A List, and Paul Oyer. The gender earnings

  gap in the gig economy: Evidence from over a million rideshare drivers. Working Paper, 2018.

Claude d’Aspremont, J Jaskold Gabszewicz, and Jean-Francois Thisse. On hotelling’s “stability in

  competition”. Econometrica, 1979.

Guillaume R Frechette, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Tobias Salz. Frictions in a competitive, regulated

  market evidence from taxis. Working Paper, 2016.

Andrei Hagiu and Julian Wright. The status of workers and platforms in the sharing economy. 2018.

Jonathan V. Hall, John J. Horton, and Daniel T. Knoepfle. Labor market equilibrium: Evidence

  from uber. Working Paper, 2017.

Jon Levin and Andrew Skrzypacz. Platform pricing for ride-sharing. Working Paper, 2016.

Afshin Nikzad. Thickness and competition in ride-sharing markets. Working Paper, 2018.




                                               14
