                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              IQ FROM IP: SIMPLIFYING SEARCH IN PORTFOLIO CHOICE

                                       Huaizhi Chen
                                       Lauren Cohen
                                        Umit Gurun
                                         Dong Lou
                                     Christopher Malloy

                                     Working Paper 24801
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24801


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2018, Revised April 2019


We would like to thank Anup Agrawal, Kenneth Ahern, Gurdip Bakshi, Gennaro Bernile,
Bhagwan Chowdry, Eugene Fama, Fangjian Fu, William Goetzmann, Zhiguo He, Petri Jylha,
Tobias Moskowitz, Jun Pan, Christo Pirinsky, Andrew Weinstock, Russell Wermers, and seminar
participants at the Chicago Booth School of Business, Chinese University of Hong Kong, King’s
College London, Renmin University, Shanghai Advanced Institute for Finance, University of
International Business and Economics, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Singapore
Management University, University of Southern California, Oppenheimer Funds, PanAgora
Asset Management, Arrowstreet Capital, the 2017 University of Miami Behavioral Finance
Conference, the 2018 American Finance Association Meetings in Philadelphia, the 2018 UCLA
Anderson Finance Conference, the 2018 QuantCon Conference in New York City, the 6th
Luxembourg Asset Management Summit, and the 2018 Taiwan Finance Association Meetings in
Taipei. We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation and the Paul Woolley
Center at the London School of Economics. Please send correspondence to: Lauren Cohen,
Harvard Business School, Baker Library 279, Soldiers Field, Boston, MA 02163, phone:
1-617-495-3888, email: lcohen@hbs.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
IQ from IP: Simplifying Search in Portfolio Choice
Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 24801
July 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. G02,G11,G14,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a novel database that tracks web traffic on the SEC’s EDGAR server between 2004 and
2015, we show that institutional investors gather information on a very particular subset of firms
and insiders, and their surveillance is very persistent over time. This tracking behavior has
powerful implications for their portfolio choice, and its information content. An institution that
downloaded an insider-trading filing by a given firm last quarter increases its likelihood of
downloading an insider-trading filing on the same firm by more than 41.3% this quarter.
Moreover, the average tracked stock that an institution buys generates annualized alphas of over
12% relative to the purchase of an average non-tracked stock. We find that institutional managers
tend to track members of the top management teams of firms (CEOs, CFOs, Presidents, and
Board Chairs), and tend to share educational and location-based commonalities with the specific
insiders they choose to follow. Collectively, our results suggest that the information in tracked
trades is important for fundamental firm value and is only revealed following the information-rich
dual trading by insiders and linked institutions.

Huaizhi Chen                                    Dong Lou
University of Notre Dame                        Department of Finance
238 Mendoza                                     London School of Economics
College of Business                             Houghton Street
hchen11@nd.edu                                  London, WC2A 2AE
                                                United Kingdom
Lauren Cohen                                    d.lou@lse.ac.uk
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273                               Christopher Malloy
Soldiers Field                                  Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163                                Baker Library 277
and NBER                                        Soldiers Field
lcohen@hbs.edu                                  Boston, MA 02163
                                                and NBER
Umit Gurun                                      cmalloy@hbs.edu
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41 75080
Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
I.        Introduction
There is a fundamental search problem inherent in portfolio choice. Moreover, in light of
the decreasing cost of creating, processing, and transmitting information, the proliferation
of information signals has increased greatly in both quantity and dimensionality in recent
decades. These forces create a classic signal-noise problem, in which an agent must search
ever larger matrices to decipher and create profitable signals. In a Grossman-Stiglitz
world, an agent will be happy to collect information up to their private marginal value of
expected return from that activity. However, with hundreds of thousands of information
signals being produced in any given day, how does an investor reduce the dimensionality
of the investment problem sufficiently to know even which subset (or class) of signals
have the potential to be informative and provide this return in expectation?
          Exactly how investors approach this foundational problem has remained largely a
black box to researchers. We view our paper as an important step in the direction of
peaking behind this curtain, looking under the hood of this process, and providing a novel
window into - as well as micro-level foundations with regard to - exactly what large
portfolio managers do in the search process; we explore how it is conducted, and what
impact this has on their observable portfolio choices.
          In particular, using rich, proprietary data provided by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) on every document downloaded from their online site—including the
exact timing and IP address of the agent downloading--we provide new evidence on the
search process in delegated portfolio management.          In particular, we show that fund
managers follow, and download, information on a very particular subset of firms, and that
this set of firms stays highly constant over time. Further, their trades on these “tracked”
firms (i.e., firms where the fund manager downloads a key filing) are significantly more
informative for future operations and future firm performance, relative to their other
trades.
          The key innovation in our paper is that we are able to explicitly link the monitoring
behavior of individual institutional investors (through their download behavior on the
SEC’s website—which we are able to map to the IP addresses of institutional investment
firms) to specific events on the stocks in their own portfolios. No prior study has been
able to examine search behavior at the level of a specific institutional investor.          In



                                         IQ from IP - 1
particular, we focus on how institutional fund managers track the trades of corporate
insiders in the stocks they own.
       We examine this laboratory for a number of reasons. First, compensation and
hiring vs. firing decisions of fund managers – in addition to external human capital
valuation such as possible hedge fund transitions – are often determined by managers’
performance relative to their peers.     In fact, many of the industries’ highest profile
rankings (e.g., Morningstar, Kiplinger, Barron’s, etc.) are relative rankings amongst fund
managers competing within a mandate. Given this tournament-setup, a natural argument
in a fund manager’s maximization-function would be to find a signal (or set of signals) on
which they have a comparative advantage relative to other managers. This begins to put
some structure on the information acquisition problem that managers face.
       Turning to insider trades, these are a potentially attractive candidate for relative
comparative advantage signals for mutual fund managers.           First, insiders are – by
definition – a class of agents with privileged access and private information regarding their
firms. Second, of all the factors of production – and all the information signals produced
on a firm – insider trades are likely amongst the most valuable for unlocking a powerful
(and legal) comparative advantage for a given fund manager. For instance, if a firm
announces a new product launch, outside of the explicit transmission of material non-
public information, it might be difficult (or prohibitively costly in any scalable manner)
for an institution to gain a comparative advantage in interpreting this signal relative to
other institutions.
       However, contrast this with an insider trade within the same firm. The trade itself
is public information – a sell, for instance. However, following the publicly disclosed sell,
an institutional fund manager who owns the stock and hence has a connection to that
firm could feasibly contact someone at the firm and inquire whether the sell was for
personal liquidity reasons; for instance, to purchase a vacation home. Once determining
that the sell was related to personal liquidity needs – information which the insider is
perfectly legally free to tell her connection (i.e., it is not considered material non-public
information to speak about vacation home purchases) – the fund manager can more
accurately interpret this public signal of the tracked stock and trade accordingly.
Importantly, this is an advantage of a connected manager – in that her competitor funds



                                       IQ from IP - 2
without a connection to the given insider may have a more costly process in gathering the
same private information.
      To better understand our approach, consider the following example firm and
investment manager tracking and trading.    AOK Inc. is a large, publicly traded firm on
the NYSE, which in 2018 operated in all 50 states, with over 1,000 stores throughout
North America and Asia - shipping to over 80 countries worldwide. The firm was widely
held in large positions by a number of institutional investors. Moreover, the firm had a
number of insiders. Two of these insiders, Mr. Sampson and Dr. Jenkins (both
independent board members), were actively trading over their times at AOK Inc.
      In 2013, Mr. Sampson – who lived close to the firm’s Headquarters – made an
unusually large dump of AOK Inc. stock. This trade was reported to the SEC, with the
trade showing up on the SEC’s site on July 30, 2013. The next day (July 31), mutual
fund manager Mr. Thompkins – manager of a large active equity fund located close to
Mr. Sampson – checked Mr. Sampson’s trade, downloading the file from the SEC’s site.
This was usual behavior for Mr. Thompkins, who had made a habit of keeping particularly
close tabs on the trades of Mr. Sampson. Mr. Thompkins, followed this tracking the very
next day (August 1) with an unusually large sale of his position in AOK that he held in
his fund for three years. This turned out to be a very savvy move. Following Mr.
Sampson’s insider sale – echoed by Mr. Thompkins dumping – AOK plummeted in the
following months. It dropped 8% in the month following, and burned down nearly 28%
in the quarter following the trade. AOK was downgraded by two large banks covering
the firm, then on its next earnings announcement missed on profits, revenues, and same
store sales, along with guiding downward.
      Now consider the trading of Dr. Jenkins. Dr. Jenkins was also an independent
director at AOK, a few years following Mr. Sampson. In March of 2015, she made an
untimely purchase of AOK on March 14.         Quickly thereafter, a fund manager, Mr.
Rothman, tracked this trade and made an outsized purchase in the same direction. Now,
not only were Mr. Rothman and Dr. Jenkins located closely to each other, they also shared
the same alma mater, Harvard Business School. In the month following Dr. Jenkins trade,
and the paired tracked buy by Mr. Rothman, AOK had a large number of positive return
realizations. It marched up over 7% the first month, and climbed over 41% in the quarter



                                     IQ from IP - 3
following the buys. Moreover, it upped guidance, picked up initiation by a new investment
bank, and beat on both earnings and same store sales at its next earnings announcement.
       Had one taken the simple strategy of replicating Mr. Rothman’s and Mr.
Thompkins’ tracked trades, (which we term as “tracked buys” and “tracked sells”
throughout the paper), one would have made abnormal returns of over 7% in the following
month, in each case, and even larger returns accruing in the subsequent months.
Moreover, these returns did not reverse, as - in sharp contrast to any overreaction pattern
- they represented fundamental information that was revealed and incorporated into prices
(e.g., real quantities of same store sales and profit margins).
       In this paper we demonstrate that the above example of AOK Inc. – and its
tracking fund managers - represents a much more systematic pattern across the entire
universe of investment manager behavior and informed trade profitability. We are able to
systematically and predictably identify institutional profitable trading on their “tracked”
firms and insiders throughout our sample period (2004-2015), using novel data from the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Further, our classification scheme is able to richly
identify informed trading even out of seeming identical behavior (i.e., informed buying
and selling vs. all other buying and selling). These abnormal returns exist through the
present day, and are even slightly stronger in point estimate in the most recent period.
       In order to do this for the full sample, we first document that institutional
managers have a very specific set of firms (and insiders) that they track. We then find
that their tracking and monitoring activities, again measured using their downloading
behavior, have powerful implications for their portfolio choices and future returns. For
instance, the fact that an institution downloaded an insider-trading filing by a given firm
last quarter increases her likelihood of downloading an insider-trading filing from the same
firm by more than 41.3% (t = 14.37) this quarter. For reference, the unconditional
probability of an institution downloading at least one insider trading filing in a quarter
from any firm in her existing portfolio is 4.8%. In other words, our persistence result – an
8 times increase in probability - is not only statistically significant, but also economically
important. We find similarly strong persistence at the individual insider-level tracking.
For instance, we observe an 18.7% (t = 9.20) increase in the probability of downloading,
say, Jamie Dimon’s insider trading filing if the manager downloaded the same insider’s



                                       IQ from IP - 4
filing the prior quarter.
       We show that these “tracked” insider trades have predictability for future firm
operations and returns. In particular, when an institution buys a stock following a tracked
insider buy, this stock outperforms other institutional purchases by a risk-adjusted 4-
factor alpha of 300 basis points per quarter on average (t=2.10), or 12% annualized
abnormal return per year. Similarly, when an institution sells a stock following a tracked
insider sell, this portfolio underperforms other institutional sales by a risk-adjusted 4-
factor alpha of 190 basis points per quarter (t=3.48), or over 7% annualized abnormal
return per year. These returns are unaffected by known risk determinants or factor model
adjustment chosen (i.e. 4-factor and DGTW).
       In addition, if the results we find reflect institutional managers exhibiting a true
comparative advantage in their tracked stocks, we might expect these managers to know
when not to “follow” the tracked insiders’ behavior. For example, if the institution can
decipher that the given trade was for liquidity reasons (as opposed to information-based),
the manager would not want to mimic that trade of the tracked insider. This implies
that when we observe institutions choosing not to follow the trades of their tracked
insiders, these insider trades should have less predictive ability for future returns. We
find exactly this pattern in the data. Firms in which institutions buy alongside tracked
insider purchases tend to outperform those in which tracked insiders buy but the
institutions choose not to buy alongside the insiders; we find analogous results on the sell
side as well. A final counterfactual we explore is the returns to following all insider buys
and sells; we show that the returns we document are not simply earned by following all
insider buys (or sells), but rather that institutions’ tracking behavior appears to allow
them to engage in valuable stock selection above and beyond mimicking all insider trades.
       There are a number of characteristics that have been shown in the literature to
predict more profitable insider trades. It could be that our results on tracked insider
trades are simply repackaging these past results. In order to test against this, we split
the universe of trades by these firm and insider characteristics. We show that institutions’
ability to outperform on their tracked insider trades holds across: large and small firms,
value and growth firms, high and low past return firms, and high and low turnover firms.
We then turn to the trades of CEOs and other top officers along with opportunistic insider



                                      IQ from IP - 5
trades – both of which have been shown to be especially informative. We show that
managers do have the ability to track and trade even within these especially profitable
subsets of trades. In particular, they appear able to choose precisely which CEO, CFO,
top officer and opportunistic trade are most profitable relative to all other CEO, CFO,
top officer and opportunistic trades.
        Importantly, we show that the outperformance that we document on these tracked
trades persists. The abnormal returns do not immediately reverse, suggesting that the
information in tracked trades is important for fundamental firm value, and is only revealed
following the information-rich dual trading by insider and linked institution.
        Further, since our institutional holdings data is primarily quarterly in nature – as
opposed to the SEC download files and insider transaction data which both contain precise
timestamps – we also use more granular data from ANcerno on the daily trades of
institutional investors to directly map the timing of institutional trades to the timing of
insider transactions. We show that institutions that trade in the direction of recent insider
transactions do so relatively quickly, with a large proportion of these trades (almost 50%)
occurring within 30 days after the insider trade; far less occurs before the insider trades,
or after this 30-day window. Moreover, a sizable percentage of the return occurs in the
few days/weeks following the tracked trade, underscoring the importance of real-time
tracking in this linked relationship between the institution and a given insider.1
        We explore the mechanism at work behind our results in a variety of ways. First
we show that institutional managers tend to track members of the top management teams
of firms (CEOs, CFOs, Presidents, and Board Chairs) and accountants, and shy away
from tracking outside directors and insiders with PhDs. Next we take our institutional
holdings data and isolate the fund managers within each institutional investment firm
whose holdings correlate most with the insider trades tracked by their fund company, and
explore these “cherry picking” fund managers in greater depth. We find that these cherry
picking fund managers are more likely to have an educational or location-based link to
the insider in question. These findings are consistent with the idea that fund managers
choose to track and mimic the trades of the specific insiders who not only possess the


1
 We also explore alternate (conservative) timing conventions to show the robustness to these alternative
conventions.


                                           IQ from IP - 6
most valuable information, but also those with whom they have lower-cost channels for
obtaining private information.
       Our finding of strong outperformance by both tracked insider buys and insider
sales relates to the larger literature on insider trading. The literature has found a few
systematic empirical facts regarding insider trading profitability. Insider buys are followed
by, on average, systematic positive abnormal returns of roughly 50-100 basis points in the
following month (this literature dates back to Lorie and Niederhoffer (1968) and Jaffe
(1974)). However, the literature has generally found little predictability associated with
the average insider sale (Jeng et al. (2003) and Lakonishok and Lee (2001)). Reasons for
this result include potential liquidity, diversification, and other motives that could the
information content of insider selling behavior. The reason this dynamic is critical is that
insider sales – with their average statistically zero return – make up over 80% of all insider
trades (Seyhun (1988) and Cohen et al. (2012)).             Thus, in only finding robust
predictability of insider buys, this comprises less than 20% of all insider trading activity.
Importantly, given that we find evidence in the paper of profitable tracking and trading
of both insider buying and insider selling, it suggests that fund managers appear able to
exploit the rich information in the entirety of insider trading (and not solely the less than
20% linked to buys).


II.    Literature Review
Our work relates to several strands of the literature, including papers analyzing the
investment performance of mutual fund managers, articles exploring the characteristics
and profitability of insider trading, and a slew of studies documenting gradual information
diffusion and limited attention in the stock market.
       The area of the mutual fund literature most closely related to our paper is the
collection of work examining whether mutual fund managers possess stock-picking ability.
This remains an open question, because while many papers (Jensen (1968), Malkiel (1995),
Gruber (1996), and Carhart (1997)) find that active managers fail to outperform passive
benchmark portfolios (even before expenses), several others (Grinblatt and Titman (1989,
1993), Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995), Daniel et al. (1997), and Wermers (1997))
find that active managers do exhibit stock-picking ability. In terms of specific



                                       IQ from IP - 7
characteristics known to correlate with superior performance, Chevalier and Ellison (1999)
use biographical data on managers to show that fund managers from undergraduate
institutions with higher average SAT scores earn abnormal returns.2 Other evidence shows
that fund managers tend to overweight nearby companies (Coval and Moskowitz (1999),
and earn higher returns on their local holdings (Coval and Moskowitz (2001)). Closest to
this paper is Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008), who find that fund managers place
bigger bets on firms they are connected to through their education network, and perform
significantly better on these holdings relative to their non-connected holdings. Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2005) also document word-of-mouth effects between same-city mutual
fund managers with respect to their portfolio choices. We add to this list by exploring to
what extent mutual funds actively investigate the insider trades on stocks within their
own portfolios. Our approach highlights another channel through which fund managers
earn abnormal returns.
        Our paper is also closely related to a large literature examining the behavior of
corporate insiders. Many of these papers study the cross-sectional return forecasting
ability of insider trades aggregated at the firm level. Numerous papers (see, for example
Lorie and Niederhoffer (1968), Jaffe (1974), Seyhun (1986, 1998), Rozeff and Zaman
(1988), Lin and Howe (1990), Bettis, Coles, and Lemmon (2000), Lakonishok and Lee
(2001), and Marin and Olivier (2008)) focus on the abnormal returns to firms in relation
to various metrics of firm-level insider trading. Seyhun (1998) summarizes this evidence
and reports that several different trading rules lead to abnormal returns. In addition, Jeng
et al. (2003) show that insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6% per year,
while insider sales fail to earn significant abnormal returns.
        Several papers take a more granular approach and examine individual insider-level
data in order to identify which insiders are truly informed. For example, Cohen, Malloy,
and Pomorski (2012) show that the past trading records of insiders can be used to identify
which insiders are likely to be trading on information and which are not. In addition,
Piotroski and Roulstone (2005) demonstrate that insider trades reflect both contrarian
beliefs as well as private information about future cash flows, and Ke, Huddard and


2
 Massa and Simonov (2005) also document a relation between the portfolio choices of individual investors
and their past educational backgrounds.


                                           IQ from IP - 8
Petroni (2003) demonstrate that insiders trade before significant accounting disclosures.
Kahle (2000) shows that long-run stock returns associated with seasoned equity offerings
(SEOs) are significantly related to measures of insider trading, and Clarke, Dunbar, and
Kahle (2001) provide evidence consistent with insiders exploiting windows of opportunity
by trying to issue overvalued stock. Finally, Jagolinzer (2009) presents more evidence of
strategic trading by insiders by focusing on a subset of insiders who publicly disclose 10b5-
1 plans; he shows that insiders initiate sales plans before negative returns and terminate
sales plans before positive returns.
       Our paper can also be situated within the large and growing literature on limited
attention, and the slow diffusion of information in the stock market. Many of these papers
argue that if investors have limited resources and capacity to collect, interpret, and finally
trade on value-relevant information, we should expect stock prices to incorporate
information only gradually. For instance, because of gradual information diffusion (Hong
and Stein, 2007) and/or gradual capital diffusion (slow moving capital (Duffie, 2010)),
this information may be impounded into stock prices slowly. Meanwhile, there is a
substantial literature studying investors’ limited attention to information. Theoretical
papers such as Merton (1987), Hong and Stein (1999), and Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003),
argue that with investors subject to binding attention and resource constraints, delayed
information flows can lead to expected returns that are not explained by traditional asset
pricing models. Numerous empirical studies find supporting evidence for these models.
For example, Huberman and Regev (2001), Barber and Odean (2006), DellaVigna and
Pollet (2006), Hou (2007), Hong, Torous, and Valkanov (2007), Cohen and Frazzini
(2008), and Cohen and Lou (2011) find that investors respond quickly to salient, eye-
catching information, but tend to ignore information that is less obvious yet nonetheless
essential to firm value.
       Since our work utilizes the log file from the SEC EDGAR database, our paper is
also related to a few recent papers that use this data to explore different, but related
issues in corporate finance and asset pricing. For example, Loughran and McDonald
(2016) provide a first descriptive analysis of this dataset and show that--after sifting out
robot requests--the average publicly-traded firm has their annual report requested only
28.4 total times by investors immediately after the 10 K-filing; they conclude that the



                                       IQ from IP - 9
“lack   of   annual   report   requests   suggests   that   investors   generally   are   not
doing fundamental research on stocks.” Lee, Ma, and Wang (2016) apply a “co-search”
algorithm to the SEC log file in order to identify economically-related peer firms; they
show that firms appearing in chronologically adjacent searches by the same individual are
fundamentally similar on multiple dimensions. Finally, Drake, Roulstone, and Thornock
(2016) show that EDGAR activity is positively related with corporate events (particularly
restatements, earnings announcements, and acquisition announcements), poor stock
performance, and the strength of a firm’s information environment; EDGAR activity is
also related to, but distinct from, other proxies of investor interest such as trading volume,
business press articles, and Google searches. Bozanic, Hooppes, Thornock, and Williams
(2017) focus on IRS use of the EDGAR data; Gibbons, Iliev, and Kalodimos (2018) explore
sells-side analysts’ downloading activity; Iliev, Kalodimos, and Lowry (2018) examine
mutual fund family downloads of proxy filings and the governance implications of this
type of monitoring. While all of these papers explore the SEC logfile data in various
ways, none of them explicitly link the users of the data to individual institutional investors
(i.e., the 13F filers that feature in our analysis) in order to explore the investment
implications of SEC searches in a direct and granular way.


III.    Data and the Setting
We combine data from a variety of sources in order to execute the empirical tests in this
paper. We use CRSP to obtain stock related information, the Thompson Reuters Insiders
database to obtain insider transactions, and Thompson Reuters Ownership data to obtain
stock holdings of fund families. We also construct three unique and novel datasets using
various sources.   In this section, we describe in detail how we construct these three
datasets, which entail: (1) matching IP addresses to 13-F organizations, (2) matching 13-
F organization names to daily trades reported in the ANcerno database (described further
below), and (3) collecting biographical background information both for corporate insiders
and mutual fund managers.


        A. Matching IP Addresses to 13-F Organizations




                                      IQ from IP - 10
       To match IP address to 13-F organizations, we follow a four-step procedure. First,
we obtain the data on SEC filings and the IP addresses of their viewers from the SEC at
the log file website (https://www.sec.gov/data/edgar-log-file-data-set). The log files are
available from 2003 onwards, and are posted by the SEC on a quarterly basis with a 6-
months delay. We use mainly the data logs from 2004 to 2015 due to the limitation of the
IP geolocation data.
       The IP addresses in the dataset are partially anonymized using a static cipher. The
data describe the access of filings by different IP addresses. A standard IP address would
have the form ###.###.###.###. Each octet ### separated by periods has a
numerical value between 0 and 255. Instead, an IP address in the EDGAR data has the
form ###.###.###.&&&. The first 9 digits of the EDGAR server IP correspond to
the actual IP that visited the website (024.145.236). The last 3 digits correspond to a
cipher (jcf). That is, each row of the data corresponds to a certain IP address
(24.145.236.jcf) viewing a specific filing coded by an accession number (0000891020-04-
000160) at a specific time and date (12:00 am on April 31, 2004).
       The static ciphers in the EDGAR log are 3-digit alphabetical codes that uniquely
represent octets between 0 and 255 throughout the data. This is apparent as the same IP
with the same cipher would visit similar forms for the same firm in multiple days and
months; and ciphers with the lowest frequency tend to be the same two: ghf and ghg
throughout the data. We ended up matching ghf and ghg to 0 and 255 respectively. IP
addresses ending with 0 and 255 tend to be reserved for network administrative purposes,
and are generally less frequent than other addresses.
       In order to match the data to organization-level information, we first de-
anonymized the ciphers. This is done by using another set of server logs from a private
but well-trafficked website. Assuming that the intersection of IP addresses for existing IP
are similar between two servers, we are able to deduce which cipher, say aaa, corresponds
to which number between 0 and 255 using the frequency of potential matches.
       For instance, if 1.1.1.aaa visited the SEC server and 1.1.1.111 visited the private
website in 2016, then the cipher aaa will have one match to 111. Since there are multiple
matches between a cipher and a set of octets, we compose a scoring system that counts
the number of times each cipher is matched to each octet. The most frequent match is



                                     IQ from IP - 11
our candidate for the cipher link. The link between a cipher and its most frequently
matched octet is distinct for the vast majority of the ciphers (236 out of 256 ciphers). For
example, aba’s most frequent octet match is 009, no other cipher matches to 009 as their
most frequent match.
       The rest of the matching, where multiple ciphers are matched to a single octet, is
done through a process of elimination. For example, if both aaa and aab score 001 as their
most frequent match, we distinguish the two by examining which of the two ciphers are
more frequently linked to 001. If 001 has many more matches with aaa than aab, then
aaa is matched to 001. In this case 001 is removed as a potential choice for aab’s matching.
aab is then linked to its next most frequent octet. We only had to iterate this process
once in order to match the remaining 20 pairs.
       Once the IP data is deciphered, we connect the specific filing IP address to a set
of organizations using a dataset of organization IP addresses from MaxMind. The IP of
organizations data is released on a periodic basis. The IP address linked to each viewing
from EDGAR is matched with the last available organization data for that IP address at
the time of the viewing. In Table 1, we illustrate the cipher table we used in order to de-
anonymize the IP addresses of the 13-F organizations in our sample.
       In the second step, we hand-match names of the 13-F organizations to the list of
potential organizations from MaxMind by research assistants. We start off with two
thousand 13-F organizations with the largest average AUM between Q1 2004 and Q4
2015. Since IPs are non-static and the MaxMind data also changes from period to period,
certain institutions appear more frequently and longer than others.
       In the third step, we identify the link between each 13-F filings institution and
their IP addresses, and focus on the documents accessed in the EDGAR system. We use
the WRDS accession filing database to link each IP viewing to a specific filing. This
specific accessing filing contains a mapping of each EDGAR document to a COMPUSTAT
firm. After this step, we are able to construct a sample for 779 unique 13-F filing
institutions and the filings they track in the EDGAR.
       In the final step, we scrape the insider trading filings from the SEC website in
order to obtain the datacodes recorded in each form. This datacode in each insider form
allow us to obtain the accession numbers necessary to match to the Thompson Insider



                                     IQ from IP - 12
database. For example, an insider trade Form 4 (0000891020-04-000160) represents Tim
Cook’s unloading of shares. After following these steps, we are able to observe which of
the identified IP addresses of 13-F organizations accessed which particular insider trading
forms on the EDGAR server from Q1 2004 to Q4 2015.


      B. Matching 13-F Organizations to Daily Trades Reported in ANcerno
      In this section we describe how we match the institution identifier from the
ANcerno database (managercode) to the 13-F institution identifier (mgrno), which we use
to aggregate the tracking of insiders by individual IP addresses. The primary data source
consists of detailed institutional stock transactions from ANcerno (formerly Abel Noser),
a leading consulting firm that works with institutional investors to monitor and optimize
their equity trading costs. ANcerno’s clients include major pension plan sponsors United
Airlines, mutual fund families (i.e., money managers), such as Fidelity Investments and
Putman Investments, and a small number of brokerage firms. This dataset is also used in
other studies, such as Goldstein, Irvine, Kandel, and Wiener (2009), Puckett and Yan
(2011), Hu, Mclean, Pontiff, and Wang (2013), and Cohen, Lou, and Malloy (2016).
      Our sample period for the ANcerno data is Q1 2004 to Q3 2011. In this period, we
start off with 11,649 managercode-year-quarter observations in the ANcerno database.
This reports the name of the institutional manager for each of its client portfolios. Using
this information, we are able to manually match the trading by institutions from the
ANcerno database to the available institutions gathered from EDGAR’s SEC data. As a
result of this procedure, we are able to identify 91 of the 779 mgrnos from the 13-F data
in ANcerno.


      C. Collecting Biographical Information for Corporate Insiders and Fund Managers
      To collect biographical information on corporate insiders, we use the BoardEx
database, which collects information about individuals who have been on the board of or
assumed an executive manager role at a publicly traded firm or a major private firm. The
set of personal information includes academic qualifications, current and past job
positions, and memberships in professional and other groups. To collect the biographical
backgrounds of mutual fund managers, we use the Morningstar database, which contains



                                     IQ from IP - 13
fund-level performance measures as well as manager profiles. We manually parse through
the education information of fund managers after searching for each fund name in the
database, and pay special attention to make sure that we capture the fund manager who
is in charge of the fund at the time of the trade. In total, we have collected biographical
information on 53,744 corporate insiders and 225 mutual fund managers associated with
our sample of insiders and institutional portfolios.
       Table 2 reports the summary statistics of the forms downloaded by matched
financial institutions, and the frequency of these forms in the EDGAR database. The
first three columns report the top accessed forms, their respective number of downloads
by all matched institutional IP addresses, and the relative frequency of these downloads.
The next three columns remove Mass Download IP addresses- IP addresses that access
more than 3000 filings per day- and report the same three statistics. The last three
columns are the top most filed forms, their respective number of filings, and the relative
frequency of these forms in the EDGAR Database.
       There were over 400 million form files requested by institutional IPs over the
sample period. The two most requested filing types were corporate 8-Ks and insider
trading filings (Form 4s). 8-Ks are required to be filed by firms to notify shareholders of
material events transpiring at the firm.       After removing mass downloads, Form 4
downloads still represent over 7% of the total downloads. Form 4s also represent over
36% of all forms filed in the EDGAR Database.
       Panel B of Table 2 reports the correlation between the holding firm checked by
institutions through 10-K forms, 8-K forms, and Insider Trading Forms (4, 5, 6, and their
amendments).     This panel shows that there is a positive correlation between an
institution’s tendency to check the insider filings along with the 10-K and 8-K forms. In
Panel C of Table 2, we report summary statistics on the number of IPs, institutions, and
the percent of their portfolio represented by the stocks they track each quarter.
       Table 3 lists the top 30 active institutions (in terms of total value of the active
portfolio last observed) that we are able to link to an IP address. Many of the largest
fundamental stock picking investment firms are represented in this list.


IV.    Empirical Results



                                      IQ from IP - 14
       A. Persistence in Tracking Behavior
       The main thesis of our paper is that investors, considering their resource
constraints, should optimally choose to focus their information gathering efforts on a
subset of the firms and a subset of the signals where they have a comparative advantage
in terms of collecting and interpreting the information. To illustrate, if investor A has a
comparative edge in interpreting information from the healthcare industry (due to, for
example, her prior work experience), we expect the investor to focus her research activity,
and consequently her portfolio holdings, in this industry.
       Moreover, since comparative advantages in information processing are accumulated
(developed) through years of experience and interactions with other economic agents, and
are thus unlikely to change rapidly over time, we expect persistent patterns in investors’
information-gathering activity. We start our empirical analysis by examining the following
question: conditional on investor A searching for regulatory filings by company X in one
period, do we see searches by the same investor on the same firm in the next period?
       Table 4 reports the persistence in institutions’ search behavior for insider trading
filings (Forms 3, 4, and 5) on the EDGAR server. We conduct a panel OLS regression
where the dependent variable is a dummy that equals one if an institution downloads at
least one insider-trading filing by a given firm in quarter t. The main independent variable
of interest is a similar dummy defined in quarter t-1. As can be seen from Column 1 of
Panel A, there is substantial persistence in institutions’ search behavior. The fact that an
institution downloaded an insider-trading filing by a given firm in quarter t-1 increases
her likelihood of downloading an insider-trading filing from the same firm by more than
41.3% (t = 14.37) the next period. For reference, the unconditional probability of an
institution downloading at least one insider trading filing in a quarter from any firm in
her existing portfolio is 4.8%. In other words, our persistence result is not only statistically
significant, but also economically important.
       In Columns 2 and 3, we further include a host of fixed effects including portfolio
fixed effects and year-stock fixed effects. Our results remain economically large. For
example, in Column 3 (with the full set of year-stock and portfolio fixed effects), the
coefficient on lagged search dummy is 0.255 (t = 11.86)) — i.e., an institution that




                                       IQ from IP - 15
downloaded insider filings of a given firm in the prior quarter has a 25.5% higher chance
of downloading insider filings by the same firm again in the following quarter.
       In the next three columns of Table 4, we narrow in on the specific insiders. In other
words, we track not only institutions’ searching for insider filings by Apple, but also the
specific filings by Tim Cook. The results are consistent with those shown in the first three
columns. As can be seen from Column 4, an institution that downloaded an insider trading
filing by a given executive in a quarter has an 18.7% (t = 9.20) higher likelihood of
downloading an insider trading filing by the same executive in the following quarter.
Again, including portfolio and year-insider fixed effects has little impact on our results.
For example, in Column 6, the fully specified regression, the coefficient on lagged search
behavior drops only slightly to 13.3% (t = 6.31).


       B. Contemporaneous Trading of Fund Managers and Corporate Insiders
       After establishing that institutions’ search behavior on EDGAR is highly persistent
(that is, each institution tends to follow the same group of firms and insiders over time),
we next turn to institutions’ trading decisions and examine whether institutions trade in
the same direction as the insiders that they follow.
       In Table 5 we report the results of panel regressions of the direction of
contemporaneous trading by institutions on the direction of trading by the insiders
checked by these institutions. The dependent variable, FundDirection, is equal to -1 if
the institution sells the stock, 1 if the institution buys the stock, and 0 otherwise.
CheckedInsiderDirection is set equal to -1 if the insiders that were checked by the
institution sold in net, and 1 if the insiders bought in net.       Similarly, the variable
CheckedInsiderBuy is equal to 1 if the insiders checked bought in net, and
CheckedInsiderSell is equal to 1 if the insiders checked sold in net. Meanwhile
AllInsiderDirection is set to -1 if all the insiders from the firm sold in net during the
quarter, and 1 if all the insiders from the firm bought in net. And again, AllInsiderBuy
is set equal to 1 if all the insiders from the firm bought in net during the quarter; and
AllInsiderSell is set to 1 if all the insiders from the firm sold in net during the quarter.
The panel is weighted by the inverse of the number of positions in each portfolio (so that
a portfolio with many positions does not dominate the regression).



                                     IQ from IP - 16
          As shown in the first row of Table 5, our institutions’ trading behavior is highly
correlated with the trading of the insiders they actively track.                    The coefficient on
CheckedInsiderDirection is large and positive (=0.077, t-stat=4.43) on the direction of
trades for existing positions. This coefficient is derived on a bidirectional basis, and implies
that if the checked insider buys the stock, the probability that an institution buys this
stock increases by 15% (from the unconditional likelihood of buying additional shares of
an existing position of 51%); additionally, if the checked insider sells the stock, the
probability that an institution sells this stock increases by 16% (from the unconditional
likelihood of selling a share of an existing position 47%). From Columns 2 and 3, we see
trading responses of fund managers to tracked insider buys and tracked insider sales
separately from EDGAR. We control for period and fund fixed effects in these regressions.
Moreover, in Columns 4-6 we control for the overall trading of the fund per quarter with
quarter x institution fixed effects. The tracked insider trades remain large and significant
predictors of fund manager behavior even controlling for these fixed effects. These results
highlight the particularly important information that appears to be embedded in tracked
insider trades for institutional trading behavior.


          C. Portfolio Returns to Active Insider Tracking
          Given that institutions tend to trade in the same direction as the subset of
managers they follow, a natural question to ask is whether institutions earn abnormal
returns from these trades. If institutions correctly choose which firms/managers’ insider
trades to follow based on their comparative advantages to process/interpret information,
we should expect these trades to generate positive abnormal returns.
          To test this idea, we form equal-weighted calendar-time portfolios over our 135-
month sample period using various sorting criteria, and compute the return differentials
across these portfolios.3 The timing and the construction of these tests is as follows: a) in
quarter t-1 we observe the trading behavior of institutions at the quarterly frequency
(note that later in the paper we explore daily trading records for a subset of our sample
to pinpoint the timing even more directly), as well as the exact insider trading date and
corresponding download date by these institutional investors, and b) in quarter t we

3
    We discuss various weighting schemes, including value- and trade-weighting below.


                                             IQ from IP - 17
compute the quarterly returns to the separate parts of these investors’ portfolios weighed
by their total net assets in quarter t-1. We illustrate this timing using a hypothetical
example in Figure 1.
       In the daily trading tests that we present later in the paper, we demonstrate that
the vast majority of fund manager trades that appear around insider trades occur after
the reported insider trade date, so we do not believe our results are driven by investors
trading before the insider trades, and before they download the SEC file. However, to
further allay this concern we also employ an alternate timing convention in Appendix
Table A1 where we force the insider trade and download dates to occur in the quarter
prior to any subsequent trades by the fund manager, and then explore returns in the
quarter following those fund manager trades. Given that the insider trading literature
has documented that the returns to following insider trades primarily accrue in the 30
days immediately after the reported trade dates (a fact we replicate in our sample), the
idea of forcing our portfolio tests to wait three full months after the insider trade to
measure any return benefits of insider following seems overly conservative. However, as
shown in the Appendix Table A1, even using this conservative timing convention we still
find evidence of abnormal returns for fund managers who trade in the same direction as
their tracked insider trades.
       In Table 6 Panel A we report the raw, DGTW-, and 4-factor-adjusted returns of
portfolios relating to insiders who bought stocks followed through the EDGAR system.
We begin by computing the average stock returns held in the institution portfolios
weighed by their total net assets (TNA). As shown in the first row of Table 6, during our
sample period, the average stock held within an institutional portfolio earns a marginally
significant and economically small 4 Factors-adjusted return of 34bps (t = 2.16) per
quarter.
       We next construct a variety of counterfactuals and benchmark portfolios to isolate
the information content of fund managers’ purchases following insider trades that they
actively follow. For instance, we divide each institution’s entire portfolio into several sub-
components: the first sub-portfolio – shown in row 2 – includes all institution’s positions
except for firms whose checked insiders bought.         Row 3 then computes a long-short
portfolio, which is held for one quarter, where the long portfolio consists of stocks where



                                      IQ from IP - 18
a fund manager downloads an insider purchase filing, and the short portfolio consists of
the portfolio in row 2. This long-short portfolio, while non-trivial in magnitude (around
1.87% per quarter), is nonetheless insignificantly different from zero. It is worth noting
however that this portfolio mixes both stocks that are downloaded and bought by the
manager, and stocks that are simply downloaded.
       However, in row 4 we now construct a long-short portfolio where we solely long
stocks where an investment manager checks the insiders’ buy transaction and also
purchases, while keeping the same short portfolio in row 2. This long-short portfolio earns
a statistically and economically significant alpha of 3% in the following quarter (t = 2.08).
Columns 4-7 then break down this L-S portfolio into its L and S legs, as well as give
information regarding the size of both legs. Throughout Table 6, it is clear from Columns
4-7 that the bulk of the alpha from the L-S portfolio is coming from the “tracked-trade”
leg of the portfolio (L) – based on the active tracking and trading by the institutional
manager.
       Next, in row 5 we change the benchmark and compare the returns of a portfolio
for which the fund manager checks an insider purchase and also buys the stock (the long
portfolio) to the returns to all other stocks that fund managers also buy in that same
quarter (the short portfolio).   Note that here the benchmark consists of all other stock
purchases by active fund managers. This long-short portfolio again earns 3% alpha in the
following quarter (t = 2.10). The results here indicate that these tracked insider purchases
contain information beyond the content of institutional purchases alone.
       In rows 6 and 7 of Table 6 Panel A, we construct an alternate benchmark that
consists of all stocks where a fund manager downloads the filing after an insider purchase,
but chooses not to buy the stock in that quarter. As noted earlier, if our results truly
reflect institutional managers exhibiting a comparative advantage in information
processing, we expect these managers to know when not to “follow” the tracked insiders’
trades. For example, if the institution can decipher that the given trade was for personal
reasons (as opposed to information-based), the manager would not want to follow that
trade of the tracked insider. Indeed, we find that these insider trades have less predictive
ability for future returns. This shown in row 6, when we use this counterfactual as our
short portfolio and use the same long portfolio as in rows 4 and 5, the long-short spread



                                      IQ from IP - 19
of 3.25% per quarter is economically large (and statistically significant at the 90%
confidence). In row 7, if we further restrict the long portfolio to only situations where the
fund manager makes a large increase in the stock position from a zero or insignificant
initial position (less than 20 basis points of total portfolio weight), the long-short spread
increases to 3.93% alpha per quarter.
       Our final counterfactual/benchmark portfolio involves examining the returns to all
stocks that are not checked by an institution but where both the insiders and the
institution purchased shares.       This benchmark portfolio allows us to compare the
coordinated trading by institutions and their checked insiders against the potentially
coincidental simultaneous trading of unchecked insiders and institutions. The portfolio of
tracked insider buys with a corresponding fund manager purchase again outperforms this
benchmark of all other insider purchases by up to 2.97% alpha per quarter (t=2.09).
Collectively, our findings point to large and significant return predictability that stems
from fund managers’ active tracking of select insiders, beyond just the interaction of
insider and institutional trades.
       Table 6 Panel B presents the analogous results around insider sales, as opposed to
insider purchases. The results are remarkably consistent with the purchase results shown
in Panel A, albeit at somewhat smaller magnitudes for the L/S portfolios in rows 5
through 8—more in the 6% to 8.5% annualized range, as opposed to the 9% to 13%
annualized range for the purchase results. For instance, consider row 5 where the long
side requires both the institution and its tracked insiders to sell the security in question,
and where the benchmark portfolio includes all holdings which are sold by the institution
but not by tracked insiders; in this specification tracked-sales underperform the
benchmark by 190bps (t = 3.48) in the following quarter.          In row 6, we define the
benchmark as including all holdings that are not sold by the institution but are sold by
tracked insiders. Similar to the result in Panel A, the return differential for the tracked
stocks that are sold relative to tracked stocks that institutions choose not to sell is
economically and statistically significant. Finally, in row 8, if the counterfactual
benchmark portfolio is instead defined as the set of insider sells which are not downloaded
by the institution, the L/S spread is again significant at 183bps (t = 3.41).




                                       IQ from IP - 20
        Collectively, the results in Table 6 indicate that institutions are able to identify
the most informative trades by closely tracking the trades of specific corporate insiders.


        D. Portfolio Returns across Firm and Insider Characteristics
        While the results in Table 6 provide evidence that institutions are able to identify,
track, and trade on especially informative insider trades, the rich literature on insider
trading has also established a number of characteristics that have been shown to also
predict more profitable insider trades. For instance, Lakonishok and Lee (2001) show
that insiders’ trades appear to be more profitable in smaller firms (vs. larger firms). It
could be that our results on tracked insider trades are simply repackaging these past
results. In order to test against this, we split the trading universe of institutions by
various stock characteristics, and explore the ability of the institutions – with their
tracking of insider trades – to generate outperformance within each of these subsamples.
We test fund managers’ ability to profitably track trades across: a.) large and small firms,
b.) value and growth firms, c.) high and low past return firms, d.) high and low turnover
firms, and e.) high and low institutional ownership firms.
        The results are shown in Table 7. Each panel represents independent double-sorts
with the respective firm characteristic being considered, with the cross-section of stocks
first split upon the median of each characteristic per quarter. In particular, they show
the L-S return spread of (buying-selling of tracked insider trades) – (buying-selling of all
other non-tracked trades) by the same managers in the given subset of the universe
(similar to row 5 in Table 6). In this way, the results aim to identify solely the tracking
premium amongst the given subset of firms (e.g., large firms separately from small firms).
        The results in Table 7 Panels A show that fund managers’ ability to outperform
on their tracked insider trades broadly holds across: large and small firms, value and
growth firms, high and low past return firms, high and low turnover firms.4 The slight
exception is that of institutional ownership (IO) – where the profits from tracked insider
trades, though positive in both, seem to be somewhat larger in low IO firms – though this
tendency is only statistically significant when the Fama-French four-factor adjustment is


4
  The t-stats in these double-sorted subset universes are slightly weaker than what we have in the original
full-sample test, largely driven by the reduced sample size of each smaller sub-sample.


                                            IQ from IP - 21
taken into account. Stepping back, the results across all five sorts bolster the idea that
institutions’ ability to profit on tracked insider trades broadly extends across firm
characteristics.
       We next move on to explore fund managers’ outperformance on tracked insider
trades within and across characteristics of the insiders themselves. In particular, Ravina
and Sapienza (2010) find evidence of stronger outperformance by top executives (e.g.,
CEOs, as opposed to other insider), while Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012) show that
much of the outperformance by insider trading is concentrated amongst opportunistic
insider trades (as opposed to routine trades). We thus examine whether tracked insider
trades can still outperform non-tracked insider trades within each of these subsets.
       To test this, similar to above, we measure different types of insider trades and split
the universe of measured trades into: f.) routine vs. opportunistic trades, and g.) trades
by top executives (e.g., CEO, chairman) vs. trades of other insiders, and again run
independent tests of managers’ ability to outperform on their tracked trades within each
of these universes. Here, we focus particularly on the relevance of information production
by the fund managers in these cases and consequently examine the performance of L-S
return spread of (buying-selling of tracked insider trades) – (buying-selling of all other
non-tracked trades that coincide with untracked insiders).
       Panel B of Table 7 displays our results. It is clear that managers do have the
ability to track and act on the especially profitable trades of top executives and
opportunistic trades. Importantly, the fund managers appear able to choose precisely
which CEO, CFO, top officer and opportunistic trades are most profitable relative to all
other CEO, CFO, top officer and opportunistic trades.


V.     Mechanism
In this section we explore the mechanism behind our key results in greater depth. We
examine the characteristics of the insiders who are tracked, the characteristics of the fund
manager doing the tracking, and the characteristics of the matched insider-institution
pairs, in order to investigate the drivers of the return predictability we document above.


       A. Characteristics of Insiders Who Are Tracked By Institutions



                                      IQ from IP - 22
       First, we examine the profiles of the specific insiders who are being searched in our
sample. The first column of Table 8 contains the names of the characteristics associated
with the firm insiders. The second column reports the percentage of each type of profile
across all BoardEx reported insiders. The third column reports the percentage of each
type for profiles that are actively checked by institutional investors, and computes
differences between the percentage of checked insiders relative to all insider profiles.
       Table 8 indicates that institutional managers tend to track members of the top
management teams of firms (CEOs, CFOs, Presidents, and Board Chairs) and
accountants, and shy away from tracking outside directors and insiders with PhDs. For
instance, CEO-related insider trade reports account for 28.7% of the total downloads by
institutions, even though they make up only 9.8% of all insider transactions, a difference
of 18.8%. We find similarly large differences for Presidents, Board Chairs, and CFOs,
suggesting that institutional managers perceive these filings to be more value-relevant
than ordinary director filings (which they download at a significantly lower rate than their
overall incidence in the population of filings).


       B. Characteristics of Fund Managers Who Track and Mimic Insider Trades
       Next, we take our institutional holdings data and attempt to isolate the fund
managers within each institutional investment firm whose holdings correlate most with
the insider trades tracked/downloaded by their institution.             We label these highly
correlated fund managers as “cherry picking” fund managers.               Specifically, for each
portfolio j in the 13-F family k, we run the following regression:
                𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑗,𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽𝑗,𝑡 ∙ 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑘,𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑗,𝑖,𝑡
   •   𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑗,𝑖,𝑡 is in the set (-1, 0, 1) which indicates the direction of the trading
       by the portfolio j on stock i in quarter t.
   •   𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑘,𝑖,𝑡 is in the set (-1, 0, 1) which indicates the direction of an
       indicator for whether the insiders at firm i observed by the 13-F family k had in
       net sold shares at t.
   •   If 𝛽𝑗,𝑡 is > 90% significance level, we call the fund j at t a Cherry Picker.
   We then examine the geographic and educational characteristics of these fund
managers in Table 9. Panel A of Table 9 reports the distribution of top locations (by


                                       IQ from IP - 23
state) of all matched mutual fund managers, and specifically the fund managers we dub
to be cherry pickers. Panel A shows that cherry pickers are more likely to reside in
Massachusetts, which has a high concentration of fundamental stock pickers in the Boston
area (e.g., Fidelity, Wellington, etc.), and also Maryland (where T. Rowe Price and many
other institutional stock selection houses are located).        Panel B then records the
distribution of education backgrounds of matched mutual fund managers relative to the
cherry pickers. The universities with the highest absolute differences between manager
and cherry picker distributions are reported.


       C. Exploring the Source of Fund Manager - Insider Links
       In Table 10 we try to pinpoint the mechanism more cleanly by focusing on the
manager-insider links that we observe in the data.           Specifically, we try to better
understand why certain fund managers choose to follow certain corporate insiders. To do
so, we explore the connection links between a cherry picking mutual fund manager and
an insider, based on commonalities in location and educational backgrounds. Again, we
define cherry pickers as fund managers whose trades each quarter correlate with net
checked insider trading at the 90% significance level. The Match Indicator is a dummy
variable for whether the cherry picker had searched for the insider within his portfolio.
The sample includes all potential insiders linked by each fund manager’s portfolio
holdings.
       Table 10 shows that while there is still much unexplained variation in the match
between institutions and tracked insiders, educational background and location are
significant predictors of this likelihood of a tracking match, even controlling for past
matching, as well as time fixed effects, education fixed effects, and geography fixed effects.
Collectively, the findings in Tables 9 and 10 are consistent with the idea that fund
managers choose to track and mimic the trades of the specific insiders who not only
possess the most valuable information, but also those with whom they have lower-cost
channels for obtaining private information.


VI.    Alternate Timing Conventions, Daily Trading Records, and Robustness




                                      IQ from IP - 24
We also explore a variety of alternate timing conventions, as well as novel data on the
daily trading behavior of institutions in order to verify the robustness of our findings, and
solidify the interpretation of our results.
       First, in Appendix Table 1, we re-run the return predictability analysis from Table
6, but impose a longer lag structure in the return tests. In Table A1 we require the insider
trade and download dates to occur in the quarter prior to any subsequent trades by the
fund manager, and then explore returns in the quarter following those fund manager
trades. We note that this builds in a minimum of 90 days from the insider trade date to
the beginning of the measured future return period. As noted earlier, given that the
insider trading literature has documented that the returns to following insider trades
primarily accrue in the 30 days immediately after the reported insider trade dates, the
idea of forcing our portfolio tests to wait a minimum of 3 full months after the insider
trade dates to measure any return benefits of insider following is a conservative approach.
       Appendix Tables A2 and A3 show two alternative weighting schemes to the equal-
weighting we include in the main analysis. In particular, we show the results using value-
weighting (using the holding weights of the tracked insider positions) in Appendix Table
A2, and trade-weighting (putting larger weights on larger trades by institutions following
these tracked insider trades relative to their initial values) in Appendix Table A3. The
results reported in Appendix Tables A2 and A3 are broadly consistent with the evidence
we presented in Table 6.5
       To further motivate the timing convention used in Table 6, we collect an alternate
source of institutional holdings at the daily level from the ANcerno database described
earlier. This data contains daily stock-level holdings and trades at the institution level
for a subset of our overall sample (the description of our matching of this institutional
data to the precise fund-manager level is contained in Section III). Using this data, we
can granularly test how quickly institutions trade following their tracking of insider trades.
Figure 2 tabulates the proportion of gross purchases of stock by institutions over a number
of trading days after checking that insiders had purchased a stock in net. Figure 3 presents


5
  In Appendix Table A4 we exclude the last two years of our sample (post-2013) to address the concern
that there is staleness in the Thomson reported holdings data (https://wrds-
www.wharton.upenn.edu/pages/support/research-wrds/researchguides/research-note-regarding-thomson-
reuters-ownership-data-issues/). The portfolio results remain very similar (large and significant).


                                          IQ from IP - 25
the analogous results for sales of stocks, as opposed to purchases. Both Figures 2 and 3
paint a similar picture: most institutional trading that follows in the direction of insider
trading happens quickly, within 30 days, and far less happens right before or right after
that 30-day window post-insider trade. These results suggest that our return predictability
results in Table 6 are highly unlikely to be an artifact of institutions trading before the
insider trade filing that they subsequently download.
       Moreover, we use the ANcerno sample to explore the return results of tracked
trades in a setting where we can measure the tracking and precise trade timing of
institutional managers. In particular, we see the exact date on which the trade is executed
by the manager following the tracking of the insider trade. Although this is a much
smaller sample – both in the cross-section and time-series – and so the power is lower, we
still see patterns of future returns for these tracked trades that are consistent with the
evidence we document using the 13-F filings. If an ANcerno institution downloads an
insider form and trades in the same direction as this insider over the next 15 trading days,
we classify these trades as following the insider. We plot the subsequent cumulative
DGTW returns of these following trades in Figure 4.
       In Figure 5 we also investigate the long-run returns to tracked insider trades by
fund managers. Specifically, we show in this figure that the outperformance that we
document on these tracked trades continues for a number of months following the tracked
insider and institution trading in the same direction. Importantly, the cumulative returns
do not immediately reverse, suggesting that the information in tracked trades is important
for fundamental firm value, and is only revealed following the information-rich dual
trading by insider and linked institution.


VII.   Conclusion
       With the proliferation of information signals in both quantity and dimensionality
in recent decades, investors face an increasingly complex portfolio choice problem. How
does an investor reduce the dimensionality of the investment problem sufficiently to know
which signals to track and collect? In this paper, we provide novel evidence to shed light
on this investment process – giving micro-foundations for the information collection and
utilization process of large delegated portfolio managers. Specifically, using web traffic



                                     IQ from IP - 26
on the SEC’s EDGAR server between 2004 and 2015, we find that mutual fund managers
track a very particular subset of firms and insiders. In addition, fund manager tracking
activity not only remains persistent over time, but also has powerful implications for their
portfolio choice.
       Moreover, managers seem able to know precisely which of their tracked insiders’
trades (e.g., Jamie Dimon’s trades) to follow, and which not to, as the trades they track
and choose to act upon significantly outperform those that they track and choose not to
trade along with.      This tracked-trade outperformance holds broadly across firm
characteristics (e.g., small and large firms, value and growth firms, high and low past
return firms); additionally, it holds even considering only the most information-rich
subsets of insider trades (e.g., opportunistic insider trades and trades by top executives).
Lastly, the abnormal returns that following these tracked trades continue to accrue for
the quarters following the trades and do not reverse, suggesting that the information
contained in the trades is important for fundamental firm value, and is revealed and
incorporated into firm value only following the information-rich tracked trades. While a
number of factors likely determine the precise choice of such information flow, we propose
and verify two significant predictors: close proximities and alumni-network connections
between fund managers and firm insiders.
       Stepping back, as the costs of producing, disseminating, collecting, and processing
information continue to fall, signal proliferation will only accelerate.   This will make
dimensionality reduction a growing problem facing investors for the foreseeable future.
We believe that our study – using novel, rich, detailed data on fund manager tracking
and trading behavior – is a first step to micro-founding and understanding successful
attempts to do precisely this. Future research should push ahead even further to establish
alternate ways that investors can solve this problem and engage as important information
collectors and price-setters in modern capital markets.




                                     IQ from IP - 27
References:

Barber, B., Odean, T., 2008. All that glitters: the effect of attention and news on the
buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial Studies 21,
785–818.

Bettis, Carr, Jeffrey Coles, and Michael Lemmon, 2000, Corporate policies restricting
trading by insiders, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 191-220.

Bozanic, Z., Hoopes, J. L., Thornock, J. R. and Williams, B. M. (2017), IRS Attention.
Journal of Accounting Research, 55: 79-114.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57-82.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than
others? Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54, 875-
899.

Clarke, Jonathan, Craig Dunbar, and Kathleen M. Kahle, 2001, Long-run performance
and insider trading in completed and canceled seasoned equity offerings, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 415-430.

Cohen, L. and D. Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 383-
400.

Cohen, L, D. Lou, and C. Malloy, 2016, Cloaked trading, Journal of Investment
Consulting 17, 207–248.

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., 2008. Economic links and predictable returns. Journal of Finance
63, 1977–2011.

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., and Malloy, C., 2008, The small world of investing: Board
connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.

Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy, and Lukasz Pomorski.                "Decoding inside
information." The Journal of Finance 67.3 (2012): 1009-1043.

Coval, Joshua, and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference
in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2074.

Coval, Joshua, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811- 841.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring
mutual fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52,
394-415.

DellaVigna, S., Pollet, J., 2006. Investor inattention, firm reaction, and Friday earnings
announcements. Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.

Drake, Michael S, Darren T. Roulstone, and Jacob R. Thornock, The Determinants and
Consequences of Information Acquisition via EDGAR, 2016, Contemporary Accounting
Research, Forthcoming

Duffie, D., 2010. Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital. Journal of Finance 65,
1237–1267.

Gibbons, Brian and Iliev, Peter and Kalodimos, Jonathan, Analyst Information
Acquisition via EDGAR. Penn State University Working Paper.

Goldstein, M.A., Irvine, P., Kandel, E. and Wiener, Z., 2009. Brokerage commissions and
institutional trading patterns. The Review of Financial Studies, 22(12), pp.5175-5212.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of
quarterly portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 394-415.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without
benchmarks: An examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47-68.

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment
strategies, portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American
Economic Review 85, 1088-1105.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds,
Journal of Finance 51, 783-810.

Hirshleifer, D., S. Lim, and S. Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extraneous events and
underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289–2325.

Hirshleifer, D. and Teoh, S.H., 2003. Limited attention, information disclosure, and
financial reporting. Journal of accounting and economics, 36(1-3), pp.337-386.

Hong, H., Stein, J., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.

Hong, H., Tourus,W., Valkanov, R., 2007. Do industries lead the stock market? Journal
of Financial Economics 83, 367–396.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2005, Thy neighbor’s portfolio:
Word-of-mouth effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, Journal of Finance
60, 2801-2824.

Hou, K., 2007, Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns,
Review of Financial Studies 20, 1113–1138.

Hu, G., McLean, R.D., Pontiff, J. and Wang, Q., 2013. The year-end trading activities of
institutional investors: Evidence from daily trades. The Review of Financial Studies,
27(5), pp.1593-1614.

Huberman, G., Regev, T., 2001. Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: a nonevent
that made stock prices soar. Journal of Finance 56, 387–396.

Iliev, Peter and Kalodimos, Jonathan and Lowry, Michelle, Investors' Attention to
Corporate Governance. Penn State University Working Paper.

Jaffe, Jeffrey, 1974, Special information and insider trading, Journal of Business 47, 410-
428

Jagolinzer, Alan, 2009, SEC Rule 10b5-1 and insiders’ strategic trade, Management
Science 55, 224-239

Jeng, Leslie, Andrew Metrick, and Richard Zeckhauser, 2003, Estimating the returns to
insider trading: a performance-evaluation perspective, The Review of Economics and
Statistic 85, 453-471.

Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945- 1964,
Journal of Finance 23, 389-416.

Kahle, Kathleen, 2000, Insider trading and the long-run performance of new security
issues, Journal of Corporate Finance 6, 25-53.

Ke, Bin, Steven Huddard, and Kathy Petroni, 2003, What insiders know about future
earnings and how they use it: Evidence from insider trades, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 35, 315-346.

Lakonishok, Josef, and Inmoo Lee, 2001, Are insiders’ trades more informative?, Review
of Financial Studies 14, 79-111.

Lee, Charles M. C., Paul Ma, and Charles Wang, “Search-Based Peer Firms: Aggregating
Investor Perception through Internet Co-Searches,”Journal of Financial Economics 2015,
Vol. 116, Issue 2, Pages 410-431.

Lin, Ji-Chai, and John Howe, 1990, Insider trading in the OTC market, Journal of Finance
45, 1273-1284.
Lorie, James, and Victor Niederhoffer, 1968, Predictive and statistical properties of insider
trading, Journal of Law and Economics 11, 35-53.

Loughran, Tim and McDonald, Bill, The Use of EDGAR Filings by Investors (December
3, 2016), Journal of Behavioral Finance forthcoming.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971- 1991,
Journal of Finance 50, 549-572.

Massimo Massa, Andrei Simonov; Is College a Focal Point of Investor Life?, Review of
Finance, Volume 15, Issue 4, 2011, Pages 757–797.

Marin, Jose, and Jacques Olivier, 2008, The dog that did not bark: Insider trading and
crashes, Journal of Finance 63, 2429-2476.

Merton, R., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information. Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.

Piotroski, Joseph, and Darren Roulstone, 2005, Do insider trades reflect contrarian beliefs
and superior knowledge about cash flow realizations?, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 39, 55-81

Puckett, A. and Yan, X., 2011. The interim trading skills of institutional investors. The
Journal of Finance, 66(2), pp.601-633.

Rozeff, Michael, and Mir Zaman, 1988, Market efficiency and insider trading: New
evidence, Journal of Business 61, 25-44

Ravina, Enrichetta and Paola Sapienza, 2010, What Do Independent Directors Know?,
Review of Financial Studies 23, 962-1003.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1986, Insiders’ profits, costs of trading, and market efficiency, Journal
of Financial Economics 16, 189-212.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1988, The information content of aggregate insider trading, Journal of
Business 61, 1-24.

Wermers, Russ, 1997, Momentum investment strategies of mutual funds, performance
persistence, and survivorship bias, University of Colorado Working Paper.
                                      Table 1. Cipher Table (Pre-Publication)

        This table reports the mapping of IP addresses’ hidden octet (code) to actual octet. The
        procedure we follow to identify these one-to-one mapping is as follows: We match the first
        9 digits (the unciphered portion) of each IP addresses on the Edgar Server to the first 9
        digits of IP addresses on a separate web trafficked server. Each hidden octet (code) is
        matched to each actual octet a number of times. We choose the most frequent matching
        actual octet as the deciphering octet. We mask the octets below, planning to make the
        entire table of ciphers available to all researchers post peer-review.

Code    Octet   Code   Octet   Code    Octet   Code   Octet   Code   Octet   Code   Octet   Code   Octet   Code   Octet
ghf         0    ---      32    ---       64    ---      96    ---    128     ---    160     ---    192     ---    224
jbj         1    ---      33    ---       65    ---      97    ---    129     ---    161     ---    193     ---    225
jdd         2    ---      34    ---       66    ---      98    ---    130     ---    162     ---    194     ---    226
ggf         3    ---      35    ---       67    ---      99    ---    131     ---    163     ---    195     ---    227
  ---       4    ---      36    ---       68    ---    100     ---    132     ---    164     ---    196     ---    228
  ---       5    ---      37    ---       69    ---    101     ---    133     ---    165     ---    197     ---    229
  ---       6    ---      38    ---       70    ---    102     ---    134     ---    166     ---    198     ---    230
  ---       7    ---      39    ---       71    ---    103     ---    135     ---    167     ---    199     ---    231
  ---       8    ---      40    ---       72    ---    104     ---    136     ---    168     ---    200     ---    232
  ---       9    ---      41    ---       73    ---    105     ---    137     ---    169     ---    201     ---    233
  ---      10    ---      42    ---       74    ---    106     ---    138     ---    170     ---    202     ---    234
  ---      11    ---      43    ---       75    ---    107     ---    139     ---    171     ---    203     ---    235
  ---      12    ---      44    ---       76    ---    108     ---    140     ---    172     ---    204     ---    236
  ---      13    ---      45    ---       77    ---    109     ---    141     ---    173     ---    205     ---    237
  ---      14    ---      46    ---       78    ---    110     ---    142     ---    174     ---    206     ---    238
  ---      15    ---      47    ---       79    ---    111     ---    143     ---    175     ---    207     ---    239
  ---      16    ---      48    ---       80    ---    112     ---    144     ---    176     ---    208     ---    240
  ---      17    ---      49    ---       81    ---    113     ---    145     ---    177     ---    209     ---    241
  ---      18    ---      50    ---       82    ---    114     ---    146     ---    178     ---    210     ---    242
  ---      19    ---      51    ---       83    ---    115     ---    147     ---    179     ---    211     ---    243
  ---      20    ---      52    ---       84    ---    116     ---    148     ---    180     ---    212     ---    244
  ---      21    ---      53    ---       85    ---    117     ---    149     ---    181     ---    213     ---    245
  ---      22    ---      54    ---       86    ---    118     ---    150     ---    182     ---    214     ---    246
  ---      23    ---      55    ---       87    ---    119     ---    151     ---    183     ---    215     ---    247
  ---      24    ---      56    ---       88    ---    120     ---    152     ---    184     ---    216     ---    248
  ---      25    ---      57    ---       89    ---    121     ---    153     ---    185     ---    217     ---    249
  ---      26    ---      58    ---       90    ---    122     ---    154     ---    186     ---    218     ---    250
  ---      27    ---      59    ---       91    ---    123     ---    155     ---    187     ---    219     ---    251
  ---      28    ---      60    ---       92    ---    124     ---    156     ---    188     ---    220     ---    252
  ---      29    ---      61    ---       93    ---    125     ---    157     ---    189     ---    221     ---    253
  ---      30    ---      62    ---       94    ---    126     ---    158     ---    190     ---    222     ---    254
  ---      31    ---      63    ---       95    ---    127     ---    159     ---    191     ---    223     ---    255
                                                         Table 2. Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics of our sample. In Panel A, we report summary statistics of the forms downloaded by institutions, along with
the proportions of forms in the Edgar database. The first three columns report the most accessed forms, their respective numbers of downloads by
all matched institutions, and the relative frequencies of these downloads. The next three columns remove mass-download IP addresses – i.e., IP
addresses that access more than 3000 filings per day – and report the same three statistics. The last three columns report the most filed forms, their
respective numbers of filings, and their relative frequencies in the Edgar Database. Panel B reports the correlations between firms checked by
institutions through tracking 10-K, 8-K, and Insider Trading Forms (3, 4, 5, and their amendments). Finally, Panel C reports the distribution of the
number of matched institutions as well as their search behavior in each quarter.

Panel A. Summary statistics on the download frequency by form type
         Edgar Downloads by Institutions                 After Removing Mass Downloads                                   All Edgar Forms
 Form            #Downloads         Frequency     Form             #Downloads     Frequency              Form              # of Forms        Frequency
 4                291,592,283         55.6%       8-K               19,871,337      17.8%                4                   6,006,779         36.6%
 8-K               68,471,817         13.0%       10-K              19,523,529      17.5%                8-K                 1,413,387          8.6%
 10-Q              29,551,127          5.6%       10-Q              19,468,598      17.4%                SC 13G/A             591,842           3.6%
 10-K              24,935,559          4.8%       4                  8,043,938       7.2%                3                    552,843           3.4%
 13F-HR            13,889,856          2.6%       6-K                2,563,774       2.3%                10-Q                 536,219           3.3%
 4/A                9,268,341          1.8%       DEF 14A            2,120,153       1.9%                497                  375,547           2.3%
 8-K/A              7,874,539          1.5%       424B2              2,073,561       1.9%                SC 13G               347,617           2.1%
 SC 13G             6,357,204          1.2%       424B5              1,943,211       1.7%                6-K                  336,734           2.1%
 SC 13G/A           5,706,116          1.1%       S-1/A              1,891,509       1.7%                424B3                258,821           1.6%
 6-K                3,984,856          0.8%       424B3              1,862,154       1.7%                SC 13D/A             206,492           1.3%
 DEF 14A            2,847,715          0.5%       13F-HR             1,832,043       1.6%                13F-HR               202,615           1.2%

Panel B. 8K-10K Correlation
                     10K          8K      Insiders
 10K                 1.00
 8K                  0.28        1.00
 Insiders            0.11        0.17       1.00

Panel C. Number of Matched Institutions per Quarter
                                            Mean     Std          Min      Q1     Median      Q3       Max
 Number of IPs Per Qtr                      208.47  47.65         95       177     209        246      280
 Number of Institution Per Qtr               69.70  12.21         41       63      70          77       92
 Weight of Checked Stocks Per Mgrno/Qtr        8.98%    17.50%   0.00%    0.35%    2.00%    7.47%    100.00%
                                Table 3. Top 30 Linked Institutions

This table reports the top 30 matched institutions (largest in terms of portfolio value).

                Mgrno      Institution Name                                                 Portfolio Value
            1   12740      CAPITAL RESEARCH & MGMT                                      $644,502,498,763
            2   27800      FIDELITY MGMT & RESEARCH (US)                                $623,465,559,994
            3   55390      MELLON BANK NA                                               $479,115,002,653
            4   71110      T. ROWE PRICE ASSOCIATES, INC.                               $435,541,810,456
            5   62890      BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION                                  $377,795,325,262
            6   91910      WELLINGTON MGMT CO, L.L.P.                                   $357,154,732,394
            7   11836      CAPITAL WORLD INVESTORS                                      $352,914,042,331
            8   25610      AXA FINANCIAL, INC.                                          $352,084,782,849
            9   90457      VANGUARD GROUP, INC.                                         $351,551,062,880
           10   58950      MSDW & COMPANY                                               $316,603,792,017
           11   58835      JPMORGAN CHASE & COMPANY                                     $316,062,544,205
           12   65260      NORTHERN TRUST GLOBAL INVTS                                  $305,692,675,586
           13   11835      CAPITAL RESEARCH GBL INVESTORS                               $299,354,230,407
           14   72400      PUTNAM INVESTMENT MGMT, LLC                                  $285,307,501,875
           15   41260      GOLDMAN SACHS & COMPANY                                      $245,836,983,966
           16   10586      AMVESCAP PLC LONDON                                          $237,493,511,896
           17   7800       DEUTSCHE BK AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT                               $226,994,949,895
           18   48170      JANUS CAPITAL MANAGEMENT LLC                                 $225,037,238,864
           19   50160      LEGG MASON INC                                               $215,319,086,243
           20   84900      CITIGROUP INVESTMENTS INC.                                   $200,525,553,607
           21   39300      FRANKLIN RESOURCES, INC.                                     $196,253,825,506
           22   11371      NORGES BK INVT MGMT (NBIM)                                   $188,412,117,446
           23   54600      MASSACHUSETTS FINL SERVICES CO                               $179,313,992,099
           24   10039      GEODE CAPITAL MGMT, L.L.C.                                   $169,824,996,700
           25   8350       BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY                                           $153,892,447,818
           26   18265      COLLEGE RETIRE EQUITIES                                      $145,381,192,291
           27   45639      COLUMBIA MGMT INV ADVISERS LLC                               $145,135,260,505
           28   37700      WACHOVIA CORPORATION                                         $141,242,468,650
           29   56780      MERRILL LYNCH CAPITAL MARKETS                                $139,563,896,834
           30   23270      DODGE & COX, INC.                                            $135,031,475,226
                    Table 4. Persistence of Insider Tracking by Institutions

This table examines the persistence in insider tracking behavior of institutions. In Panel A, the dependent
variable in Columns 1-3 is a dummy variable (CheckedFirm at t+1) that equals one if an institution tracks
insider filings from a particular firm in quarter t+1. The main independent variable of interest is
CheckedFirm at t that equals one if the same institution tracks insider filings from the same firm in quarter
t. In Columns 4-6, the dependent variable is a dummy (CheckedInsider at t+1) that equals one if an
institution tracks filings by a particular insider in quarter t+1. The main independent variable of interest
is CheckedInsider at t that equals one if the same institution tracks the same insider’s filings in quarter t.
We further control for portfolio, year x stock and year x stock x insider fixed effects. Panel B reports the
unconditional probabilities of an institution downloading insider filings from a given firm or by a given
insider. T-statistics, reported in parenthesis, are based on standard errors double clustered by quarter and
firm. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Persistence of Tracking Behavior
                                      Checked Firm at t+1                     Checked Insider at t+1
Checked Firm at t              0.413***    0.259***    0.255***
                                (14.37)     (12.20)     (11.86)
Checked Insider at t                                                     0.187***      0.142***    0.133***
                                                                          (9.20)        (6.58)       (6.31)
Portfolio Fixed Effect              No           Yes          Yes           No            Yes         Yes
Year x Stock Fixed Effect           No           No           Yes
Year x Stock x Insider
                                                                            No           No           Yes
Fixed Effect

Adj. R2                          0.1947        0.2696       0.2833        0.0387        0.0842       0.0958
No.                             1,338,919     1,338,919    1,338,919    11,190,087    11,190,087   11,190,087


Panel B. Unconditional Tracking
                                            Checked Firm                      Checked Insider
       Unconditional
                                                4.80%                                1.13%
       Probability
                                Table 5. Contemporaneous Trading

This table reports panel regressions of the direction of contemporaneous trading by an institution on the
direction of trading by the insiders tracked by the institution. The dependent variable, FundDirection, is
equal to -1 if the institution sells the stock, 1 if the institution buys the stock, and 0 otherwise. The main
independent variable of interest is CheckedInsiderDirection, which equals -1 if the insiders checked by the
institution sell in aggregate, 1 if the insiders buy in aggregate, and 0 otherwise. CheckedInsiderBuy is equal
to 1 if the insiders checked by the institution buy in aggregate and 0 otherwise. CheckedInsiderSell is equal
to 1 if the insiders checked by the institution sell in aggregate and 0 otherwise. AllInsiderDirection is equal
to -1 if all insiders of the firm (checked and unchecked) sell the stock in aggregate, 1 if all insiders buy in
aggregate, and 0 otherwise. AllInsiderBuy is equal to 1 if all the insiders of the firm buy in aggregate and
0 otherwise. AllInsiderSell is equal to 1 if all the insiders of the firm sell in aggregate and 0 otherwise.
Observations are weighted by the inverse of the number of positions held by each institution (so that a
portfolio with many positions do not dominate the analysis). T-statistics, reported below the coefficients,
are based on standard errors double clustered by quarter and firm. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                  FundDirection (-1 for sell, 1 for buy)
 CheckedInsiderDirection      0.077***                                 0.071***
                                (4.43)                                   (4.18)
 CheckedInsiderBuy                          0.159***                                 0.160***
                                              (6.54)                                  (5.83)
 CheckedInsiderSell                                      -0.084***                                -0.076***
                                                           (-3.43)                                  (-3.21)
 AllInsiderDirection          0.019***                                 0.020***
                                (3.94)                                   (4.21)
 AllInsiderBuy                              0.035***                                 0.034***
                                              (3.58)                                  (3.71)
 AllInsiderSell                                          -0.042***                                -0.044***
                                                           (-4.37)                                  (-4.66)


 Time FE                         Yes           Yes          Yes           No            No           No
 Institution FE                  Yes           Yes          Yes           No            No           No
 Time x Institution FE           No            No            No           Yes          Yes           Yes


 Adj. R2                        0.0265       0.0266        0.0264       0.0908        0.0909        0.0907
 No.                          2,469,803     2,469,803    2,469,803     2,469,792     2,469,792    2,469,792
                                                           Table 6. Portfolio Returns

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading. Panel A corresponds to tracked insider buys
and Panel B corresponds to tracked insider sells. In terms of timing, we require that institutions both view the insider trading record and potentially
trade the underlying stock in quarter t. We then analyze the equal weighted returns to those trades in quarter t+1. Row 1 shows the returns of the
average stock held within an institutional portfolio. Row 2 includes all holdings where the institution does not check/download a Form 4 filing. Row
3 then computes a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio consists of stocks of which a fund manager downloads an insider trading filing, and
the short portfolio consists of the portfolio in row 2. Row 4 computes a long-short portfolio where the long portfolio consists of all stocks of which a
fund manager checks the insiders’ transaction and also trade shares in the same direction during the same quarter, while keeping the same short
portfolio represented in row 2. Row 5 constructs a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio includes all stocks of which the fund manager checks
insider trades and also trade in the same direction as the insider, the short portfolio includes all other stocks that the fund manager buys/sells in
the same quarter. In rows 6 and 7, we then construct an alternate benchmark that consists of all stocks where a fund manager downloads the filing
after an insider trades, but chooses not to trade in the same direction in that quarter. In Row 8, the benchmark portfolio includes all stocks that are
not checked by a fund manager but are traded by insiders in the same direction as the fund manager. Reported below are the quarterly excess,
DGTW, and 4-Factor adjusted returns of these aforementioned portfolios (as well as the long and short sides). T-statistics, reported in parenthesis,
are based on Newey-West standard errors.

                                                            Excess                    4-Factor      L % of        L 4F         S % of       S 4F
  Panel A: Tracked Insider Buys                                           DGTW
                                                            Returns                    Alpha        Assets        Alpha        Assets       Alpha

  1) All Positions                                           2.78%        0.22%         0.34%        100%
                                                             (1.92)       (2.02)        (2.16)
  2) All Positions Except Checked Insider Buying             2.76%        0.22%         0.33%        98.7%
                                                             (1.93)       (1.93)        (2.14)
  3) Checked Insider Buying vs 2)                            1.87%        2.02%         1.77%        1.28%        2.10%        98.7%        0.33%
                                                             (1.56)       (1.84)        (1.57)                    (1.84)                     (2.14)
  4) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs 2)                 2.96%        2.90%         3.00%        0.68%        3.33%        98.7%        0.33%
                                                             (2.02)       (2.12)        (2.08)                    (2.30)                     (2.14)
  5) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   2.97%        2.90%         3.00%        0.68%        3.33%        49.8%        0.33%
     Rest Bought                                             (2.03)       (2.13)        (2.10)                    (2.30)                     (1.93)
  6) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   3.68%        2.55%         3.25%        0.68%        3.33%        0.61%        0.08%
     Checked and Not Bought                                  (2.13)       (1.63)        (1.91)                    (2.30)                     (0.08)
  7) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   4.28%        2.90%         3.93%        0.15%        3.80%        0.15%        -0.14%
     Checked and Not Bought (Zero Initial Positions)         (2.39)       (1.79)        (2.23)                    (2.46)                    (-0.13)
  8) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   3.02%        2.97%         2.97%        0.68%        3.33%        2.65%        0.35%
     Not Checked Insider Buying and Bought                   (2.17)       (2.22)        (2.09)                    (2.30)                     (0.95)
                                                    Excess              4-Factor   L % of   L 4F      S % of   L 4F
Panel B: Tracked Insider Sales                                DGTW
                                                    Returns              Alpha     Assets   Alpha     Assets   Alpha

1) All Positions                                    2.77%      0.23%     0.34%     100%
                                                     (1.93)    (2.22)    (2.25)
2) All Positions Except Checked Insider Selling     2.78%      0.24%     0.36%     91.9%
                                                     (1.93)    (2.36)    (2.32)
3) Checked Insider Selling vs 2)                    -1.09%    -1.12%    -1.14%     8.01%    -0.78%    91.9%     0.36%
                                                    (-2.56)   (-2.64)   (-2.71)             (-1.85)             (2.32)
4) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs 2)           -1.83%    -1.62%    -1.89%     4.46%    -1.54%    91.9%     0.36%
                                                    (-3.40)   (-3.07)   (-3.50)             (-2.83)             (2.32)
5) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.             -1.85%    -1.63%    -1.90%     4.46%    -1.54%    48.0%     0.36%
   Rest Sold                                        (-3.42)   (-3.07)   (-3.48)             (-2.83)             (2.41)
6) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.             -1.06%    -1.12%    -1.49%     4.46%    -1.54%    3.55%    -0.05%
   Checked and not Sold                             (-1.51)   (-1.78)   (-2.15)             (-2.83)            (-0.12)
7) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.             -1.64%    -1.71%    -2.10%     0.79%    -1.77%    0.70%     0.34%
   Checked and not Sold (Small Initial Positions)   (-1.95)   (-2.23)   (-2.53)             (-2.71)             (0.65)
8) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.             -1.78%    -1.62%    -1.83%     4.46%    -1.54%    45.3%     0.29%
   Not Checked Insider Selling and Sold             (-3.41)   (-3.07)   (-3.41)             (-2.83)             (1.98)
             Table 7. Portfolio Returns across Firm and Insider Characteristics

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading using
different subsample. Panel A classifies all stocks into two halves based on whether they are above or below
the median lagged market value, book-to-market ratio, past one-year return, share turnover, or institutional
ownership respectively. We report the long-short spread, which is (buying-selling of tracked insider trades)
– (buying-selling of all other non-tracked trades) by institutions (i.e. Row 5 of Panel A minus Row 5 of
Panel B of Table 6). Panel B classifies all insider trades to routine vs. opportunistic (non-routine) trades
(following Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski, 2012), and into trades by top executives (e.g., CEO, chairman)
vs. trades by other insiders. We report (buying-selling of tracked insider trades) – (buying-selling of all
other non-tracked trades that coincide with untracked insiders of the same insider group) by institutions
(i.e. Row 8 of Panel A minus Row 8 of Panel B of Table 6). Reported below are the quarterly excess,
DGTW, and 4 Factor adjusted returns of these aforementioned L-S spreads. T-statistics, reported in
parenthesis, are based on Newey-West standard errors.

Panel A. Portfolio Returns across Firm Characteristics

a) Small vs. Large Firm Size (Buying Minus Selling)
                               Excess Returns                    DGTW                    4-Factor Alpha
 Large Size                          3.14                         2.76                        2.82
                                    (2.01)                       (1.98)                      (1.96)
 Small Size                          3.26                         3.45                        3.42
                                    (1.31)                       (1.48)                      (1.39)

b) Low vs. High BM (Buying Minus Selling)
                            Excess Returns                       DGTW                    4-Factor Alpha
 High BM                          3.10                            2.99                        3.28
                                 (2.03)                          (2.11)                      (2.31)
 Low BM                           4.88                            4.38                        4.85
                                 (2.06)                          (1.96)                      (2.13)

c) Low vs. High Past Returns (Buying Minus Selling)
                               Excess Returns                    DGTW                    4-Factor Alpha
 High MOM                           3.93                          4.01                        3.68
                                   (2.08)                        (2.24)                      (1.91)
 Low MOM                            4.21                          3.26                        4.47
                                   (1.94)                        (1.59)                      (2.24)

d) Low vs. High Turnover (Buying Minus Selling)
                              Excess Returns                     DGTW                    4-Factor Alpha
 High Turnover                     4.65                           4.17                        4.72
                                  (2.66)                         (2.60)                      (2.69)
 Low Turnover                      2.89                           2.60                        2.58
                                  (1.12)                         (1.14)                      (1.13)

e) Low vs. High Institutional Ownership (Buying Minus Selling)
                               Excess Returns                DGTW                        4-Factor Alpha
 High Inst                           1.41                      1.64                           0.74
                                    (0.77)                   (0.98)                          (0.44)
 Low Inst                            4.65                      4.30                           4.88
                                    (2.32)                   (2.27)                          (2.56)
Panel B. Portfolio Returns across Trading and Insider Characteristics

f) Routine Vs Non-Routine (Buying Minus Selling)
                              Excess Returns                  DGTW      4-Factor Alpha
  Routine                          3.46                        3.89          4.19
                                  (1.09)                      (1.45)        (1.40)
  Opportunistic                    4.54                        4.55          4.56
                                  (2.90)                      (3.03)        (2.84)


g) Insiders Types (Buying Minus Selling)
                              Excess Returns                  DGTW      4-Factor Alpha
 All Top Officers                    3.96                      4.09          4.10
                                    (2.84)                    (3.21)        (2.97)
     CEO & Chairman                  3.14                      3.31          3.33
                                    (1.64)                    (1.79)        (1.71)
     Rest of Top Officers            3.52                      2.75          3.63
                                    (2.55)                    (2.02)        (2.66)
 Rest of Insiders                    2.05                      1.56          1.83
                                    (1.21)                    (0.95)        (1.07)
                         Table 8. Characteristics of Checked Insider Profiles

This table reports the characteristics of the insiders being tracked in our sample. These characteristics
include the insider’s highest education degree (MBA, PhD, MD), position in the firm (accountant, director,
CEO, president, chairman, CFO), and graduating institution (Yale, Harvard, Princeton). The first column
reports the percentage of each type of insiders for the entire BoardEx sample. The second column reports
the percentage of each type of insiders being checked by at least one institution. The differences between
the checked sample and the BoardEx sample are reported in the third column.


                                       All Profile      Checked Profile       Difference

              Accountant                 11.25%              15.55%             4.30%
              MBA                        34.53%              34.57%             0.04%
              PhD                        7.19%               6.46%              -0.73%

              MD                         2.13%               1.92%              -0.21%

              Director                   70.23%              54.58%             -15.65%
              CEO                        9.83%               28.71%             18.88%

              President                  19.91%              33.69%             13.78%

              Chairman                   9.49%               27.28%             17.80%

              CFO                        9.95%               16.18%             6.24%
              Harvard                    9.92%               11.65%             1.73%

              Princeton                  1.53%               1.91%              0.38%

              Yale                       1.80%               2.01%              0.21%
                            Table 9. Characteristics of Cherry-Pickers

This table reports the characteristics of fund managers within the matched 13-F mutual fund families.
Cherry Pickers are fund managers whose trades correlate positively with the insider trades tracked by the
13-F mutual fund family at or above the 10% significance level. Panel A reports the geographic distribution
of all mutual fund managers, and that of the cherry pickers, as well as the difference between the two. Panel
B reports the education background distribution of all mutual fund managers, and that of the cherry pickers,
as well as the difference between the two.

Panel A. Geographic Distribution of Cherry-Pickers
                                 Distribution of          Distribution of
              State                 Managers              Cherry Pickers            Difference
                 AZ                    0.89%                   1.48%                   0.59%
                 CA                    8.67%                   5.90%                  -2.77%
                 CO                    0.53%                   0.37%                  -0.16%
                 CT                    2.30%                   0.37%                  -1.93%
                 FL                    0.53%                   0.37%                  -0.16%
                 GA                    1.06%                   0.74%                  -0.32%
                 IL                    3.89%                   4.43%                   0.53%
                 KS                    1.24%                   0.74%                  -0.50%
                MA                     22.66%                 30.63%                   7.97%
                MD                     7.43%                  11.44%                   4.01%
                MO                     3.19%                   2.58%                  -0.60%
                 NC                    2.66%                   1.11%                  -1.55%
                 NJ                    3.36%                   4.06%                   0.70%
                 NY                    20.89%                 21.03%                   0.15%
                 OH                    5.66%                   3.69%                  -1.97%
                 OK                    0.18%                   0.37%                   0.19%
                 PA                    6.37%                   7.38%                   1.01%
                 TX                    6.20%                   1.85%                  -4.35%
                WA                     0.18%                   0.00%                  -0.18%
                 WI                    2.12%                   1.48%                  -0.65%
Panel B. Education Background Distribution of Cherry-Pickers
                                   Distribution of        Distribution of
   School                             Managers            Cherry Pickers     Diff
   University of Wisconsin              5.79%                  7.27%        1.48%
   SUNY                                 2.79%                  3.50%        0.71%
   Harvard University                   5.07%                  5.39%        0.32%
   University of Virginia               1.60%                  1.75%        0.15%
   Brown University                     1.09%                  1.23%        0.15%
   Princeton University                 1.14%                  1.23%        0.10%
   Yale University                      1.29%                  1.36%        0.07%
   University of Michigan               1.03%                  1.10%        0.07%
   California State University          3.10%                  3.11%        0.01%
   Stanford University                  2.28%                  2.27%        0.00%
   New York University                  3.52%                  3.50%        -0.01%
   Columbia University                  3.15%                  3.11%        -0.04%
   Boston College                       1.76%                  1.69%        -0.07%
   Northwestern University              1.24%                  1.17%        -0.07%
   University of Minnesota              1.24%                  1.17%        -0.07%
   University of Pennsylvania           5.48%                  5.39%        -0.09%
   Dartmouth College                    1.81%                  1.56%        -0.25%
   University of Illinois               2.28%                  1.95%        -0.33%
   University of Chicago                5.02%                  4.67%        -0.34%
   University of California             9.31%                  7.14%        -2.17%
                         Table 10. Match of Insiders and Cherry-Pickers

This table explores potential links between cherry-picking fund managers and the insiders they track. We
examine common links through locations and education backgrounds. Cherry Pickers are fund managers
whose trades correlate positively with the insider trades tracked by the 13-F institution at or above the
10% significance level. The dependent variable is a match indicator that equals one if the cherry picker
searches for a given insider and zero otherwise. The main independent variables include an education-link
dummy that equals one if the cherry picker and the insider graduate from the same school, and a location-
link dummy that equals one if the cherry picker and the insider are based in the state. The sample includes
all potential insiders-fund manager pairs based on fund holdings. We also control for quarter, insider-
education, manager-education, insider-location, and manager-location fixed effects. T-statistics, reported
below the coefficients, are based on standard errors clustered by quarter. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                              Match Indicator
Education Link                 0.328%**    0.349%***     0.325%*** 0.370%***       0.668%***    0.391%***
                                 (2.64)      (2.76)         (2.75)       (3.85)       (6.20)       (3.91)
Location Link                  1.42%***    1.40%***      1.31%*** 0.955%***        0.501%**     0.502%**
                                 (4.84)      (4.98)         (4.77)       (3.92)       (2.15)       (2.20)
Lag Match Indicator                                      21.9%***     18.9%***     20.04%***    17.91%***
                                                           (12.32)      (11.86)      (11.39)      (11.26)

Quarterly FE                      No           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Insider Education FE              No           No           No           Yes           No           Yes
FM Education FE                   No           No           No           Yes           No           Yes
Insider Location FE               No           No           No           No            Yes          Yes
FM Location FE                    No           No           No           No            Yes          Yes

Adj-R2                          0.0005       0.0141       0.0303        0.0533       0.0455       0.0618
No. Obs.                       1,748,892    1,748,892    1,748,892     1,748,892    1,705,546    1,705,546
                                               Institution X checks
                                               the filings (April 15,
                                                        2011)     Institution X takes
                                                                 the position (May 15,
                Insider Trading Occurs                                   2011)
                    (April 3, 2011)                                         Institution X reports
                                                                             the position in 13F
                                                                               (June 30, 2011)




                       Form 4 is filed                                                             End of Return
                       (April 5, 2011)                                                           calculation period
                                                                                               (September 30, 2011)
                                                                           Beginning of Return
                       Form 4 is reported to
                                                                            calculation period
                              public
                                                                              (July 1, 2011)
                          (April 5, 2011)



Figure 1. This figure illustrates the timing of our portfolio return test with a hypothetical example.
                                       Gross Buying Proportion
             60%

             50%

             40%

             30%

             20%

             10%

               0%
                     "-30 to -1"   "0 to 30"   "31 to 60"   "61 to 90"   "91 to 120" "121 to 150"


Figure 2. This figure shows the proportion of gross buying of a stock by institutions over the next X
(ranging from 1 to 150) number of trading days after checking insider filings.


                                       Gross Selling Proportion
             60%

             50%

             40%

             30%

             20%

             10%

               0%
                     "-30 to -1"   "0 to 30"   "31 to 60"   "61 to 90"   "91 to 120" "121 to 150"

Figure 3. This figure shows the proportion of gross selling of a stock by institutions over the next X
(ranging from 1 to 150) number of trading days after checking insider filings.
                                    Cumulative DGTW Returns
          0.50%

          0.45%

          0.40%

          0.35%

          0.30%

          0.25%

          0.20%

          0.15%

          0.10%

          0.05%

          0.00%
                  0     5      10      15      20     25      30      35      40      45     50

Figure 4. We plot the subsequent cumulative DGTW returns of tracked-insider trades. Specifically, If an
Ancerno institution downloads an insider form and trades in the same direction as the insider over the next
15 trading days, we classify these trades as tracked-insider trades.
                                               Long Term Portfolio Return
                               7.00%


                               6.00%


                               5.00%
           Cumulative Return




                               4.00%


                               3.00%


                               2.00%


                               1.00%


                               0.00%
                                       0   2         4           6            8         10    12
                                                Months After Portfolio Formation Date

Figure 5. This figure shows the long-run returns to tracked-insider trades by fund managers. Specifically,
it is the difference between the portfolio described in row 5 of Table 6 Panel A, and that in row 5 of Table
6 Panel B over the next 12 months.
                                Appendix Table A1. Alternative Timing

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading.
Panel A corresponds to tracked insider buys and Panel B corresponds to tracked insider sells. In terms of
timing, we require that institutions both view the insider trading record (which takes place in quarter t)
and trade the underlying stock in quarter t+1. We then analyze the equal-weighted returns to those trades
in quarter t+2. Row 5 constructs a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio includes all stocks of which
the fund manager checks insider trades and also trade in the same direction, the short portfolio includes all
other stocks that the fund manager buys/sells in the same quarter. In Row 8, the benchmark portfolio
includes all stocks that are not checked by a fund manager but are traded by insiders in the same direction
as the fund manager. Reported below are the quarterly Raw, DGTW, and 4 Factor adjusted returns of
these aforementioned portfolios (as well as the long and short sides). T-statistics, reported in parenthesis,
are based on Newey-West standard errors. 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

                                                                 Excess                    4-Factor
       Panel A: Tracked Insider Buys                                           DGTW
                                                                 Returns                    Alpha

       5) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   1.20%         0.86%        1.11%
          Rest Bought                                             (1.05)        (0.76)       (1.01)
       8) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   1.38%         1.00%        1.18%
          Not Checked and Bought                                  (1.30)        (0.90)       (1.09)

                                                                 Excess                    4-Factor
       Panel B: Tracked Insider Sales                                          DGTW
                                                                 Returns                    Alpha

       5) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.22%       -1.16%       -1.42%
          Rest Sold                                               (-2.22)      (-2.16)      (-2.67)
       8) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.07%       -1.10%       -1.26%
          Not Checked and Sold                                    (-2.05)      (-2.08)      (-2.42)
                        Appendix Table A2. Value-Weighted Portfolio Returns

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading.
Panel A corresponds to tracked insider buys and Panel B corresponds to tracked insider sells. In terms of
timing, we require that institutions both view the insider trading record and potentially trade the underlying
stock in quarter t. We then analyze the holding-value weighted returns to those trades in quarter t+1. Row
5 constructs a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio includes all stocks of which the fund manager
checks insider trades and also trade in the same direction, the short portfolio includes all other stocks that
the fund manager buys/sells in the same quarter. In Row 8, the benchmark portfolio includes all stocks that
are not checked by a fund manager but are traded by insiders in the same direction as the fund manager.
Reported below are the quarterly Raw, DGTW, and 4 Factor adjusted returns of these aforementioned
portfolios (as well as the long and short sides). T-statistics, reported in parenthesis, are based on Newey-
West standard errors. 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

                                                                 Excess                    4-Factor
       Panel A: Tracked Insider Buys                                           DGTW
                                                                 Returns                    Alpha

       5) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   2.18%         2.27%        1.75%
          Rest Bought                                             (1.50)        (1.70)       (1.22)
       8) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   2.63%         2.71%        2.18%
          Not Checked and Bought                                  (1.77)        (1.96)       (1.45)

                                                                 Excess                    4-Factor
       Panel B: Tracked Insider Sales                                          DGTW
                                                                 Returns                    Alpha

       5) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.70%       -1.33%       -1.85%
          Rest Sold                                               (-2.80)      (-2.39)      (-3.02)
       8) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.68%       -1.35%       -1.84%
          Not Checked and Sold                                    (-2.77)      (-2.42)      (-3.00)
                     Appendix Table A3: Trade-Size-Weighted Portfolio Returns

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading.
Panel A corresponds to tracked insider buys and Panel B corresponds to tracked insider sells. In terms of
timing, we require that institutions both view the insider trading record and trade the underlying stock in
quarter t. We then analyze the trade-size weighted returns to those trades in quarter t+1. A stock’s trade-
size weight is the increase (decrease) in portfolio weight of the tracked buy (the tracked sale) relative to
the stock’s final weight (initial weight). Row 5 constructs a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio
includes all stocks of which the fund manager checks insider trades and also trade in the same direction,
the short portfolio includes all other stocks that the fund manager buys/sells in the same quarter. In Row
8, the benchmark portfolio includes all stocks that are not checked by a fund manager but are traded by
insiders in the same direction as the fund manager. Reported below are the quarterly Raw, DGTW, and 4
Factor adjusted returns of these aforementioned portfolios (as well as the long and short sides). T-statistics,
reported in parenthesis, are based on Newey-West standard errors. 5% statistical significance is indicated
in bold.

                                                                  Excess                    4-Factor
        Panel A: Tracked Insider Buys                                          DGTW
                                                                  Returns                    Alpha

        5) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   3.92%        3.95%         4.05%
           Rest Bought                                             (2.09)       (2.22)        (2.28)
        8) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                   3.75%        3.65%         3.63%
           Not Checked and Bought                                  (2.00)       (2.04)        (1.96)


                                                                  Excess                    4-Factor
        Panel B: Tracked Insider Sales                                         DGTW
                                                                  Returns                    Alpha

        5) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -2.89%       -2.64%       -3.11%
           Rest Sold                                               (-3.37)      (-3.29)      (-3.81)
        8) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -3.31%       -2.96%       -3.61%
           Not Checked and Sold                                    (-3.78)      (-3.38)      (-4.25)
                 Appendix Table A4: Exclude the Post-2013 Period from Our Sample

This table reports calendar-time portfolio returns of various types of institutional holdings and trading
excluding the post 2013 sample period. Panel A corresponds to tracked insider buys and Panel B corresponds
to tracked insider sells. In terms of timing, we require that institutions both view the insider trading record
and trade the underlying stock in quarter t, and analyze the equal-weighted returns to those trades in
quarter t+1. Row 5 constructs a long-short portfolio, where the long portfolio includes all stocks of which
the fund manager checks insider trades and also trade in the same direction, the short portfolio includes all
other stocks that the fund manager buys/sells in the same quarter. In Row 8, the benchmark portfolio
includes all stocks that are not checked by a fund manager but are traded by insiders in the same direction
as the fund manager. Reported below are the quarterly Raw, DGTW, and 4 Factor adjusted returns of
these aforementioned portfolios (as well as the long and short sides). T-statistics, reported in parenthesis,
are based on Newey-West standard errors. 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold.

                                                                  Excess                    4-Factor
       Panel A: Tracked Insider Buys                                           DGTW
                                                                  Returns                    Alpha

       5) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                    1.58%        1.27%         1.47%
          Rest Bought                                              (1.02)       (0.92)        (1.00)
       8) Checked Insider Buying and Bought vs.                    1.70%        1.48%         1.64%
          Not Checked and Bought                                   (1.17)       (1.09)        (1.11)

                                                                  Excess                    4-Factor
        Panel B: Tracked Insider Sales                                         DGTW
                                                                  Returns                    Alpha

        5) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.88%       -1.51%       -1.85%
           Rest Sold                                               (-3.02)      (-2.44)      (-2.96)
        8) Checked Insider Selling and Sold vs.                    -1.82%       -1.52%       -1.81%
           Not Checked and Sold                                    (-3.02)      (-2.46)      (-2.93)
                     Appendix A5: Description of the Deciphering Procedure


The deciphering process decrypts the IP addresses from the SEC Edgar log files in order to match
them to a commercial IP geolocation/organizational database. The IP addresses in the dataset
are partially anonymized using a static cipher. A standard IP address have the form
###.###.###.###. Each octet ### separated by periods has a numerical value between
0 and 255. An IP address in the Edgar data has the form ###.###.###.&&&. The first 9
digits of the Edgar server IP correspond to the actual IP that visited the website (024.145.236).
The last 3 digits correspond to a hidden octet (jcf). That is, each row of the data corresponds to
a certain IP address (24.145.236.jcf) viewing a specific filing coded by an accession number
(0000891020-04-000160) at a specific time and date (12:00 am on April 31, 2004).


The static ciphers in the Edgar log are 3-digit alphabetical codes that uniquely represent octets
between 0 and 255 throughout the data. It is very apparent that this cipher is static in nature.
   1) The same cipher would visit similar forms in multiple days and months. For example, the
       same IP address, with aca as the cipher, would visit AIG filings in January 2009, February
       2009, and so on.
   2) We find that ciphers with the lowest frequency tend to be the same two: ghf and ghg
       throughout the data. We ended up matching ghf and ghg to 0 and 255 respectively. IP
       addresses ending with 0 and 255 tend to be reserved for network administrative purposes,
       and are generally less frequent than other addresses.


We obtain another dataset of server logs from a private but well-trafficked website in order to
decrypt the EDGAR IP address. Specifically, we identify all instances where the first 9 digits of
an IP address in the Edgar files match an IP address from this private server.


If 1.1.1.aaa visited the SEC server in its history and 1.1.1.111 visited this website in 2016, then
the cipher aaa will have one match to 111. Since there are multiple matches between a cipher and
a set of octets, we compose a scoring system that counts the number of times each cipher is
matched to each octet. The most frequent match is our candidate for the cipher link. The link
between a cipher and its most frequently matched octet is distinct for the vast majority of the
ciphers (236 out of 256 ciphers). For example, aba’s most frequent octet match is 009, no other
cipher matches to 009 as their most frequent match. In this set of 236 matches, the identified
octet is on average 96% more frequent than the next most frequent match. I.e. aej is matched to
its more frequent octet, 71, 298 times. The next most frequent octet, 135, has about 139 matches
to aej.
The remainder of the matching - where multiple ciphers are matched to a single octet - is done
through a process of elimination. For example, if both aaa and aab score 001 as their most frequent
match, we distinguish the two by examining which of the two ciphers are more frequently linked
to 001. If 001 has many more matches with aaa than aab, then aaa is matched to 001. In this case
001 is removed as a potential choice for aab’s matching. aab is then linked to its next most
frequent octet. We only had to iterate this process once in order to match the remaining 20 pairs.
When we examine the frequency of octet to cipher matches in this subset, the most frequent cipher
for each of these octet accounts for significantly more matches than the next most frequent cipher
(116% more frequent).


At the end of our decryption, we obtain 256 pairs of unique matchings between the hidden octet
and the actual octet for the EDGAR database. We present our results in table 1.
