NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VIOLENCE WHILE IN UTERO:
THE IMPACT OF ASSAULTS DURING PREGNANCY ON BIRTH OUTCOMES
Janet Currie
Michael Mueller-Smith
Maya Rossin-Slater
Working Paper 24802
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24802

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018, Revised December 2019

We thank seminar and conference participants at the University of Michigan, University of
Arizona, the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, University of Gothenburg, the Harvard
Kennedy School of Government, Stockholm University, Stanford University, Vanderbilt
University, the NBER Summer Institute, the Transatlantic Workshop on the Economics of Crime,
the America Latina Crime and Policy Network (ALCAPONE) Annual Meeting, and the
Conference on Empirical Legal Studies for helpful comments. We are grateful to Ingrid Gould
Ellen and the staff at the NYU Furman Center for assisting in assembling the data for this project,
Sara Shoener of the NYC Commission on Gender Equity for background information on
domestic violence in New York City, and Abigail Lebovitz for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Janet Currie, Michael Mueller-Smith, and Maya Rossin-Slater. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Violence while in Utero: The Impact of Assaults During Pregnancy on Birth Outcomes
Janet Currie, Michael Mueller-Smith, and Maya Rossin-Slater
NBER Working Paper No. 24802
July 2018, Revised December 2019
JEL No. I14,I31,J12,J13,K14
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of prenatal exposure to violent crime on infant health, using New York City
crime records linked to mothers’ addresses in birth records data. We address endogeneity of
assault exposure with three strategies and find that in utero assault exposure significantly
increases the incidence of adverse birth outcomes. We calculate that the annual social cost of
assault during pregnancy in the US is more than $3.8 billion. Since infant health predicts longterm wellbeing and disadvantaged women are disproportionately likely to be domestic abuse
victims, violence in utero may be an important channel for intergenerational transmission of
inequality.
Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
Michael Mueller-Smith
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
365C Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Ave.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mgms@umich.edu

Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
615 Crothers Way
Encina Commons, MC 6019
Stanford, CA 94305-6006
and NBER
mrossin@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Crime is considered a canonical example of a negative externality because of its large cost to
society. While a large literature in economics is devoted to understanding the determinants
of criminal behavior (e.g., Becker, 1968; Erlich, 1973; Freeman, 1999; Deming, 2011; Billings,
Deming and Rockoff, 2014; Chalfin and McCrary, 2015) and the impacts of criminal sanctions
on offenders (e.g., Hawken and Kleiman, 2009; Buonanno and Raphael, 2013; Aizer and
Doyle, 2015; Mueller-Smith, 2015; Bhuller et al., 2016; Dobbie et al., 2018; Agan and Starr,
2018) less is known about the causal effects of crime on victims. Estimates of the social
cost of crime rely on jury awards (Miller et al., 1996) or contingent valuation studies (Cohen
et al., 2004), both of which assume that the impacts of victimization are fully understood.
Although these methods yield a very wide range of estimates,1 they serve a critical role
in policy evaluation. Appendix Table A.1 lists examples of studies in which cost of crime
estimates are used to evaluate a variety of interventions, including education policies, labor
market programs, child development programs, gun regulation, housing programs, and many
others. Clearly, improving estimates of the costs of crime on victims can help to inform costbenefit analyses of a wide range of policies, both within and outside of the criminal justice
system.
Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a crime that involves physical, sexual, or psychological harm by a current or former partner or spouse. IPV is endemic in countries all
around the world (Campbell et al., 2004; Devries et al., 2010), exists across a range of socioeconomic, religious, and cultural communities (World Health Organization, 2012), and
accounts for over one seventh of all violent crimes in the United States (see Appendix Figure
A.1a). Economists have studied the determinants of domestic violence from the perspective
of household bargaining models (Tauchen et al., 1991; Lundberg and Pollak, 1993; Farmer
and Tiefenthaler, 1997; Dee, 2003; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2006; Bowlus and Seitz, 2006;
Aizer, 2010; Card and Dahl, 2011; Bobonis et al., 2013; Hidrobo and Fernald, 2013; Tertilt
and Van Den Berg, 2015), but there is much less economic research on the impacts of IPV
on victims.2 This paper focuses on the effects of assault on pregnant women, which is particularly damaging as it can also affect the unborn child. The reported prevalence of physical
or sexual abuse among pregnant and postpartum women ranges between 7 and 23 percent
(Helton and Snodgrass, 1987; Amaro et al., 1990; McFarlane et al., 1992; Johnson et al.,
2003; Charles and Perreira, 2007; Chambliss, 2008), and IPV-related homicide is a leading
1

See Section 2.4 for a description of these methods. The most influential studies in this area differ by a
factor of up to 22 on the magnitude of the cost estimate depending on the type of violent crime.
2
Other related work has examined the determinants of violence in the prostitution market (e.g., see
Cunningham and Shah, 2017).

1

cause of death during pregnancy (Palladino et al., 2011).
Estimating the causal effects of criminal victimization is challenging for at least two reasons. First, while credible administrative data on alleged offenders (with personal identifying
information) is readily available through arrest and incarceration databases, victim identities are generally withheld for confidentiality reasons.3 Research on crime victims is thus
typically limited to self-reports in survey data, such as the National Crime Victimization Survey, which may be subject to non-random measurement error or recall bias (Ellsberg et al.,
2001).4 Second, victimization—especially due to violent crime—is not a random event. Poor
women are much more likely to experience domestic violence than their more advantaged
counterparts (Jewkes, 2002; Aizer, 2011). There are also substantial differences in victimization rates by race and ethnicity (Lauritsen and White, 2001), and by mental health status
(Desmarais et al., 2014). It is therefore difficult to isolate the causal effects of experiencing
a violent crime from the influence of other (often unobservable) factors.
This paper attempts to overcome these challenges in order to offer new evidence on how
violent crime affects some of the most vulnerable members of society—pregnant women and
their children. We leverage a unique source of linked administrative data from New York
City: birth records with information on maternal residential addresses merged to the exact
locations and dates of reported crimes.
We use three different empirical strategies, each of which relies on different identifying
assumptions. First, we compare the outcomes of women who report an assault in the nine
months after conception to those who experience an assault one to ten months after the
estimated due date.5 This comparison relies on the assumption that the determinants of
IPV are similar during the pregnancy and postpartum periods, which is consistent with the
empirical literature (Charles and Perreira, 2007; Bailey, 2010). This assumption is further
supported by balancing tests for differences in maternal and paternal characteristics across
the treatment and control groups, smoothness in sample density around the expected birth
date, and a supplementary analysis of parental characteristics and family dynamics during
the pregnancy and postpartum periods using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Nevertheless, we also use a calculation proposed by Oster (2017) to investigate
the extent to which these estimates may be biased by differential selection into IPV during
3

Arrests data are available from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Uniform Crime Reporting
program. Data on prisoners are available through the National Prisoner Statistics program at the Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
4
Social surveys also rely on increasingly selected samples of individuals willing to respond, with unknown
consequences for data quality (Dillman et al., 2014).
5
This approach is similar to that of Black et al. (2016) and Persson and Rossin-Slater (2018), who exploit
the timing of deaths in the family to study the effects of in utero exposure to maternal bereavement on
children’s outcomes.

2

the pregnancy and postpartum periods.
Second, we estimate a difference-in-differences (DD) model, in which we compare the
difference between mothers who experience an assault during pregnancy and those who have
one in the months after, relative to the analogous difference for mothers who report any
other type of crime during those two time periods. The DD model allows for there to be a
difference in the reporting rate between women who experience an assault during pregnancy
and women who experience one postpartum, but assumes that this difference is similar to
any difference in the reporting rate for other crimes. In addition, by comparing assaults
to other crimes (which are likely to be stressful but involve less direct physical harm to the
mother), this method can shed light on any differential effects of prenatal exposure to assault
relative to other stressful shocks.
Third, we estimate models with maternal fixed effects, which account for any timeinvariant differences across mothers who do and do not experience an assault during pregnancy. These models compare two pregnancies of the same mother, where one was affected
by assault and the other was not. Thus, these estimates focus exclusively on the pregnancy
period and do not involve comparisons with IPV exposure after pregnancy. Put differently,
whereas the control groups in the first two strategies contain mothers who are still experiencing violence, the control group in the fixed effects model is not experiencing violence.
Hence, one might expect the estimated effects of assault during pregnancy to be larger in
this specification. Consistent with this prediction, the point estimates based on the maternal
fixed effects design are larger than those obtained using the first two strategies. The siblings
sample also allows us to do a placebo test, in which we drop all mothers who ever experienced an assault during pregnancy, and instead estimate maternal fixed effects models using
an indicator for assault in months one to ten after the estimated due date as the treatment
variable. We do not find any evidence of placebo impacts on infant health outcomes, suggesting that the results from our baseline maternal fixed effects models are not confounded
by unobservable differences across siblings around the period of childbirth that are correlated
with exposure to assault.
All three strategies indicate that experiencing assault during pregnancy has adverse consequences for infant health. Focusing on the relatively conservative estimates from the “pregnancy vs. postpartum assault exposure” and DD strategies (which are remarkably similar),
mothers with an assault during pregnancy have at least a 0.08 standard deviation (SD)
higher summary index of severe adverse birth outcomes, compared to mothers who report
an assault in the postpartum period and mothers who experience any other crime during
either period. This result is driven by 1.5 and 2.1 percentage point (61 and 46 percent)
higher rates of very low birth weight births (less than 1,500 grams) and low 1-minute Apgar
3

score births, respectively.6 These impacts stem mainly from assaults in the 3rd trimester
of pregnancy. These assaults are also associated with a higher probability of induced labor,
a likely medical response to injuries sustained by pregnant victims of abuse. Indeed, we
find some evidence that victims of assault during pregnancy are generally more likely to use
medical services.
We conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation to provide an estimate of the average
social cost of assault during pregnancy to infants. We use the conservatively estimated 1.5
percentage point increase in the likelihood of a very low birth weight birth, and account for
six types of short and long-term costs: Higher rates of infant mortality, increased medical
costs during and immediately following birth, increased childhood disability, increased adult
disability, decreases in adult income, and reductions in life expectancy. We calculate an
average social cost of at least $36,857 per assault during pregnancy. Assuming that 2.6
percent of pregnant women experience an assault—the national victimization rate estimated
from survey data—this figure translates into a total annual social cost to affected infants
of at least $3.8 billion in the U.S. alone. The cost becomes even larger if one applies the
estimate we obtain from maternal fixed effects models ($85,999 per assault; $8.9 billion per
year), which compare affected to unaffected pregnancies, as discussed above.
Importantly, our cost calculation is for affected infants and does not incorporate the
costs associated with victimization that the woman experiences herself. Santos (2013) uses
British survey data and models the cost of domestic violence as compensating variation
in a life satisfaction regression, producing a cost estimate ranging from £27,000 ($43,200
in 2013) to £70,000 ($112,000 in 2013). In ongoing work, Bindler and Ketel (2019) use
Dutch administrative data to study the impacts of criminal victimization in an event-study
framework, finding that victims experience large reductions in earnings and increases in
public benefit receipt that last up to 8 years following the crime. These findings suggest that
to approach an estimate of the full cost of IPV during pregnancy, one would have to add
these costs to mothers to our estimates of the costs to affected infants.
Prior research suggests that shocks in the fetal period can have life-long consequences for
adult health, human capital, and labor market outcomes (Almond et al., 2018; Aizer and
Currie, 2014; Currie and Almond, 2011; Currie, 2011; Barker, 1990). Since poor pregnant
women are much more likely to be victims of assault than their more advantaged counterparts (Jewkes, 2002; Aizer, 2011), and since the majority of all violence against women is
perpetrated by domestic partners (Tjaden and Thoennes, 2000), our results suggest that
6
The Apgar score is based on a doctor’s observation of the baby’s skin color, heart rate, reflexes, muscle
tone, and breathing shortly after birth, and is reported on a 0-10 scale. Scores below 7 are considered low.
See: https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/apgar.html.

4

intra-family conflict may be an important and previously understudied mechanism through
which early-life health disparities perpetuate persistent economic inequality across generations. The possibility of social contagion of violence within neighborhoods (Damm and
Dustmann, 2014; Billings, Deming and Ross, 2019) further exacerbates this channel.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses our paper in the context
of the existing literature, and then provides background information about IPV, police responses in New York City, and current approaches to estimating the social cost of crime.
Section 3 describes our administrative data sources, while Section 4 discusses the empirical
approach. Section 5 presents the results. Finally, Section 6 presents our estimate of the
implied social cost of crime to infants and offers some conclusions.

2

Background

2.1

Relationship of Our Work to Previous Research on IPV and Violence during
Pregnancy

Prior studies, which compare women who experience IPV during pregnancy to those who do
not, have documented a negative association between prenatal IPV and pregnancy and birth
outcomes (Newberger et al., 1992; Cokkinides et al., 1999; Murphy et al., 2001; Campbell,
2002; Valladares et al., 2002; Coker et al., 2004; Ahmed et al., 2006; Silverman et al., 2006;
Sarkar, 2008).7 However, to the best of our knowledge, only one other paper has addressed
non-random selection into IPV in order to identify the impacts of IPV on infant health:
Aizer (2011) uses a control function approach (Heckman, 1979) and linked hospitalizations
and births data from California to estimate the effect of hospitalization for assault during
pregnancy. Variation in IPV comes from geographic and time variation in the enforcement of
laws against domestic violence.8 She finds that hospitalization for assault during pregnancy
is associated with a 163 gram reduction in birth weight.
We build on this path-breaking research in three ways: First, we include all assaults
reported to the police instead of focusing only on those resulting in hospitalization. Second,
we develop several alternative research designs. Third, in addition to birth outcomes, we
examine the use of medical interventions and prenatal behaviors in an attempt to understand
7

There is also a small literature on interventions targeting IPV during pregnancy that have been evaluated
using randomized controlled trials. Consistent with our results, interventions that lower IPV also reduce the
incidence of very low birth weight and very pre-term births (Kiely et al., 2010; El-Mohandes et al., 2011).
These studies are limited by small sample sizes: e.g., Kiely et al. (2010) report that out of the 150 pregnant
women exposed to IPV who were assigned to their treatment group, only one had a very low birth weight
birth.
8
Specifically, Aizer (2011) uses the ratio of arrests for domestic violence to the number of 911 calls
reporting domestic violence in the previous year as an instrument for hospitalization for assault.

5

the mechanisms driving our estimated effects on infant health.
We also contribute to a literature on the relationship between violence—either due to
local criminal activity or due to more global events such as wars and terrorist attacks—and
infant health (Berkowitz et al., 2003; Lederman et al., 2004; Lauderdale, 2006; Messer et al.,
2006; Eskenazi et al., 2007; Masi et al., 2007; Camacho, 2008; Metcalfe et al., 2011; Mansour
and Rees, 2012; Brown, 2013; Torche and Villarreal, 2014; Torche and Shwed, 2015). These
studies typically measure potential exposure rather than actual victimization, and focus on
maternal stress during pregnancy as an important channel through which potential exposure
to violence can affect infant health. Our estimates instead speak to the direct consequences
of violent crime on the victims.9 Our results are consistent with a physical channel—mothers
assaulted in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy are more likely to need to be induced prematurely,
and deliver very low birth weight babies as a consequence.
2.2

Intimate Partner Violence in New York City and Beyond

Intimate partner violence is shockingly common. One study from the World Health Organization, which used data from twelve countries, reports that women’s lifetime risk of physical
or sexual violence ranges from 15 percent (Japan) to 71 percent (Ethiopia) (Garcia-Moreno
et al., 2005). Prevalence rates of IPV during pregnancy have been found to be up to 57
percent, with typical risk for women in industrialized countries ranging between 3.4 and 11
percent (Campbell et al., 2004; Shamu et al., 2011; Devries et al., 2010).
In the United States, recent estimates from the National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey (NIPSVS) by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicate that 32
percent of U.S. women experience physical IPV at some point in their lifetimes (Smith et al.,
2017). This number represents an increase from a mid-1990s estimate from the National
Violence Against Women Survey, which reported that 22 percent of women experienced IPV
(Tjaden and Thoennes, 2000). As shown in Appendix Figure A.1a, violent crime where the
perpetrator is a stranger has gone down substantially over 1993-2016. Instead, violent crime
most commonly occurs between two individuals with a known relationship (either intimate
partners, other relatives, or acquaintances). And as noted above, violence originating from
an intimate partner accounts for over one seventh of all violent crime.
In New York City—the setting for our paper—survey evidence shows that about 69,000
adult women feared IPV in 2004-2005 (New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 2008). Administrative records additionally indicate that women in their peak
9

Duncan et al. (2016) show that fetal exposure to the Superbowl increases the probability of low birth
weight. The authors argue that domestic violence is one channel through which this effect could arise, but
do not have any direct data on the incidence of violence.

6

childbearing ages of 20 to 29 are at greatest risk of severe IPV, whether measured as female
IPV-related homicide, female IPV-related hospitalization, or female IPV-related emergency
department visits (New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 2008).10 Black
and Hispanic women, as well as those living in low-income neighborhoods, are at heightened
risk.11
As previously noted, reported prevalence rates of physical or sexual abuse among pregnant and postpartum women range between 7 and 23 percent (Helton and Snodgrass, 1987;
Amaro et al., 1990; McFarlane et al., 1992; Johnson et al., 2003; Charles and Perreira,
2007; Chambliss, 2008), with more recent studies documenting relatively higher rates. Thus,
pregnant women and their unborn children represent a significant fraction of violent crime
victims. Newberger et al. (1992) point out that violence during pregnancy can affect infant
health through a direct physical channel resulting from blunt trauma to the maternal abdomen, which in turn can result in early onset of labor due to placental abruption, or other
complications such as the rupture of the mother’s uterus. There may also be indirect channels, including elevated stress, exacerbation of existing chronic illnesses, changes in access
to prenatal care or other services, and engagement in adverse behaviors such as smoking or
poor nutrition as a coping mechanism.
2.3

Police Responses to Domestic Violence in New York City

Since we use police reports to measure crimes, it is useful to understand how police treat
domestic violence in New York City. New York state law requires that police investigate
all reports of domestic violence. In 2017, the New York City Police Department (NYPD)
responded to almost 200,000 domestic assault incidents, with over half including an intimate
partner (New York Police Department, 2017). Fourteen percent of all felony-level complaints
included a domestic incident, making it one of the most common complaints to the NYPD.12
10

The second age group at greatest risk was women aged 30 to 39.
Black and Hispanic women have a 150 to 770 percent higher risk of severe IPV relative to non-Hispanic
white women, depending on the specific measure.
12
When a domestic violence complaint is made, the police may issue an appearance ticket or immediately
arrest the accused depending on the degree of the offense. While statistics specific to domestic violence
incidents are unavailable, 67 percent of felony and misdemeanor assault suspects were arrested in 2017
(O’Neill, 2018). If arrested, the accused are locally booked and should be arraigned before a judge within
24 hours. At the arraignment, the judge decides whether to issue an order of protection, as well as whether
to release the defendant (with or without bail) or to hold the defendant on remand. By New York law,
individuals convicted of a misdemeanor assault can be sentenced to anywhere from 0 to 12 months of jail
time. Felony assault sentences depend on the degree of the offense: Class B (5-25 years in prison), Class C
(3.5-15 years in prison), Class D (2-7 years in prison), or Class E (1.5-4 years in prison or probation). Yet
only a fraction of those who are arrested are convicted and sentenced to incarceration. According to NYS
Division of Criminal Justice Services (2018), between 2013 and 2017, 23 percent of violent felony arrests
were convicted and sentenced to a form of incarceration (prison, jail, time-served or jail and probation). The
11

7

State law breaks domestic violence into three distinct categories depending on its severity.
Felony domestic assault requires that a crime resulted in serious bodily injury (e.g., a broken
bone) or involved a weapon that led to substantial prolonged pain or physical impairment.
Misdemeanor offenses are crimes that result in substantial pain or impairment of physical
condition, but not over a sustained period. Violations, also known as petty offenses, include verbal threats and physical acts that do not result in injury. In this study, we focus
specifically on reported instances of misdemeanor and felony assaults (including aggravated
assaults) and exclude violations because less serious offenses have lower reporting rates than
misdemeanor and felony assaults (Morgan and Kena, 2017).
The NYPD has over 400 domestic violence prevention officers, investigators, and supervisors (New York Police Department, 2018). Prevention officers receive additional training in
how to confront the potentially unpredictable situations associated with domestic violence.
New York state has had a “mandatory arrest” law since the passage of the Family Protection
and Domestic Violence Intervention Act in 1994. This law implies that police officers must
make an arrest when there is probable cause of either a felony or a misdemeanor offense
committed by one “member of the same family or household” against another. The fact that
felonies and misdemeanors are treated similarly by the police is another reason to exclude
violations, where the officer has more discretion about whether to make an arrest.13,14
In summary, domestic violence cases make up a large fraction of the NYPD’s workload.
Officers are mandated to respond to domestic violence complaints, and must arrest suspects
in cases of felony or misdemeanor assault. The fact that we use data on all such cases that
were reported to the NYPD, and not only cases that resulted in a conviction, means that we
have a more representative sample of assaults during pregnancy than some previous studies.
However, issues of mis-measurement and under-reporting of IPV may still exist in our data,
as discussed below in Sections 3 and 4, as well as in Appendix C.
2.4

Estimating the Social Costs of Crime

Attempts to measure the social cost of crime date back to at least the Wickersham Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (Anderson et al., 1931). Costs include (but are
corresponding figure for all misdemeanor arrests was 15 percent. New York state does not report specific
estimates for domestic violence offenses or statistics on the length of sentence.
13
Members of the same family include spouses, former spouses, individuals who have a child together,
individuals who are related by blood, and individuals who are either in or were previously in an intimate
relationship together. See http://www.opdv.ny.gov/help/fss/policecourts.html for more details.
14
The NYC Confidentiality Policy (Bloomberg, 2003a,b) mandates that police officers should not ask
undocumented immigrants who are victims of crime (including IPV) about immigration status. This policy
arguably mitigates concerns about under-reporting of violence against immigrants in our data.

8

not limited to) property loss or destruction,15 the administrative costs of the justice system,
victims’ mental and physical health, and victims’ potential lost productivity.16 Quantifying
these impacts in terms of a common unit of measurement (e.g., dollars) is not trivial, but is
crucial for evaluating policy decisions. In fact, many economic analyses use such estimates
to assess the potential cost-effectiveness of public programs (see Appendix Table A.1).
Several strategies have been developed to meet this need (Cohen, 2005).17 The “cost
of illness” tradition (Hodgson and Meiners, 1982; Malzberg, 1950) attempts to quantify the
tangible impacts of crime on specific outcomes using the “best available information” and
assigned prices (McCollister et al., 2010). Often, the “best available information” comes
from victim self-reports. The jury-award approach measures the social cost of crime using
actual compensation awards from civil personal injury cases (Miller et al., 1996).
Other work uses hedonic methods to estimate the social cost of crime (Thaler, 1978),
assuming that both the tangible and intangible costs of crime are capitalized into local
housing prices. Contingent valuation studies use a similar logic: Surveys ask respondents
about their willingness to pay to avoid being the victim of various crimes, which theoretically
provides a measure of both tangible and intangible costs (Cohen et al., 2004; Cook and
Ludwig, 2000).18 All of these methods assume that the impacts of crime are fully known. If
the impact is unknown to the researcher, a jury, a home buyer, or a survey respondent, then
these estimates of the social cost of crime will be biased towards zero. Conversely, if people
have exaggerated fears of crime, then survey methods will overstate the cost of crime.
Appendix Table A.2 reports commonly used upper and lower bound estimates of the cost
of several major types of crime. According to these estimates, the social cost of assault is
between approximately $16,000 and $90,000 per victim. While there is a wide range, available
estimates consistently indicate that violent crime is more costly than other offenses. As a
result, small changes in violent crime rates can be influential in cost-effectiveness analyses.
Benefit-cost calculations have become standard in analyses of interventions that influence
criminal activity. It is therefore critical to generate estimates of the cost of violent crime
that accurately reflect causal effects, and that fully account for the full range of potential
impacts. Our analysis aims to provide new evidence on the cost of assault during pregnancy
on infant health outcomes, which are typically omitted from existing calculations. We discuss
the costs associated with our estimated impacts on affected infants’ health in Section 6.
15

Whether to consider property theft a social loss or transfer remains an open question in the field.
See Table 9B.2 in Donohue (2009) for an extensive discussion of potential costs of crime.
17
Soares (2015) provides a review of these methods for an economic audience and discusses how the
approaches measure inherently different theoretical parameters.
18
Often cost strategies are complemented with estimates from the statistical value of life literature, which
relies on a compensating wage differences (Viscusi and ALDY, 2003).
16

9

3

Data

We merge three restricted administrative data sets from New York City: the universe of
reported crimes between 2004 and 2012, the universe of birth records, and a building characteristics database. We merge these data sets using information on exact crime locations,
maternal residential addresses, and unique building identifiers, as described in detail in Appendix B.
Crime data. The crime data come from NYPD records. These data cover all criminal
complaints reported between 2004 and 2012.19 Each record includes the exact longitude and
latitude where the event allegedly occurred, the date and time of the offense, the degree of the
offense, and a categorical description of the nature of the offense. The incidents represent the
full universe of reported crimes in New York City over the study period.20 Appendix Table
A.3 demonstrates that close to one-fifth of these reported crimes were violent in nature.
Violent crimes include assaults, aggravated assaults, murder, manslaughter, and robbery.
Property crimes account for an additional third of the crime reports, mainly reflecting larceny,
grand larceny, and burglary. Most other crimes involve drug offenses, criminal mischief, or
harassment.
Appendix Figure A.1b shows trends in violent crimes in New York City over the study
period. Misdemeanor and felony assaults, which represent the majority of violent offenses
and are the focus of this study, remained stable at close to 110,000 combined offenses per
year.21
Births data. Births data come from administrative records held by the New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of Vital Statistics. These data include
detailed information about both the child and the parents.22 We observe a variety of birth
19

Due to privacy concerns, sexual assault crimes were withheld from this database. Administrative records
from the NYPD (New York Police Department, 2017) indicate that less than 0.2% of domestic assault incidents included a complaint of rape. In addition, we were permitted to access only a subset of the variables
contained in the data system, which was less than what is publicly available in geospatially coarsened data (see
https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/NYPD-Complaint-Data-Historic/qgea-i56i). Any
attempt to merge these additional variables into our analysis data set would be a violation of our data
use agreements.
20
While there may be some false complaints, it is advantageous to see the uncensored set of criminal
reports, particularly when many cases may not proceed further due to victim non-cooperation.
21
The figure also shows a notable decline in robberies over the study period, particularly in 2009, but we
do not focus on robberies in the current study.
22
These data come from two sources: medical information about the child, pregnancy, and delivery are
recorded by the hospital of delivery, while information about maternal behaviors are self-reported by the
mother in a questionnaire that she completes while in the hospital.

10

outcomes, including child sex, birth order, plurality, birth weight in grams, gestation length
in weeks, the Apgar score, an indicator for any abnormal conditions of the newborn, an
indicator for any congenital anomalies, an indicator for whether the child was transferred
to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) after birth, and an indicator for whether the
child has died by the time the birth certificate is filed. We also have information about
the delivery, including whether the birth occurred via cesarean section, whether labor was
induced, and an indicator for any complications of labor or delivery. Further, we have data
on maternal behaviors during pregnancy and at childbirth, including the date of prenatal
care initiation and the total number of prenatal care visits, whether the mother received
Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) benefits, whether
the mother smoked before or during pregnancy, whether the mother used any illicit drugs
during pregnancy, maternal pregnancy weight gain, and whether the mother reports being
depressed during pregnancy.23
Lastly, these data include rich information about the mothers, including age, education
level, marital status, race/ethnicity, nativity, and whether the mother has any pregnancy risk
factors (such as diabetes, hypertension, pre-eclampsia, eclampsia, and whether any previous
child was born pre-term, low birth weight, or small-for-gestational-age). We also have the
following information about fathers: age, education level, race/ethnicity, and nativity.24 The
births data include maternal residential addresses, full maiden names, and dates of birth,
which allow us to match mothers to crimes occurring in their homes, and also to match
siblings born to the same mother, as we discuss below. We calculate the estimated month
and year of conception for each birth using information on the month and year of birth and
gestation length, and limit the data to conception years 2004 to 2012.
Building characteristics data. Building characteristics come from the NYC Department
of City Planning’s (NYC DCP) Primary Land Use Tax Lot Output (PLUTO) data. The
PLUTO data include information on the tax lot and building characteristics (type of dwelling,
number of floors, estimated value, etc.), as well as on geographic, political, and administrative
districts as of 2009. Each property is uniquely identified by the Bureau, Block, Lot (BBL)
tax identifier, an identifier that is unique to New York City. Importantly, these data allow
23

The birth certificate format changed in 2008, and information about depression during pregnancy is only
available from 2008 onward. Depression is coded on a 5-point scale: 1= not depressed at all; 2= a little
depressed; 3= moderately depressed; 4= very depressed and did not get help; 5= very depressed and got
help. Our indicator is set to one for mothers in categories 2 through 5.
24
About 14 percent of the observations in our sample are missing all father information from the birth
certificate. We create indicators for missing values for all paternal characteristics such that we can include
them as controls in our regression models without dropping observations that do not have father information.
There is no statistically significant difference in the likelihood of missing father information between our
treatment and control groups (see Table 2).

11

us to distinguish between single-family homes and large multi-unit apartment buildings.
Analysis sample and summary statistics. After merging these three data sets (see
Appendix B), we make the following additional restrictions to the sample for our main
analysis. First, we focus on mothers who reside in single-family homes because for them,
we can be sure that a crime occurred in their home (rather than in another apartment
in the same building). Second, we consider mothers residing in The Bronx, Brooklyn, or
Queens, leaving us with 68,704 observations. We drop mothers in Manhattan since there
are few who reside in single-family homes, and we drop mothers in Staten Island because
they are less comparable to mothers in the other boroughs in terms of their demographic
and socioeconomic characteristics.
To create the analysis sample for our first estimation strategy, we identify women for
whom the first reported (misdemeanor or felony) assault that we observe occurred in the
month of conception or in the following 9 months, and women for whom the first such assault
occurred in months 10 through 19 post-conception (i.e., the months following the expected
due date month).25 We use the expected rather than the actual month of birth to define
these groups because realized gestation length is a potential outcome. A related issue is
that the longer the pregnancy lasts, the more time there is for the woman to be assaulted
during pregnancy. For both of these reasons, defining treatment using the actual month of
birth may introduce bias into the model.26 These restrictions leave us with a sample of 2,045
births.
Tables 1 and 2 present mean maternal and paternal characteristics, respectively, for three
sub-groups of parents that are relevant to our first identification strategy. Column (1) uses all
observations where the mother did not experience a first assault at her home in months 0-19
post-conception (i.e., those who are neither in our treatment nor control group). Column (2)
uses treatment group observations, column (3) uses control group observations, while column
(4) reports the difference in means between the treatment and control groups. Comparing
column (1) to columns (2) and (3) in both tables demonstrates that exposure to assault is
25

For the majority of women in our primary analysis sample, we only observe one assault. There are
181 observations where a mother experiences assaults in her home both during months 0-9 post-conception
and months 10-19 post-conception; these women are included in our treatment group since they experience
their first observed assault during the prenatal period. Our results are similar if we instead drop women
with multiple assaults across the prenatal and postpartum periods. Additionally, there are 201 observations
where a mother has assaults during months 1-10 before conception and months 0-9 post-conception, and 77
observations where a mother has assaults during months 1-10 before conception, months 0-9 post-conception,
and months 10-19 post-conception; these women are dropped from our main analysis sample since their first
assault occurs before pregnancy, but they are included in a robustness analysis that uses mothers with first
assaults before pregnancy as an alternative control group.
26
See Currie and Rossin-Slater (2013), Black et al. (2016), and Persson and Rossin-Slater (2018) for a
detailed discussions of these issues.

12

not random. Women who have an assault during or shortly after pregnancy are younger,
less likely to be married, more likely to be non-Hispanic black or Hispanic, and have lower
education levels than other mothers. The fathers of their children are younger, less educated,
and more likely to be minorities. However, when we zoom in on mothers who experience a
first assault either during pregnancy or in the postpartum period in columns (2) and (3),
the differences in parental characteristics are all statistically indistinguishable from zero at
the 5% level of confidence. We explore the potential differences between the treatment and
control groups for our first identification method further in Section 4 below.
Measurement error. In principle, our measure of exposure to assault could capture the
victimization of another household member, who is not the pregnant woman or new mother.
In addition, it is possible that women move during pregnancy, implying that they were not
residing at the home in which the assault occurred at the time when it occurred. The
scope for these misclassification errors is limited, however. The victim is unlikely to be
the child—estimates from Maston et al. (2011) indicate that only 0.6 percent of assaults
are situations in which the victim-offender relationship is child-parent. Moreover, Census
data show that only 12.7 percent of mothers of young children living in single-family homes
in The Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens have another non-partner female adult living in their
residence, implying that the vast majority of women in our data are the sole adult females
in their households and therefore the likely victims of the assaults we observe in the data.
Similarly, only 11.3 percent of these mothers have moved in the prior year, indicating that
most new mothers maintain residential stability during pregnancy.27 Moreover, our estimate
of the number of pregnant women assaulted matches well with survey data from the Center
for Disease Control’s Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS), as shown
in Appendix C.28
Outcomes. To address the issue of multiple hypothesis testing, we group our outcomes
into four indices: (1) severe birth outcomes index, which includes indicators for the following
27
Estimates based on authors’ calculations using pooled 2000 and 2010 Census 5% Public Use Microdata
Samples. Mothers of young children are defined as women with children less than 2 years old in the household.
28
Another data problem is that IPV tends to be under-reported to police. Notably, although IPV is
under-reported, victims of IPV are as likely as other victims of assault to call the police (Felson et al., 2002).
In addition, Miller and Segal (2018) demonstrate that a higher rate of female representation in the police
force increases the reporting rate of domestic violence to law enforcement. Our inclusion of conception year
and month fixed effects accounts for this potential source of selection into reporting. We further attempt
to limit the scope of potential under-reporting bias through two sample restrictions. First, we use a sample
of mothers who have all had a reported assault at their residence at some point in the months surrounding
childbirth, indicating a willingness to report to law enforcement in both our treatment and control groups.
Second, we focus on misdemeanor and felony offenses, which are less likely to be under-reported than more
minor offenses (Morgan and Kena, 2017).

13

severely adverse outcomes: very low birth weight (<1,500 grams), very pre-term birth (<34
weeks gestation), low 1-minute Apgar score (<7), NICU admission, any abnormal conditions
(e.g., use of assisted ventilation or surfactant) or congenital anomalies of the newborn, and
death by the time of birth certificate filing; (2) broad birth outcomes index, which includes all
outcomes included in the main birth outcomes index, as well as other less severe measures:
continuous birth weight in grams, indicator for low birth weight (<2,500 grams), gestation
in weeks, and indicator for pre-term birth (<37 weeks);29 (3) use of medical services index,
which includes: indicator for first trimester prenatal care initiation, number of prenatal care
visits, indicator for induction of labor, indicator for delivery by c-section, and indicator
for any complications during labor or delivery (e.g., premature rupture of membranes); (4)
maternal behavioral and well-being index, which includes indicators for: mother smoking
during pregnancy, mother using illicit drugs during pregnancy, mother being depressed, low
pregnancy weight gain (<15 lbs), high pregnancy weight gain (>40 lbs),30 and the mother
not receiving WIC benefits.
To create the indices, we first orient each outcome such that a higher value either represents a more adverse outcome (for indices 1, 2, and 4) or more use of medical services
(for index 3), and then standardize each oriented outcome by subtracting the control group
mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation. For the first analysis, the control group is defined as mothers for whom the first assault that we observe is in months 10
through 19 post-conception. For the maternal fixed effects analysis, the control group is all
births with no assault in months 0-9 post-conception. We take an equally weighted average
of the standardized outcomes as in Kling et al. (2007).

4

Empirical Design

Our goal is to estimate a causal relationship between exposure to an assault during pregnancy
and infant health. Consider a stylized model of the form:
yi = γAssaultP regi + xi0 ω + ui
29

(1)

We have also examined an index that additionally includes indicators for high birth weight (>4,000
grams) and a male child, with very similar results. Since male fetuses are more likely to miscarry, a reduction
in male births may indicate an increase in miscarriages (see, e.g., Sanders and Stoecker, 2015; Halla and
Zweimüller, 2013). We do not find any evidence for changes in the sex ratio at birth.
30
Medical recommendations for pregnancy weight gain depend on the woman’s pre-pregnancy BMI. However, our births data only contain information on maternal pre-pregnancy BMI starting in 2008. In order
to study pregnancy weight gain for the whole sample, we use the 15 and 40 lbs thresholds, since overweight
women are advised not to gain less than 15 lbs, while underweight women are advised not to gain more
than 40 lbs. See https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/
Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy.

14

for each mother-child pair i. yi is an outcome of interest such as the severe birth outcomes
index, AssaultP regi is an indicator that is equal to 1 for mothers who have a first reported
assault in their homes during pregnancy and 0 otherwise, xi is a vector of observable determinants of yi , and ui is a vector of unobservable characteristics. Since assaults during pregnancy
are not randomly assigned, unobservable components in ui are likely to be correlated with
the treatment variable, leading to biased estimates of γ in equation (1).
Our empirical strategies aim to overcome this issue by identifying control groups that
enable us to approximate a randomized design. We adopt three research designs, which
rely on different identifying assumptions, including: (1) comparing the outcomes of women
who report an assault in the nine months after conception to those who experience an
assault one to ten months after the estimated due date, (2) a difference-in-differences (DD)
model, in which we compare the difference between mothers who experience an assault during
pregnancy and those who have one in the months after, relative to the analogous difference
for mothers who report any other type of crime during those two time periods, and (3)
a maternal fixed effects approach, which accounts for any time-invariant differences across
mothers who do and do not experience an assault during pregnancy.
During Versus Post-Pregnancy Model. The literature suggests that women who experience an assault in their homes in a short time period after pregnancy serve as an appropriate
control group for women who have one during pregnancy, and we provide further evidence
regarding the comparability of these two groups below.
In particular, consider the sample:
S = {i : 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]i = 1 |1[eb < Assault ≤ eb + 10]i = 1} .
where c denotes the month of conception and eb denotes the expected month of birth (i.e.,
the 9th month after the month of conception). Thus, 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]i = 1 indicates that
the assault occurred during the expected length of the pregnancy, while 1[eb < Assault ≤
eb + 10]i = 1 indicates that it occurred in the 9 following months.
We estimate the following model on the sample with i ∈ {S}:
yiymr = β0 + β1 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]iymr + ψy + φm + ρr + x0 i δ + νiymr ,

(2)

where 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]iymr is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the assault
occurs in or before the expected month of birth, and 0 otherwise. We include conception
year and month fixed effects, ψy and φm , respectively, as well as fixed effects for the three
boroughs in our analysis, ρr . The vector xi includes the following control variables: maternal
15

and paternal age group dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for the mother
being married, indicators for maternal and paternal nativity status (U.S.-born, foreign-born,
missing), maternal and paternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, nonHispanic black, other, missing), maternal and paternal education dummies (less than high
school and no diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree,
bachelor’s degree or more, missing), indicator for a single rather than multiple birth, and
parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing).
The key coefficient of interest, β1 , represents an estimate of the impact of exposure to
an assault during pregnancy. The coefficient β1 may not capture the stress associated with
being in a violent relationship, however. The literature on IPV suggests that an assault
where the police are called is unlikely to be a “one-off” event (Straus et al., 2017). In many
cases, there was a continuous pattern of abuse before, during, and after pregnancy that
may, from time to time, culminate in a more serious assault in which law enforcement gets
involved. Therefore, all of the women in our treatment and control groups are likely to be
subject to high levels of stress, implying that these estimates capture the effects of the more
serious physical assault itself. As noted above, this is a distinction between our work and
previous work on the impact of stressful events during pregnancy. However, as discussed, the
maternal fixed effects estimates are likely to incorporate both the effects of physical assault
and the effects of the stress associated with being at risk of violence; see below for more
details on this strategy.
This first analysis relies on the assumption that the timing of assault within a 10-month
window surrounding the expected month of birth is exogenous to our outcomes of interest.
Put differently, we require that mothers in our treatment and control groups are not selected
in systematically different ways that are correlated with infant health. Evidence from a
study of the determinants of IPV during and after pregnancy by Charles and Perreira (2007)
provides support for this assumption. Using rich longitudinal survey data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS)—which includes detailed information on
parental demographics, family structure, measures of social support, stress, and substance
abuse—they attempt to predict whether violence occurs during pregnancy or postpartum
and find that only one out of 26 predictors is statistically significant.
We examine the plausibility of the identifying assumption in our data as well. Tables
1 and 2 have already shown that mothers and fathers in the treatment and control groups
are similar in terms of their observable characteristics.31 Figure 1 depicts how the number
and composition of births varies with the distance between the month of assault and the
31

We have also checked whether the shares of felony versus misdemeanor assaults differ across our treatment
and control groups, finding no statistically significant differences.

16

conception month. In panel (a), we plot the total number of births in which the first assault
that we observe occurs, from 10 months before conception to 19 months after (months -10
to 19). In panel (b), we predict the main birth outcome index using the maternal, paternal,
and child characteristics included in vector xi (described above), and then plot the mean
of the predicted index by the month of assault relative to conception month. The vertical
red lines separate the figure into observations with assaults pre-pregnancy (months -10 to
-1), assaults during the expected length of pregnancy (months 0 to 9, i.e., our treatment
group), and assaults after the expected month of birth (months 10 to 19, i.e., our main
control group). We find no jumps in either the number or the composition of births at these
markers, suggesting no observable change in selection into our treatment or control groups.
In Appendix Table A.4, we further show that the lack of significant differences in the
observable characteristics of mothers and fathers between the treatment and control groups
holds up when we include borough, conception year, and conception month fixed effects, as
in our main model (2). Specifically, we estimate model (2), using each of the background
characteristics as a dependent variable, and omitting the vector xi . We report the estimates
of β1 from these regressions; out of 19 coefficients in Appendix Table A.4, only two are
marginally significant at the 10% level. We find that mothers and fathers in the treatment
group are less than a year older than mothers and fathers in the control group, a difference
that is unlikely to drive our main effects on infant health. We have also used all of the
characteristics in xi to predict our treatment variable. The p-value from an F -test of the
joint significance of these regressors is 0.92.
The above discussion makes clear that we cannot detect any systematic differences between the treatment and control groups along margins observable in our administrative data.
But one might worry that other factors not recorded in our data—such as parental relationship quality or dynamic patterns in family income or poverty—may vary across women
who experience assault during pregnancy and those who experience assault as new mothers.
Moreover, the likelihood of calling the police when an assault occurs may differ between the
treatment and control groups.
Bindler and Ketel (2019) show that both earnings and government benefit receipt in
the Netherlands are stable in the years leading up to a domestic assault incident, which
reduces concerns about dynamic selection in our study. To further shed light on these
concerns in the U.S. context, we turn to survey data from FFCWS. While the FFCWS
sample is substantially smaller than our linked administrative data set, it includes more
detailed information on parental relationships and evolving family circumstances and does
not rely on reports of IPV to the police. We compare women whose partners initiated IPV
during pregnancy and those whose partners initiated IPV in the first year after childbirth.
17

We find no significant differences in a variety of individual and household measures (e.g.,
baseline relationship status, household composition, and household income). We also find
that the timing of IPV initiation is uncorrelated with factors such as whether the baby
resembles the father, the child’s sex, and changes in the household’s income and poverty
ratio. Appendix D provides more details and presents these results.
In addition, we follow Oster (2017) to provide a lower bound on our estimated treatment
effect after adjusting for selection on unobservable characteristics, and to examine how large
selection on unobservables would have to be to make our estimated treatment effect go to
zero. We further test the robustness of our results to incorporating women who experience
a first assault in the 9 months before conception into the control group.
Difference-in-Difference Model. As a second estimation strategy, we estimate a DD
model, in which we compare the difference between mothers who experience an assault during
pregnancy and those who have one in the months after, relative to the analogous difference
for mothers who experience any other type of crime during those two time periods. For
these analyses, our sample includes all women with any crime in their home in months 0-19
post-conception; i.e., our DD analysis sample is:
S 0 = {i : 1[c ≤ Crime ≤ eb ]i = 1 |1[eb < Crime ≤ eb + 10]i = 1} .
Here, 1[c ≤ Crime ≤ eb ]i = 1 indicates that the crime occurred during the expected length
of the pregnancy, while 1[eb < Crime ≤ eb + 10]i = 1 indicates that it occurred in the 9
following months.
We then estimate the following model on the sample with i ∈ {S 0 }:
yiymr = π0 + π1 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]iymr + π2 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb + 10]iymr
+π3 1[c ≤ Crime ≤ eb ]iymr + ψy + φm + ρr + x0 i δ + εiymr ,

(3)

Thus, we augment model (2) by including separate indicators for assault during months
0-9 post-conception (1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]iymr ), assault during months 0-19 post-conception
(i.e., either during or after pregnancy, 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb + 10]iymr ), and for experiencing
any other crime during months 0-9 post-conception (1[c ≤ Crime ≤ eb ]iymr ). The omitted
category is thus women who experienced some other type of crime in their home during
months 10-19 post-conception. The rest of the variables are as defined in equation (2). We
are interested in the coefficient π1 , which is the estimate of the effect of exposure to assault
during pregnancy, relative to exposure to assault post-pregnancy, and relative to exposure
to any other crime during either period.
18

The DD model allows for there to be differences in the characteristics of women who
report an assault during pregnancy and those who report one in the postpartum period,
but assumes that those differences are similar to the differences between women who report
other crimes across these two time periods. Moreover, this model allows us to separate any
differential effect of assault during pregnancy relative to the effect of exposure to another
crime, such as burglary, which is likely to also be a stressful event. As one indirect test of the
identifying assumptions underlying the DD design, we show results from the DD regression
models with maternal and paternal characteristics as outcomes in Appendix Table A.5. We
observe no systematic differences between mothers who report an assault during versus after
pregnancy relative to the differences between mothers who report other crimes during versus
after pregnancy.
Maternal Fixed Effects Model. In a third estimation strategy, we leverage the maternal
identifiers in our birth records data to link siblings born to the same mother, and use a
maternal fixed effects design. Using a sample of all singleton sibling births by mothers who
reside in single-family homes in The Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens during the first pregnancy,
we estimate:32
yiymk = κ0 + κ1 1[c ≤ Assault ≤ eb ]iymk + ζy + χm + πk + x0 i τ + µiymk

(4)

for each child i, conceived in year y and month m, born to mother k. πk is a maternal fixed
effect, while the vector xi now only includes characteristics that vary within each mother:
maternal and paternal age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for mother
being married, maternal and paternal education dummies (less than high school and no
diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree
or more, missing), paternal race/ethnicity and nativity dummies (to account for possible
different fathers across pregnancies), child parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing), and
birth interval dummies (1st birth, < 12 months from previous birth, 12-24 months from
previous birth, 24-36 months from previous birth, 36-48 months from previous birth, 48+
months from previous birth). The key coefficient of interest, κ1 , is identified using the 451
children of 201 mothers who have at least one pregnancy exposed to an assault, and one
unexposed pregnancy.33 In these models, we cluster standard errors on the mother. The use
of mother fixed effects alleviates concerns about mothers who suffer assault during pregnancy
32
We only condition on residence in The Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens during the first pregnancy since
subsequent mobility may be endogenous.
33
We also include children of mothers who never have an assault during pregnancy (18,107 observations)
and children of mothers who have an assault during every pregnancy (42 observations) to increase power in
identifying the coefficients on the other variables in the regression model.

19

being differentially selected from those who experience assaults in the postpartum period.
One potential issue for the maternal fixed effects model is that that subsequent fertility is
endogenous with respect to exposure to assault, leading to selection into the sibling sample.
However, Appendix Table A.6 demonstrates that experiencing an assault during the first
pregnancy observed in our data is not correlated with either the likelihood of having a
future child or with the total number of subsequent children. Thus, we conclude that our
sample of siblings is not subject to selection bias.
Another concern is that unobservable differences across siblings around the period of
childbirth may be correlated with exposure to assault (e.g., changes in maternal employment
or family structure). To examine this issue, we estimate placebo fixed effects models, in which
we drop mothers who ever experience an assault during pregnancy, and instead use as the
treatment variable an indicator for assault after pregnancy. As we discuss in more detail
below, we find no evidence of a significant correlation between post-pregnancy exposure to
assault and our main outcomes of interest, assuaging concerns about unobservable timevarying factors confounding the maternal fixed effects estimates.

5

Results

Main results. Table 3 summarizes the estimated results for the outcome indices, using our
three empirical strategies. The first row reports results from estimating equation (2) using
the sample with i ∈ {S} defined in Section 4 (i.e., the model that compares mothers who
experience an assault during pregnancy with those who experience one in the postpartum
period). In the second row, we show the treatment coefficient estimate from the DD model,
in which we use mothers who experience any other crime in their home during or after
pregnancy as an additional control group (note that the full set of DD coefficients is presented
in Appendix Table A.7). The final row presents estimates from the maternal fixed effects
model (equation (4)).
Across all three methods, the results indicate that exposure to assault during pregnancy
causes a deterioration in newborn health. Column (1) shows that an assault during pregnancy
is associated with a statistically significant 0.08 SD increase in the severe birth outcome index
in both the “during versus post-pregnancy” and DD models. The effect on the broader
birth outcome index, which includes less extreme outcomes and continuous birth outcome
measures, is a 0.06 to 0.07 SD increase, which is marginally significant at the 10% level
(column 2). The similarity of the results between the assault timing and DD models suggests
that while there is a significant adverse effect of assault during pregnancy on infant health,

20

there appears to be no significant impact of exposure to other crimes.34 As other crimes
are also stressful events but are less likely to involve direct physical harm to the mother
compared to an assault, our evidence of a differential negative impact of exposure to assault
implies that direct physical harm to the mother is an important channel for the estimated
effect on infant health.
The maternal fixed effects results for the severe and broader birth outcome indices in
the third row of Table 3 columns (1) and (2) also show a worsening of newborn health. As
expected, the estimated effect magnitudes are larger in the fixed effects specifications than
in the other two models. Recall that in the first two models, we are comparing assault
during pregnancy to assault postpartum, implying that all of the women in the sample are
likely to be in violent, stressful relationships around the time of childbirth. In the maternal
fixed effects model, we are instead comparing women who were subject to violence during
one pregnancy to themselves at another point in time where they may well have left (or not
yet entered) the violent relationship. Thus, the plausible contrast in violence exposure and
stress between “treatment” and “control” is starker in the maternal fixed effects model.
Panel A of Appendix Table A.8 presents results for the individual birth outcomes based
on the “during versus post-pregnancy” estimation strategy, while Panel A of Appendix Table
A.9 does so for the maternal fixed effects models.35 Using the first method, we find that
the overall rise in the severe birth outcomes index is driven by 1.5 and 2.1 percentage point
increases in the likelihoods of very low birth weight births and low 1-minute Apgar scores,
respectively, which constitute 60.6 and 46.4 percent effects when evaluated at the dependent
variable sample means. While the signs of the treatment coefficients for other outcomes—
very pre-term birth, NICU admission, the presence of abnormal conditions or congenital
anomalies, and death—are also consistent with an adverse effect, they are not individually
statistically significant. In the maternal fixed effects models, while we lose some power
(recall, there are only 451 children of 201 mothers who had one exposed and one unexposed
pregnancy), we nevertheless observe impacts on individual birth outcomes. We find increases
in the rates of very pre-term and low 1-minute Apgar score births (the latter is marginally
significant at the 10% level), as well as a substantial increase in the likelihood of NICU
admission (significant at the 5% level). The coefficient for very low birth weight is likewise
positive and large in the maternal fixed effects model, but not significant at conventional
levels (p-value of 0.15).
34

We have also estimated regression model (2) using a sample of mothers who experience a burglary
instead of an assault in their homes either during or after pregnancy. We do not find any significant effects
of exposure to burglary on our outcome indices. Results available upon request.
35
The results for individual outcomes from the DD models are very similar to those from the “during
versus post-pregnancy” models and available upon request.

21

Mechanisms. To shed some light on the mechanisms driving birth outcomes, we examine
the mother’s use of medical services during pregnancy and delivery in column (3) of Table 3.
Results from the assault timing and DD models (rows 1 and 2) indicate that women with a
reported assault during pregnancy are significantly more likely to use medical services than
their counterparts with a reported assault in the postpartum period. Panel B of Appendix
Table A.8, which shows results for the individual components of the use of medical services
index, suggests that this effect in part operates through a 6.0 percentage point higher likelihood of initiating prenatal care in the first trimester and 0.33 more prenatal care visits
(marginally significant). It is plausible that women who are assaulted early in the pregnancy
may go to the doctor sooner than they otherwise would have to check on the health of the
fetus. This finding suggests that women who experience violence during pregnancy may
engage in compensatory behaviors, making our impacts on birth outcomes lower bounds.
Column (3) of Panel B of Appendix Table A.8 also shows a strong impact on induction of
labor—assault during pregnancy is associated with a 5.6 percentage point increase in the
likelihood of labor being induced, a 25.7 percent rise at the sample mean.
However, when we examine the use of medical services with the maternal fixed effects
specification, we find no statistically significant results (see Panel B of Appendix Table
A.9). It is possible that there is less scope for variation in these outcomes when we examine
differences across pregnancies within the same mother (i.e., a mother who initiates prenatal
care during the first trimester in one pregnancy is also likely to initiate prenatal care at that
time during another pregnancy, regardless of assault exposure).
Column (4) of Table 3 examines mechanisms further by studying impacts on the maternal
behavioral and well-being index. We do not find any significant effects on this aggregate
outcome in any of the models we consider. When examining the individual outcomes in
Panels C of Appendix Tables A.8 and A.9, we only observe a significant coefficient for one
outcome—it appears that women exposed to assault during pregnancy are less likely to
receive WIC benefits.36
36

The decline in WIC take-up could arise for a variety of related reasons. One possibility is that perpetrators of IPV may be engaging in controlling behaviors that limit the choices of their victims. For
more discussion of the role of control in IPV see, for example: http://www.opdv.ny.gov/professionals/
abusers/coercivecontrol.html. Abused women may also fear going to a government program office (e.g.,
a WIC clinic) because of the heightened risk of staff reporting suspicions of abuse and/or the possible reactions of their abusers. In addition, it is possible that the effect on WIC is due to New York’s mandatory
arrest law for domestic violence cases, where police are required to arrest at least one person if they respond
to a domestic violence incident. If the nature of the incident is unclear, then the police may arrest all individuals in the home, including the pregnant woman, who may consequently place less trust in government
programs. Finally, it could be an indication of declining pro-social behaviors resulting from poor mental
health and broader social withdrawal.

22

Timing of effects. In Appendix Figure A.2, we explore differences in impacts across
various periods of exposure using a variant of our first estimation strategy. Here, we include
all mothers with a first assault in the window from 10 months before conception month to 19
months after conception month. The figures show the coefficients and the corresponding 90%
and 95% confidence intervals from event-study models that include separate indicators for
any assault occurring during the following periods: 8-10 months before conception month (“-3
Pre”), 5-7 months before conception month (“-2 Pre”), 1-4 months before conception month
(“-1 Pre”), months 0-2 post-conception (“1 Tri”), months 3-5 post-conception (“2 Tri”),
months 6-9 post-conception (“3 Tri”), months 13-15 post-conception (“2 Post”), and months
16-19 post-conception (“3 Post”). The omitted category is months 10-12 post-conception
(i.e., the 3 months after the expected month of delivery).
The graphs suggest that the impacts on very low birth weight, very pre-term, and low
1-minute Apgar score births, as well as induction of labor, are strongest for assaults in the
3rd trimester of pregnancy. Taken together, these results are indicative of a direct physical
mechanism driving our effects: pregnant victims of assault may be likely to go to the hospital
because of the resulting physical trauma, where they may need to have their labor induced
prematurely and therefore deliver very pre-term and very low birth weight babies.
Addressing additional concerns about selection. As discussed in Section 4, a central
concern about interpreting our estimated effects as causal is about possible differences in
unreported assaults and selection into assault across the treatment and control groups in
our first estimation strategy. We have already presented evidence that the observable characteristics of parents in the treatment and control groups—both in our administrative data
from NYC and survey data from the FFCWS—are statistically indistinguishable. In Panel
A of Appendix Table A.10, we examine the robustness of our estimates to including women
with an observed assault in their home up to 10 months prior to the conception month (i.e.,
before pregnancy). Just like women in the treatment group, these women do not (yet) have
newborn children, and may therefore have similar reporting behaviors. Using this augmented
sample of assaults, we continue to see a significant increase in the summary index of severe
adverse birth outcomes.
Even if we do not observe any evidence of selection on observable characteristics, it
remains possible that our effects are biased due to selection on unobservables. To assess
the magnitude of this bias, we follow Oster (2017) and report a lower bound on our main
treatment effect estimate under the assumption of equal degree of selection on unobservable
and observable variables. We also calculate how large the degree of selection on unobservable
characteristics would have to be to explain away the treatment effect. Columns (1) through
23

(4) of Appendix Table A.11 show that our treatment effect on the severe birth outcome
index is remarkably stable as we include different sets of controls for maternal and paternal
characteristics, and borough fixed effects. We also report two parameters: β, which is a
lower bound on the treatment effect under the assumption of equal degree of selection on
observed and unobserved variables, and δ, the degree of selection on unobservables relative
to observables that would be necessary to get a treatment effect of zero. We find that the
lower bound on the treatment effect for the severe birth outcome index remains positive, and
that selection on unobservables would have to be more than 1.3 times larger than selection
on observables in order to explain away our treatment effect.37 As our δ parameter is greater
than one, our results pass the rule-of-thumb threshold suggested by Oster (2017).
The siblings sample also allows us to do a helpful placebo test, in which we drop all
mothers who ever experienced an assault during pregnancy, and instead estimate maternal
fixed effects models using an indicator for assault in months 10-19 post-conception (i.e.,
after pregnancy) as the treatment variable. If our main fixed effects results were driven by
unobservable differences across siblings around the period of childbirth that are correlated
with exposure to assault (e.g., changes in maternal employment or family structure), then
we would expect to see a significant correlation between assault post-pregnancy and our
pregnancy and birth outcomes. Instead, Appendix Table A.12 shows insignificant treatment
coefficients for both of our birth outcome indices (columns 1 and 2). The magnitudes of the
coefficients are about one sixth of those reported in the analogous columns in Panel C of
Table 3. We do observe a significant correlation with the maternal behavioral and well-being
index in column (4), which suggests positive selection on this set of outcomes. That is, a
negative value means better behaviors in the postpartum assault group, which would tend
to reduce the estimated difference between the effect of assault during pregnancy and the
effect of assault postpartum.
Multi-family homes. Lastly, Panel B of Appendix Table A.10 investigates whether our
results hold when we expand beyond our single-family home analysis sample. Here, we
consider births by mothers who reside in multi-family homes with three floors or less, where
the mother experienced an assault in her building during either months 0-9 post-conception
A central input into the Oster calculation is Rmax , which is the R2 from a hypothetical regression of
the outcome on treatment and both observed and unobserved controls. Oster (2017) proposes two ways
of choosing Rmax . One way is to use the R2 from a within-family regression model. Another way is to
assume that Rmax is equal to 1.3 × R˜2 , where R˜2 is the R2 from the regression with all observable controls
(column 4 in Appendix Table A.11). We use the former method and set Rmax = 0.18, which is the R2 from
our maternal fixed effects model that includes all time-varying maternal and paternal controls (equation
(4)) for the severe birth outcome index as the outcome. If we were to use the latter method, we would set
Rmax = 1.3 × 0.054 = 0.07, obtaining even larger δ and β parameters. Thus, our choice of Rmax = 0.18 is
conservative.
37

24

or the 9 months after the expected month of delivery. The treatment variable in Panel B
is the probability of assault during pregnancy, assuming that the probability is equal to the
number of reported assaults in the building divided by the number of units in the building.
We continue to see an increase in the severe birth outcomes summary index in this larger and
more heterogeneous sample. We also observe a decline in the use of medical services index.
The difference in the use of medical care results between the single- and multi-family home
samples is likely driven by the difference in parental characteristics across the two groups. To
assess this explanation, we have tried re-weighting the multi-family sample to more closely
resemble our primary single-family home analysis sample on observable characteristics, and
estimating our models using the re-weighted data. The resulting coefficients become more
similar to those from our baseline models (results available upon request).

6

Conclusion

Measuring the social cost of crime—and especially violent crime—is crucial for policy debates about the judicial system and programs that impact criminal behavior more broadly.
Existing approaches assume that all of the costs of victimization are fully captured. However,
causal evidence on the effects of violent crime on victims is sparse due to data constraints and
the potential endogeneity of exposure. We break new ground by using linked administrative
data from New York City to deliver new estimates of the effects of assault on an important
segment of the population, newborn children.
We use three different research designs, which rely on novel administrative data that link
birth records for children of mothers living in single-family homes in The Bronx, Brooklyn,
and Queens boroughs of New York City to reported crimes that occur in their homes. In
the first strategy, we compare the birth and pregnancy outcomes of women who have a
reported assault in their home in months 0 through 9 post-conception to those who have an
assault in months 1 through 10 after the estimated due date. We find that assault during
pregnancy leads to increases in the rates of very low birth weight and low 1-minute Apgar
score births of 61 and 46 percent, respectively. The effects appear to be driven by assaults
in the 3rd trimester, for which we also observe an increase in the likelihood of induced labor.
We show that are results are very similar when we instead estimate a DD model, which
compares the difference in outcomes between women who experience an assault in their
homes during pregnancy and in the postpartum period to the difference between women
who experience other types of crimes across these two periods. We also present results
from a third specification, which controls for maternal fixed effects, and thus compares two
pregnancies of the same mother, where one was affected by assault and the other was not.
25

As the control group in the maternal fixed effects model is less likely to be experiencing any
violence (whereas the control groups in the first two specifications are exposed to violence in
the period surrounding childbirth), the point estimates for the effects on infant health from
this third method are larger than those from the first two methods.
What do our findings imply for the measurement of the social cost of crime? We conduct
a back-of-the-envelope calculation, focusing on the estimates of the effect of assault on very
low birth weight births. We consider the best available evidence on costs arising through
six channels: higher rate of infant mortality, increased medical costs at and immediately following birth, increased costs associated with childhood disability, decreases in adult income,
increased medical costs associated with adult disability, and reductions in life expectancy.
This calculation—presented in detail in Table 4 and using the estimates from our first empirical model—generates an average social cost of $36,857 per assault during pregnancy. If
we use the larger maternal fixed effects estimates, we get an average social cost of $85,999.
Appendix Figure A.3 shows that this cost is largely driven by the higher likelihood of infant
mortality and decreased life expectancy among very low birth weight children. We emphasize
that these numbers likely underestimate the full social cost of assault on pregnant women
for at least five reasons: measurement error in our crime data, under-reporting of IPV to
the police, the fact that we do not measure the effects of assault on maternal well-being,
possible compensatory responses on the part of mothers that may reduce the damage to the
fetus from assault, and the fact that women subject to IPV are likely to be living with high
levels of ambient stress, which is also known to affect fetal development.
As noted in Section 2.4, existing work suggests that assaults generate between $16,000
and $90,000 in social costs per victim depending on the methodological approach. However,
we are not aware of any prior attempts to calculate these costs specifically for the population
of newborn infants, whose mothers constitute a shockingly large and vulnerable subgroup of
assault victims. The current methods of evaluating these effects—jury award estimates and
contingent valuation studies—largely focus on costs that manifest immediately at the time
of the violent episode and are not well-suited for incorporating longer-term costs, such as
those resulting from the adverse health and human capital consequences on unborn children.
With an average of 3,177 pregnant women between 2004 and 2012 in New York City suffering
physical abuse, our estimates imply that the total social costs previously unaccounted for
in New York City alone are approximately $117.1 to $273.2 million per year. Across the
United States, we estimate an annual social cost of around $3.78 to $8.82 billion based on
the best available nationwide victimization estimates for pregnant women, and the fact that
there are approximately 3.9 million births per year.38
38

Pooling across all participating states in PRAMS 2011 (AR, CO, DE, GA, HI, MA, MD, ME, MI, MN,

26

Our results imply that interventions that reduce violence against pregnant women can
have meaningful consequences not just for the women (and their partners), but also for
the next generation and society as a whole. Future research exploring the longer-term
consequences of prenatal exposure to assaults on child health and development, as well
as on maternal well-being is indicated.

References
Agan, A. and Starr, S. (2018). Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A Field Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133 (1).
Ahmed, S., Koenig, M. A. and Stephenson, R. (2006). Effects of domestic violence on
perinatal and early-childhood mortality: evidence from north india. American journal of
public health, 96 (8), 1423–1428.
Aizer, A. (2010). The gender wage gap and domestic violence. American Economic Review,
100 (4), 1847–59.
— (2011). Poverty, violence, and health the impact of domestic violence during pregnancy
on newborn health. Journal of Human resources, 46 (3), 518–538.
— and Currie, J. (2014). The intergenerational transmission of inequality: Maternal disadvantage and health at birth. Science, 344 (6186), 856–861.
— and Doyle, J. (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (2).
Almond, D., Currie, J. and Duque, V. (2018). Childhood circumstances and adult
outcomes: Act ii. Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Amaro, H., Friend, L., Cabral, H. and Zucherman, B. (1990). Violence during
pregnancy and substance use. American journal of public health, 80.
Anderson, H., Ploscowe, M., Van Kleeck, M., Winslow, E. and Reid, I. (1931).
Report on the causes of crime. Tech. rep., US Wickersham Commission.
Anderson, W. L., Armour, B. S., Finkelstein, E. A. and Wiener, J. M. (2010).
Estimates of state-level health-care expenditures associated with disability. Pubic Health
Reports, 125 (1).
Bailey, B. A. (2010). Partner violence during pregnancy: prevalence, effects, screening,
and management. International journal of women’s health, 2, 183.
Barker, D. J. (1990). The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. BMJ: British Medical
Journal, 301 (6761), 1111.
Becker, G. (1968). Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach. Journal of Political
Economy, 72 (2).
MO, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OK, OR, and PA), 2.6 percent of respondents reported being physically hurt by
their husband or partner during pregnancy.

27

Belfield, C., Nores, M., Barnett, S. and Schweinhart, L. (2006). The High/Scope
Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Followup.
Journal of Human Resources, 41 (1), 162–190.
Berkowitz, G. S., Wolff, M. S., Janevic, T. M., Holzman, I. R., Yehuda, R.
and Landrigan, P. J. (2003). The world trade center disaster and intrauterine growth
restriction. Jama, 290 (5), 595–596.
Bharadwaj, P., Lundborg, P. and Rooth, D.-O. (2018). Birth Weight in the LongRun. Journal of Human Resources, 53 (1).
Bhuller, M., Dahl, G. B., Løken, K. V. and Mogstad, M. (2016). Incarceration,
recidivism and employment. Working Paper w22648, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Billings, S. B., Deming, D. J. and Rockoff, J. (2014). School segregation, educational
attainment, and crime: Evidence from the end of busing in charlotte-mecklenburg. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (1), 435–476.
—, — and Ross, S. L. (2019). Partners in crime. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 11 (1), 126–50.
Bindler, A. and Ketel, N. (2019). Scaring or scarring? Labour market effects of criminal
victimisation. University of Gothenburg School of Business, Economics and Law Working
Paper in Economics No. 749.
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J. and Salvanes, K. G. (2016). Does grief transfer across
generations? bereavements during pregnancy and child outcomes. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 8 (1).
Bloomberg, M. (2003a). City Policy Concerning Immigrant Access to City Services. Tech.
rep., The City of New York, Office of the Mayor.
— (2003b). City-Wide Privacy Policy and Amendment of Executive Order No. 34 Relating
to City Policy Concerning Immigrant Access to City Services. Tech. rep., The City of New
York, Office of the Mayor.
Bobonis, G. J., González-Brenes, M. and Castro, R. (2013). Public transfers and domestic violence: The roles of private information and spousal control. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 5 (1), 179–205.
Bowlus, A. J. and Seitz, S. (2006). Domestic violence, employment, and divorce. International Economic Review, 47 (4), 1113–1149.
Brown, R. (2013). The mexican drug war and early-life health: The impact of violent crime
on birth outcomes. Demography, pp. 1–22.
Buonanno, P. and Raphael, S. (2013). Incarceration and Incapacitation: Evidence from
the 2006 Italian Collective Pardon. American Economic Review, 103 (6).
Bureau of Justice Statistics (). Number of violent victimizations by victim-offender
relationship, 1993-2016. Generated using the NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool at
www.bjs.gov.
28

Camacho, A. (2008). Stress and birth weight: evidence from terrorist attacks. The American Economic Review, pp. 511–515.
Campbell, J., Garcia-Moreno, C. and Sharps, P. (2004). Abuse during pregnancy in
industrialized and developing countries. Violence Against Women, 10 (7), 770–789.
Campbell, J. C. (2002). Health consequences of intimate partner violence. The Lancet,
359 (9314), 1331–1336.
Card, D. and Dahl, G. B. (2011). Family violence and football: The effect of unexpected
emotional cues on violent behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (1), 103–
143.
Carpenter, C. and Dobkin, C. (2011). The minimum legal drinking age and public
health. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (2).
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2015). Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the Literature.
Journal of Economic Literature, 55 (1).
Chambliss, L. R. (2008). Intimate partner violence and its implication for pregnancy.
Clinical obstetrics and gynecology, 51 (2), 385–397.
Charles, P. and Perreira, K. M. (2007). Intimate partner violence during pregnancy
and 1-year post-partum. Journal of Family Violence, 22 (7), 609–619.
Cohen, M. (2005). The Costs of Crime and Justice. London: Routledge.
Cohen, M. A., Rust, R. T., Steen, S. and Tidd, S. T. (2004). Willingness-to-pay for
crime control programs. Criminology, 42 (1), 89–110.
Coker, A. L., Sanderson, M. and Dong, B. (2004). Partner violence during pregnancy
and risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology, 18 (4),
260–269.
Cokkinides, V. E., Coker, A. L., Sanderson, M., Addy, C. and Bethea, L. (1999).
Physical violence during pregnancy: maternal complications and birth outcomes. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 93 (5), 661–666.
Cook, P. and Ludwig, J. (2000). Gun Violence: The Real Costs. Oxford University Press.
— and MacDonald, J. (2011). Public Safety through Private Action: An Economics
Assessment of BIDS. Economic Journal, 121.
Cunningham, S. and Shah, M. (2017). Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications
for Sexual Violence and Public Health. The Review of Economic Studies, 85 (3), 1683–
1715.
Currie, J. (2011). Inequality at birth: Some causes and consequences. The American Economic Review, 101 (3), 1–22.
— and Almond, D. (2011). Chapter 15: Human capital development before age five. In
O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 4, Part 2, Elsevier, pp. 1315–1486.
29

— and Rossin-Slater, M. (2013). Weathering the storm: Hurricanes and birth outcomes.
Journal of Health Economics, 32 (3), 487 – 503.
— and Tekin, E. (2012). Understanding the Cycle: Childhood Maltreatment and Future
Crime. Journal of Human Resources, 47 (2).
Cutler, D. and Meara, E. (2000). The Technology of Birth: Is It Worth It? In A. Garber
(ed.), Frontiers in Health Policy Research, MIT Press, vol. 3.
Dahl, G. and DellaVigna, S. (2009). Does movie violence increase violent crime?
Quaterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2), 667–734.
Damm, A. P. and Dustmann, C. (2014). Does growing up in a high crime neighborhood
affect youth criminal behavior? American Economic Review, 104 (6), 1806–1832.
Dee, T. S. (2003). Until death do you part: The effects of unilateral divorce on spousal
homicides. Economic Inquiry, 41 (1), 163–182.
Deming, D. (2011). Better schools, less crime? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126.
Desmarais, S. L., Van Dorn, R. A., Johnson, K. L., Grimm, K. J., Douglas, K. S.
and Swartz, M. S. (2014). Community violence perpetration and victimization among
adults with mental illnesses. American journal of public health, 104 (12), 2342–2349.
Devries, K. M., Kishor, S., Johnson, H., Stockl, H., Bacchus, L. J., GarciaMoreno, C. and Watts, C. (2010). Intimate partner violence during pregnancy: analysis of prevalence data from 19 countries. Reproductive Health Matters, 18 (36), 158–170,
pMID: 21111360.
Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D. and Christian, L. M. (2014). Internet, phone, mail, and
mixed-mode surveys: the tailored design method. John Wiley & Sons.
Dobbie, W., Goldin, J. and Yang, C. (2018). The Effects of Pretrial Detention on
Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges.
American Economic Review, 108 (2).
Donohue, J. (2009). The Overall Change Over the Previous Decades and the Benefits on
the Margin. In S. Raphael and M. Stoll (eds.), Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits
and Costs of the Prison Boom, Russell Safe Foundation.
—, Aneja, A. and Weber, K. (2017). Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment using Panel Data and a State-level Synthetic Controls Analysis.
Duncan, B., Mansour, H. and Rees, D. I. (2016). It’s just a game: The super bowl and
low birth weight. Journal of Human Resources, pp. 0615–7213R.
El-Mohandes, A. A., Kiely, M., Gantz, M. G. and El-Khorazaty, M. N. (2011).
Very preterm birth is reduced in women receiving an integrated behavioral intervention:
a randomized controlled trial. Maternal and child health journal, 15 (1), 19–28.
Ellsberg, M., Heise, L., Pena, R., Agurto, S. and Winkvist, A. (2001). Researching
domestic violence against women: methodological and ethical considerations. Studies in
family planning, 32 (1), 1–16.
30

Erlich, I. (1973). Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theorteical and Empirical
Investigation. Journal of Political Economy, 81 (3).
Eskenazi, B., Marks, A. R., Catalano, R., Bruckner, T. and Toniolo, P. G.
(2007). Low birthweight in new york city and upstate new york following the events of
september 11th. Human Reproduction, 22 (11), 3013–3020.
Evans, W. and Owens, E. (2007). COPS and crime. Journal of Public Economics, 91,
181–201.
Farmer, A. and Tiefenthaler, J. (1997). An economic analysis of domestic violence.
Review of Social Economy, 55 (3), 337–358.
Felson, R. B., Messner, S. F., Hoskin, A. W. and Deane, G. (2002). Reasons for
reporting and not reporting domestic violence to the police. Criminology, 40 (3), 617–648.
Freedman, M. and Owens, E. (2011). Low-income housing development and crime. Journal of Urban Economics, 70, 115–131.
Freeman, R. B. (1999). The economics of crime. Handbook of labor economics, 3, 3529–
3571.
Garcia-Moreno, C., Jansen, H., Ellsberg, M., Heise, L. and Watts, C. (2005).
WHO Multi-country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence against Women.
Tech. rep., World Health Organization.
Hack, M., Flannery, D., Schluchter, M., Cartar, L., Borawski, E. and Klein,
N. (2002). Outcomes in young adulthood for very-low-birth-weight infants. The New Engalnd Journal of Medicine, 346 (3).
Halla, M. and Zweimüller, M. (2013). Parental Response to Early Human Capital
Shocks: Evidence from the Chernobyl Accident. Discussion Paper 7968, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA).
Hawken, A. and Kleiman, M. (2009). Managing drug involved probationers with swift and
certain sanctions: Evaluating Hawaii’s HOPE. Tech. rep., National Insitute of Justice.
Heaton, P. (2012). Sunday liquor laws and crime. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 42–52.
Heckman, J. and Masterov, D. (2007). The productivity argument for investing in young
children. Review of Agricultural Economics, 29 (3), 446–493.
Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47 (1),
153–161.
Heller, S. (2014). Summer jobs reduce violence among disadvantaged youth. Science,
346 (6214).
Helton, A. and Snodgrass, S. (1987). Battering during pregnancy; intervention strategies. Birth, 14.
Hidrobo, M. and Fernald, L. (2013). Cash transfers and domestic violence. Journal of
health economics, 32 (1), 304–319.
31

Hjalmarsson, R. (2009). Juvenile Jails: A Path to the Straight and Narrow or to Hardened
Criminality. Journal of Law and Economics, 52.
Hodgson, T. and Meiners, M. (1982). Cost-of-illness methodology: a guide to current
practices and procedures. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, Health and Society, 60 (3).
Jewkes, R. (2002). Intimate partner violence:
359 (9315), 1423–1429.

causes and prevention. The Lancet,

Johnson, J., Haider, F., Ellis, K., Hay, D. and Lindow, S. (2003). The prevalence
of domestic violence in pregnant women. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstretrics
and Gynaecology, 110.
Kiely, M., El-Mohandes, A. A., El-Khorazaty, M. N. and Gantz, M. G. (2010).
An integrated intervention to reduce intimate partner violence in pregnancy: a randomized
trial. Obstetrics and gynecology, 115 (2 Pt 1), 273.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B. and Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects. Econometrica, 75 (1), 83–119.
—, Ludwig, J. and Katz, L. F. (2005). Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120.
Lauderdale, D. S. (2006). Birth outcomes for arabic-named women in california before
and after september 11. Demography, 43 (1), 185–201.
Lauritsen, J. L. and White, N. A. (2001). Putting violence in its place: The influence
of race, ethnicity, gender, and place on the risk for violence. Criminology & Public Policy,
1 (1), 37–60.
Lederman, S. A., Rauh, V., Weiss, L., Stein, J. L., Hoepner, L. A., Becker,
M. and Perera, F. P. (2004). The effects of the world trade center event on birth
outcomes among term deliveries at three lower manhattan hospitals. Environmental Health
Perspectives, pp. 1772–1778.
Lee, C. P., Chertow, G. M. and Zenios, S. A. (2009). An Empiric Estimate of the
Value of Life: Updating the Renal Dialysis Cost-Effectiveness Standard. Value in Health,
12 (1).
Levitt, S. (1996). The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from
Prison OVercrowding Litigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111.
Linden, L. and Rockoff, J. (2008). Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property
values from megan’s laws. American Economic Review, 98 (3).
Lochner, L. and Moretti, E. (2004). The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports. American Economic Review, 94 (1).
Lott, J. (1998). More Guns, Less Crime. University of Chicago Press.
— and Whitley, J. (2001). Safe-storage gun laws: Accidental deaths, suicides, and crime.
Journal of Law and Economics, 44.
32

Lundberg, S. and Pollak, R. A. (1993). Separate spheres bargaining and the marriage
market. Journal of political Economy, 101 (6), 988–1010.
Malzberg, B. (1950). Mental illness and the economic value of a man. Mental Hygiene,
34 (4).
Mansour, H. and Rees, D. I. (2012). Armed conflict and birth weight: Evidence from
the al-aqsa intifada. Journal of Development Economics, 99 (1), 190–199.
Masi, C. M., Hawkley, L. C., Piotrowski, Z. H. and Pickett, K. E. (2007). Neighborhood economic disadvantage, violent crime, group density, and pregnancy outcomes in
a diverse, urban population. Social science & medicine, 65 (12), 2440–2457.
Maston, C. T., Klaus, P. A. and Robinson, J. E. (2011). Criminal Victimization in
the United States, 2008 – Statistical Tables. Tech. rep., Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Matthews, T. J., MacDorman, M. F. and Thoma, M. E. (2015). Infant Mortality
Statistics From the 2013 Period Linked Birth/Infant Death Data Set. Tech. rep., U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System.
McCollister, K., French, M. and Fang, H. (2010). The Cost of Crime to Society: New
Crime-Specific Estimates for Policy and Program Evaluation. Drug Alcohol Dependence,
108 ((1-2)).
McConnell, S. and Glazerman, S. (2001). National Job Corps Study: The Benefits and
Costs of Job Corps. Tech. rep., Mathematica Policy Research.
McFarlane, J., Parker, B., Soeken, K. and Bullock, L. (1992). Assessing for abuse
during pregnancy. JAMA, 267.
Messer, L. C., Kaufman, J. S., Dole, N., Savitz, D. A. and Laraia, B. A. (2006).
Neighborhood crime, deprivation, and preterm birth. Annals of epidemiology, 16 (6), 455–
462.
Metcalfe, A., Lail, P., Ghali, W. A. and Sauve, R. S. (2011). The association
between neighbourhoods and adverse birth outcomes: A systematic review and metaanalysis of multi-level studies. Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology, 25 (3), 236–245.
Miller, A. R. and Segal, C. (2018). Do Female Officers Improve Law Enforcement
Quality? Effects on Crime Reporting and Domestic Violence. The Review of Economic
Studies.
Miller, T. R., Cohen, M. A., Wiersema, B. et al. (1996). Victim costs and consequences: A new look. US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, National
Institute of Justice Washington, DC.
Morgan, R. E. and Kena, G. (2017). Criminal Victmization, 2016. Report NCJ 251150,
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration.

33

Murphy, C. C., Schei, B., Myhr, T. L. and Du Mont, J. (2001). Abuse: a risk
factor for low birth weight? a systematic review and meta-analysis. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 164 (11), 1567–1572.
New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (2008). Intimate
partner violence against women in New York City. Tech. rep.
New York Police Department (2017). Domestic Violence Report: Complaint and Radio Run Statistics involving Domestic Incidents. https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/nypd/
downloads/excel/domestic-violence/dv-complaint-radio-run-annual-2017.xlsx.
New York Police Department (2018). Domestic violence. https://www1.nyc.gov/
site/nypd/services/law-enforcement/domestic-violence.page.
Newberger, E. H., Barkan, S. E., Lieberman, E. S., McCormick, M. C., Yllo,
K., Gary, L. T. and Schechter, S. (1992). Abuse of pregnant women and adverse birth
outcome: current knowledge and implications for practice. Jama, 267 (17), 2370–2372.
NYS Division of Criminal Justice Services (2018). Adult Arrests Disposed: Bronx
County, Kings County and Queens County. Tech. rep., NYS Division of Criminal Justice
Services.
O’Neill, J. (2018). Crime and Enforcement Activity in New York City (Jan 1 - Dec 31,
2017. Tech. rep., New York City Police Department.
Oster, E. (2017). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, pp. 1–18.
Palladino, C. L., Singh, V., Campbell, J., Flynn, H. and Gold, K. (2011). Homicide
and suicide during the perinatal period: findings from the national violent death reporting
system. Obstetrics and gynecology, 118 (5), 1056.
Persson, P. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2018). Family ruptures, stress, and the mental
health of the next generation. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Redcross, C., Millenky, M., Rudd, T. and Levshin, V. (2012). More Than a Job:
Final Results from the Evaluation of the Center for Employment Opportunities (CEO)
Transitional Jobs Program. Tech. rep., MDRC.
Rogowski, J. (1998). Cost-effectiveness of care for very low birth weight infants. Pediatrics,
102 (1).
Sanders, N. J. and Stoecker, C. (2015). Where have all the young men gone? using
sex ratios to measure fetal death rates. Journal of health economics, 41, 30–45.
Santos, C. (2013). Costs of domestic violence: a life satisfaction approach. Fiscal Studies,
34 (3), 391–409.
Sarkar, N. (2008). The impact of intimate partner violence on women’s reproductive health
and pregnancy outcome. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 28 (3), 266–271.
Shamu, S., Abrahams, N., Temmerman, M., Musekiwa, A. and Zarowsky, C.
(2011). A systematic review of african studies on intimate partner violence against pregnant women: Prevalence and risk factors. PLOS ONE, 6 (3), 1–9.
34

Silverman, J. G., Decker, M. R., Reed, E. and Raj, A. (2006). Intimate partner
violence victimization prior to and during pregnancy among women residing in 26 us
states: associations with maternal and neonatal health. American Journal of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, 195 (1), 140–148.
Smith, J., Sharon an Chen, Basile, K., Gilbert, L., Merrick, M., Patel, N.,
Walling, M. and Jain, A. (2017). The National Intimate Partner and Sexuali Violence
Survey (NISVS): 2010-2012 State Report. Tech. rep., National Center for Injury Prevention
and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Soares, R. (2015). Welfare costs of crime and common violence. Journal of Economic
Studies, 42 (1).
Stabile, M. and Allin, S. (2012). The economic costs of childhood disability. The future
of children, 22 (1), 65–96.
Stevenson, B. and Wolfers, J. (2006). Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce
laws and family distress. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1), 267–288.
Straus, M. A., Gelles, R. J. and Steinmetz, S. K. (2017). Behind closed doors:
Violence in the American family. Routledge.
Tauchen, H. V., Witte, A. D. and Long, S. K. (1991). Domestic violence: A nonrandom affair. International Economic Review, pp. 491–511.
Tertilt, M. and Van Den Berg, G. J. (2015). The association between own unemployment and violence victimization among female youths. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie
und Statistik, 235 (4-5), 499–516.
Thaler, R. (1978). A Note on the Value of Crime Contro: Evidence From the Property
Market. Journal of Urban Economics.
Tjaden, P. and Thoennes, N. (2000). Prevalence, Incidence, and Consequences of Violence Against Women: Findings from the National Violence Against Women Survey.
Report, National Institute of Justice and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Torche, F. and Shwed, U. (2015). The hidden costs of war: Exposure to armed conflict
and birth outcomes. Sociological Science, 2, 558–581.
— and Villarreal, A. (2014). Prenatal exposure to violence and birth weight in mexico:
Selectivity, exposure, and behavioral responses. American sociological review, 79 (5), 966–
992.
Valladares, E., Ellsberg, M., Peña, R., Högberg, U. and Persson, L. Å. (2002).
Physical partner abuse during pregnancy: a risk factor for low birth weight in nicaragua.
Obstetrics & Gynecology, 100 (4), 700–705.
Viscusi, W. K. and ALDY, J. (2003). he Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of
Market Estimates Throughout the World. The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.
World Health Organization (2012). Understanding and addressing violence against
women. Tech. rep.

35

Figure 1: Number of Births and Predicted Severe Birth Outcome Index By Month of Assault
Relative to Conception

0

30

Number Births
60
90

120

150

(a) Number of Births

−10

0
10
Month of Assault Relative to Conception

20

−.02

Predicted Birth Outcome Index
0
.02
.04

.06

(b) Predicted Severe Birth Outcomes Index

−10

0
10
Month of Assault Relative to Conception

20

Notes: The top figure plots the total number of births by the month of assault relative to the conception
month. The bottom figure plots mean predicted severe birth outcomes index by the month of assault
relative to the conception month. The predicted severe birth outcomes index is estimated from a regression
of the index on the following characteristics: maternal and paternal age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+,
missing), indicator for mother being married, indicators for maternal and paternal nativity status
(U.S.-born, foreign-born, missing), maternal and paternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white,
Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, other, missing), maternal and paternal education dummies (less than high
school and no diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree
36
or more, missing), indicator for singleton birth, parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing). The vertical red
lines in each graph denote the month of conception and month 9 of pregnancy, respectively.

Table 1: Maternal Characteristics by Any Assault During vs. Post Pregnancy
(1)
No Assault

(2)
Assault-Preg

(3)
Assault-Post

(4)
Diff (2)-(3)

Mother’s Age

29.79

27.01

26.48

0.524∗

Mother’s Age less
than 20

0.0444

0.122

0.140

-0.0184

Mother’s Age 35 or
more

0.238

0.137

0.126

0.0110

Mother Married

0.650

0.355

0.329

0.0252

Mother Non-Hispanic
White

0.308

0.121

0.113

0.00771

Mother Hispanic

0.166

0.256

0.258

-0.00204

Mother Non-Hispanic
Black

0.290

0.488

0.487

0.000334

Mother Non-Hispanic
Asian

0.211

0.108

0.101

0.00655

Mother Foreign-Born

0.532

0.495

0.498

-0.00278

Mother’s Education
Less than HS

0.122

0.269

0.275

-0.00556

Mother’s Education
HS

0.249

0.299

0.295

0.00451

Mother’s Education
Some College

0.273

0.275

0.275

-0.000433

Mother’s Education
College or More

0.355

0.152

0.151

0.00103

Observations

66,659

976

1,069

Notes: Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and
Manhattan with conception years 2004-2012. Column (1) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations where the mother did not experience an assault in either the 10 months post conception month or 10
months post expected delivery months. Column (2) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations
where the mother experienced any assault at her home during 10 months post conception month. Column
(3) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations where the mother experienced any assault at her
home during 10 months post expected delivery month. Column (4) presents the difference between (2) and
(3), where significance levels are denoted as: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

37

Table 2: Paternal Characteristics by Any Assault During vs. Post Pregnancy
(1)
No Assault

(2)
Assault-Preg

(3)
Assault-Post

(4)
Diff (2)-(3)

Father’s Age

33.41

30.83

30.20

0.625

Father’s Age less
than 20

0.0120

0.0379

0.0458

-0.00793

Father’s Age 35 or
more

0.373

0.223

0.224

-0.000213

Father Non-Hispanic
White

0.304

0.110

0.100

0.00954

Father Hispanic

0.137

0.188

0.194

-0.00614

Father Non-Hispanic
Black

0.230

0.337

0.356

-0.0193

Father Non-Hispanic
Asian

0.192

0.102

0.0861

0.0164

Father Foreign-Born

0.530

0.514

0.505

0.00920

Father’s Education
Less than HS

0.107

0.175

0.167

0.00869

Father’s Education
HS

0.261

0.295

0.299

-0.00426

Father’s Education
Some College

0.228

0.183

0.185

-0.00182

Father’s Education
College or More

0.287

0.103

0.108

-0.00409

Father Info Missing

0.0717

0.140

0.135

0.00566

Observations

66,659

976

1,069

Notes: Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and
Manhattan with conception years 2004-2012. Column (1) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations where the mother did not experience an assault in either the 10 months post conception month or 10
months post expected delivery months. Column (2) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations
where the mother experienced any assault at her home during 10 months post conception month. Column
(3) presents mean maternal characteristics for observations where the mother experienced any assault at her
home during 10 months post expected delivery month. Column (4) presents the difference between (2) and
(3), where significance levels are denoted as: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

38

Table 3: Summary of Estimated Effects of Assault During Pregnancy on Summary Index Outcomes
Severe Birth
Outcomes
Index

Broad Birth
Outcomes
Index

Medical
Services
Index

Behavioral/
Wellbeing
Index

During vs. Post Pregnancy Model:

0.077**
[0.036]

0.066*
[0.035]

0.057***
[0.022]

0.025
[0.019]

2,045

Difference-in-Difference Model:

0.077**
[0.036]

0.064*
[0.035]

0.040*
[0.022]

0.032
[0.020]

11,566

Maternal Fixed Effects Model:

0.30**
[0.13]

0.25**
[0.12]

-0.013
[0.063]

0.040
[0.057]

18,600

Research Design

Observations

39

Notes: Each coefficient in each row is from a separate regression. The outcomes are four summary indices: severe birth outcomes index, broad birth
outcomes index, use of medical services index, and a maternal behaviors and well-being index. See text for more details. The sample is limited to
births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012. In the first row, only
observations where the mother experienced an assault at her home during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected
month of delivery are included, while the second row includes mothers who experienced any crimes at their homes during these periods. In the third
row, the sample is limited to singleton sibling births by mothers who resided in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens during the
first pregnancy. In the first two rows, the regressions include controls for the following maternal and paternal characteristics: maternal and paternal
age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for mother being married, indicators for maternal and paternal nativity status (U.S.-born,
foreign-born, missing), maternal and paternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, other, missing), maternal
and paternal education dummies (less than high school and no diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s
degree or more, missing), indicator for singleton birth, parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing). The regressions also control for conception year,
conception month, and borough fixed effects. The third row includes controls for time-varying characteristics only, including birth interval dummies
(see text for more details), conception year, and conception month as well as mother fixed effects. Robust standard errors in the first two rows;
standard errors are clustered on the mother in the third row.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 4: Calculating the Social Cost of Assault on Pregnant Women
Channel

Estimate

Source

(1) Cost due to infant death =
Change in infant mortality per VLBW ×
Cost of infant mortality

$1,068,682
0.206
$5,184,000

Matthews et al. (2015)1
Cutler and Meara (2000)2

(2) Infant medical care cost

$207,739

Rogowski (1998)2

(3) Childhood disability cost =
Change neurosensory disability per VLBW ×
Cost of childhood disability (18 years)

$54,900
0.10
$549,000

Hack et al. (2002)
Stabile and Allin (2012)2

(4) Cost due to reduction in adult income =
Average lifetime income ×
Percent income loss from VLBW

$17,185
$520,753
0.033

American Communities Survey3
Bharadwaj et al. (2018)

(5) Cost of adult disability (medical care) =
Change adult disability per VLBW ×
Cost of adult disability medical care (ages 19 to 67)

$69,822
0.10
$698,220

Hack et al. (2002)
Anderson et al. (2010)2

(6) Cost of long-term mortality risk =
Average change in life expectancy ×
Statistical value of year of life

$1,038,786
11.6
$89,551

Bharadwaj et al. (2018)4
Lee et al. (2009)2

Estimated cost of assault during pregnancy to infants5
During/Post Pregnancy Assault Timing: ∆VLBW × [(1) + (2) + (3) + (4) + (5) + (6)] =
Maternal Fixed Effects Model:
∆VLBW × [(1) + (2) + (3) + (4) + (5) + (6)] =

|

{z

Cost of VLBW

$36,857
$85,999

}

Notes: This table presents the details of our calculation of the social cost of assault on pregnant women. We
use our estimated effects on the likelihood of very low birth weight births from our assault timing model (1.5
percentage points, see Appendix Table A.8) and from the maternal fixed effects model (3.5 percentage points,
see Appendix Table A.9). This adverse infant health outcome is associated with increased costs through numerous channels, including: higher rate of infant mortality, increased medical costs at and immediately following
birth, increased costs associated with childhood disability, decreases in adult income, increased medical costs
associated with adult disability, and reductions in life expectancy.
1 We conservatively assume that in the absence of the assault, the victims would face the infant mortality
risk associated with low birth weight but not very low birth weight babies (i.e., birth weights in the range
1,500-2,499g).
2 Dollar amounts have been inflation adjusted to 2018 values using the US consumer price index.
3 In order to calculate the present discounted value of lifetime earnings, we sum over the distribution of earnings
from ages 16 to 64 in the 2017 American Communities Survey, and assume that earnings are discounted at a
3 percent real rate (i.e., a 5 percent discount rate with 2 percent wage growth) back to age zero.
4 We use the Social Security Administration’s Period Life Table from 2015, and multiply the probability of death
in each year of life following the first year by 2.8 based on the estimate from Bharadwaj et al. (2018). We
exclude the first year to avoid double counting the impacts to infant mortality. We calculate the changes in
life expectancy separately for men (12.3 years) and women (10.9 years), and then average them.
5 ∆V LBW
LBW
= 0.015; ∆V
M at.F E = 0.035
During/P ost

40

Online Appendix — Not for Publication

A

Additional Results

41

Appendix Figure A.1: Trends in Violent Crimes

0

2000000 4000000 6000000 8000000

(a) By Victim-Offender Relationship in the NCVS

1995

2000

2005
Year

2010

Intimates
Well−known/casual acquaintances

2015
Other relatives
Stranger

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

(b) By Type in New York City

2004

2006

2008
Year
Misd. Assault
Homicide

2010

2012

Felony Assault
Robbery

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on the Bureau of Justice Statistics 1993-2016 National Crime
Victimization Survey (panel a) and administrative records from the New York Police Department (panel
b).

42

Appendix Figure A.2: Timing of Effects of Exposure to Assault
(b) Very Pre-Term

0.020

0.020

0.040

0.040

(a) Very Low Birth Weight

0.019

0.008
0.003

−3 Pre −2 Pre −1 Pre

−0.005

1 Tri

2 Tri

3 Tri

95% CI

2 Post

3 Post

−3 Pre −2 Pre −1 Pre

90% CI

1 Tri

2 Tri

3 Tri

95% CI

2 Post

3 Post

90% CI

(d) Induction of Labor

0.063

0.050

0.040

0.100

0.060

(c) Low 1-Min Apgar Score

0.027

0.025

0.021
0.016

0.004
−0.001

2 Tri

95% CI

3 Tri

2 Post

−0.007

−0.012
−0.028

−0.050
−0.100

−0.020

1 Tri

0.002
−0.022

−0.002

−0.008

−3 Pre −2 Pre −1 Pre

0.014

0.000

0.017

0.000

0.020

−0.008
−0.015

−0.020

−0.004

0.004

−0.009

−0.040

0.000
−0.020

0.004

0.003

0.015
0.004

0.000

0.012

0.019

0.017

3 Post

90% CI

−3 Pre −2 Pre −1 Pre

1 Tri

2 Tri

95% CI

3 Tri

2 Post

3 Post

90% CI

Notes: See notes under Table 3 for a description of the sample and control variables. Each graph shows the
coefficients and the corresponding 90 and 95% confidence intervals from event-study models that include
indicators for any assault during the following windows: 8-10 months before conception month (“-3 Pre”),
5-7 months before conception month (“-2 Pre”), 1-4 months before conception month (“-1 Pre”), months
0-2 post-conception (“1 Tri”), months 3-5 post-conception (“2 Tri”), months 6-9 post-conception (“3 Tri”),
months 13-15 post-conception (“2 Post”), and months 16-19 post-conception (“3 Post”). The omitted
cateogry is months 10-12 post-conception (i.e., the 3 months after the expected month of delivery).

43

Appendix Figure A.3: Distribution of the Total Social Cost of Assault by Source

Notes: We estimate the total social cost of assault during pregnancy to infants at $36,857 in 2018 dollars.
See Table 4 for details on this calculation.

44

Appendix Table A.1: Examples of Economic Research Using Social Cost of Crime Estimates

Research Field

Illustrative Studies

Active Labor Market Programs

McConnell and Glazerman (2001); Redcross et al.
(2012); Heller (2014)

Child Development

Belfield et al. (2006); Heckman and Masterov (2007);
Currie and Tekin (2012)

Education

Lochner and Moretti (2004); Deming (2011)

Gun Regulation

Lott (1998); Lott and Whitley (2001); Donohue et al.
(2017)

Justice and Law Enforcement

Levitt (1996); Evans and Owens (2007); Hjalmarsson (2009); Buonanno and Raphael (2013); MuellerSmith (2015); Dobbie et al. (2018)

Media

Dahl and DellaVigna (2009)

Public Health

Carpenter and Dobkin (2011); Heaton (2012)

Urban Policy

Kling et al. (2005); Linden and Rockoff (2008); Cook
and MacDonald (2011); Freedman and Owens (2011)

Notes: Studies listed in this table represent a non-exhaustive sample of economic research that uses social
costs of crime estimates in the analysis.

Appendix Table A.2: Common Estimates of the Social Cost of Crime
Cohen, Miller
and Wiersema
(1996)

Cohen, Rust,
Steen and Tidd
(2004)

Murder
Rape
Robbery
Assault
Burglary
Motor Vehicle Theft
Larceny

$4,980,360
$147,378
$13,552
$15,924
$2,372
$6,268
$627

$12,569,260
$307,105
$300,626
$90,706
$32,395

Study Design

Jury Award

Contingent Valuation

Notes: Estimates have been converted to 2017 dollars.

45

∗

∗
∗

Estimates not calculated in original article.

Appendix Table A.3: Total NYPD Criminal Reports by Crime Type and Offense Level
(2004-2012)

Crime Type

Felony

Offense Level
Misdemeanor
Violation

Total

Drug
Other
Property
Violent

128,248
330,978
1,175,072
644,117

552,351
1,627,416
1,132,586
694,638

1
762,730
0
0

680,600
2,721,124
2,307,658
1,338,755

All Types

2,278,415

4,006,991

762,731

7,048,137

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on administrative records from the New York Police Department.

46

Appendix Table A.4: Association Between Assaults During Pregnancy, Maternal, and Paternal Characteristics, Pregnancy vs.
Postpartum Exposure Sample
A. Maternal Characteristics
(1)
Age

(2)
Mar

(3)
For

(4)
Wh

(5)
Hsp

(6)
Bl

(7)
LowEd

(8)
(9)
(10)
HighEd Any Risk 1st Par

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.525∗ 0.0310 0.000309 0.0113 0.000830 -0.00400 -0.00291 0.00206
[0.291] [0.0216] [0.0228] [0.0146] [0.0198] [0.0226] [0.0226] [0.0225]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

26.73
2045

0.341
2045

0.496
2045

0.117
2045

0.257
2045

0.488
2045

0.569
2045

0.426
2045

0.0199
[0.0218]
0.632
2045

(11)
Sngle

-0.0161 -0.00780
[0.0227] [0.00692]
0.465
2045

0.977
2045

47

B. Paternal Characteristics
(1)
Age

(2)
For

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.674∗ 0.00895
[0.408] [0.0223]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

30.50
1565

0.510
2045

(3)
Wh

(4)
Hsp

(5)
Bl

(6)
LowEd

(7)
(8)
HighEd Missing

0.0121
[0.0140]

-0.00479
[0.0177]

-0.0263
[0.0215]

0.00814
[0.0227]

-0.0145 0.0171
[0.0205] [0.0152]

0.105
2045

0.191
2045

0.347
2045

0.468
2045

0.290
2045

0.137
2045

Notes: Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens with conception years 2004-2012.
Only observations where the mother experienced an assault at her home during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected
month of delivery are included. All regressions include conception year, conception month, and borough fixed effects. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Appendix Table A.5: Association Between Assaults During Pregnancy, Maternal, and Paternal Characteristics, DD Model
A. Maternal Characteristics
(1)
Age
Assault During
Pregnancy

(2)
Mar

(3)
For

(4)
Wh

(5)
Hsp

(6)
Bl

(7)
LowEd

0.304
0.0154 0.00106 -0.0128 0.00739 -0.00212 0.0208
[0.326] [0.0242] [0.0258] [0.0157] [0.0223] [0.0257] [0.0253]

(8)
(9)
(10)
HighEd Any Risk 1st Par
-0.0221
[0.0253]

0.00268
[0.0247]

(11)
Sngle

-0.0314 -0.00562
[0.0258] [0.00826]

Assault During or -2.316∗∗∗ -0.228∗∗∗ -0.0106 -0.145∗∗∗ 0.0604∗∗∗ 0.150∗∗∗ 0.146∗∗∗ -0.148∗∗∗ -0.0146 0.0453∗∗∗ 0.00768
Post Pregnancy
[0.221] [0.0163] [0.0174] [0.0108] [0.0150] [0.0174] [0.0172] [0.0171] [0.0168] [0.0174] [0.00496]
Any Crime During 0.118 0.00743 0.00669 0.00159 -0.000580 -0.00547 -0.00242 0.00253
Pregnancy
[0.135] [0.0104] [0.0105] [0.00861] [0.00822] [0.0103] [0.0106] [0.0106]
Indiv. obs.

10156

10156

10156

10156

10156

10156

10156

10156

(6)
LowEd

(7)
HighEd

(8)
Missing

0.0197
[0.0257]

-0.0228
[0.0231]

0.0202
[0.0173]

0.0178∗
[0.0101]
10156

0.00624 -0.00269
[0.0106] [0.00356]
10156

10156

48

B. Paternal Characteristics
(1)
Age
Assault During
Pregnancy

(2)
For

(3)
Wh

(4)
Hsp

(5)
Bl

0.230 -0.0139 -0.0112 0.0119 -0.0174
[0.458] [0.0253] [0.0150] [0.0200] [0.0247]

Assault During or -2.347∗∗∗ 0.00987 -0.152∗∗∗ 0.0296∗∗ 0.103∗∗∗ 0.0745∗∗∗ -0.156∗∗∗ 0.0319∗∗∗
Post Pregnancy
[0.310] [0.0170] [0.0102] [0.0135] [0.0167] [0.0173] [0.0158] [0.0113]
Any Crime During 0.251
0.0166 0.00467 -0.0141∗ -0.00504 -0.00807 -0.000556 0.00515
Pregnancy
[0.175] [0.0105] [0.00854] [0.00761] [0.00958] [0.0105] [0.0105] [0.00647]
Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

32.14
8466

0.517
10156

0.220
10156

0.162
10156

0.286
10156

0.417
10156

0.411
10156

0.111
10156

Notes: Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens with conception years 2004-2012.
Only observations where the mother experienced a crime at her home during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected
month of delivery are included. All regressions include conception year, conception month, and borough fixed effects. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Appendix Table A.6: Association Between Assault During the First Pregnancy and Subsequent Fertility

Assault During First
Pregnancy
Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

(1)
Any More Kids

(2)
Number Future Kids

-0.000805
[0.0131]

-0.00670
[0.0170]

0.239
49593

0.291
49593

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Sample is limited to first observed births by mothers
who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012.
Controls are the same as in Panel A of Table 3. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

49

Appendix Table A.7: Difference-in-Difference Effects of Assault During Pregnancy on Summary Index Outcomes, Relative to
Any Crime

50

(1)
Severe Birth Out

(2)
Broad Birth Out

(3)
Med Serv

(4)
Behav/Well

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0767∗∗
[0.0360]

0.0643∗
[0.0346]

0.0403∗
[0.0223]

0.0320
[0.0196]

Assault During or
Post Pregnancy

-0.0111
[0.0222]

-0.0123
[0.0218]

0.000177
[0.0157]

-0.0132
[0.0139]

Any Crime During
Pregnancy

0.00912
[0.0133]

0.00621
[0.0131]

0.00651
[0.00920]

-0.00677
[0.00775]

11566

11566

11566

11566

Indiv. obs.

Notes: This table presents the DD coefficients for the four summary index outcomes: severe birth outcomes index, broad birth outcomes index, use
of medical services index, and a maternal behaviors and well-being index. Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in
the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012. Only observations where the mother experienced any crime at her home during
either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected month of delivery are included. Regressions include controls for the following
maternal characteristics: maternal age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for mother being married, indicator for mother being
foreign-born, maternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, other, missing), maternal education dummies (less
than high school and no diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree or more, missing), indicator for
singleton birth, parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing). The regressions also control for conception year, conception month, and borough fixed
effects. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Appendix Table A.8: Effects of Assault During Pregnancy on Individual Outcomes, Pregnancy vs. Postpartum Exposure Strategy
A. Severe Birth Outcomes
(1)
VLBW

(2)
V Pret

(3)
Low 1m Apg

(4)
NICU

(5)
Abn/Con

(6)
Death

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0154∗∗
[0.00732]

0.0136
[0.00922]

0.0214∗∗
[0.00941]

0.0185
[0.0150]

0.0124
[0.0146]

0.00186
[0.00279]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.0254
2045

0.0421
2045

0.0461
2037

0.124
2045

0.116
2000

0.00342
2045

B. Use of Medical Services
(1)
PNC 1Tri

(2)
NVis

(3)
Induc

(4)
Csec

(5)
Compl

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0596∗∗∗
[0.0215]

0.325∗
[0.174]

0.0555∗∗∗
[0.0187]

-0.0101
[0.0210]

-0.0147
[0.0148]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.646
1975

10.05
2010

0.216
2037

0.325
2045

0.120
2040

C. Maternal Behaviors and Well-Being
(1)
Smoke

(2)
Drugs

(3)
Depr

(4)
Low Wgt

(5)
High Wgt

(6)
No WIC

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.00601
[0.00730]

-0.00369
[0.00421]

0.0126
[0.0270]

0.0155
[0.0146]

-0.00992
[0.0190]

0.0443∗∗
[0.0198]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.0284
2042

0.00854
1990

0.272
1178

0.112
2021

0.221
2021

0.361
2036

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate regression. The outcomes in Panel A are indicators
for: very low birth weight, very pre-term birth, low 1-minute APGAR score, NICU admission, any
abnormal conditions or congenital anomalies of the newborn, death. The outcomes in Panel B are:
indicator for any prenatal care, indicator for first trimester prenatal care initiation, number of prenatal
care visits, indicator for induction of labor, indicator for delivery by c-section, indicator for any
complications during labor or delivery. The outcomes in Panel C are indicators for: mother smoking during
pregnancy, mother using illegal drugs during pregnancy, mother being depressed, too low weight gain, too
high weight gain, and no WIC take-up. Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family
homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012. Only observations where the
mother experienced an assault at her home during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months
post expected month of delivery are included. Controls are the same as in Panel A of Table 3. Robust
standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

51

Appendix Table A.9: Effects of Assault During Pregnancy on Individual Outcomes, Maternal
Fixed Effects Model
A. Severe Birth Outcomes
(1)
VLBW

(2)
V Pret

(3)
Low 1m Apg

(4)
NICU

(5)
Abn/Con

(6)
Death

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0352
[0.0244]

0.0568∗∗
[0.0286]

0.0491∗
[0.0275]

0.0722∗∗
[0.0338]

0.0350
[0.0315]

0.0109
[0.00964]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.00973
18599

0.0178
18600

0.0261
18570

0.0704
18600

0.0707
18279

0.00167
18599

B. Use of Medical Services
(1)
PNC 1Tri

(2)
NVis

(3)
Induc

(4)
Csec

(5)
Compl

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.00663
[0.0594]

-0.259
[0.485]

0.000829
[0.0491]

-0.0206
[0.0310]

-0.00622
[0.0387]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.780
18002

10.67
18358

0.178
18566

0.277
18600

0.0957
18558

C. Maternal Behaviors and Well-Being
(1)
Smoke

(2)
Drugs

(3)
Depr

(4)
Low Wgt

(5)
High Wgt

(6)
No WIC

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0128
[0.0235]

0.0000715
[0.000746]

-0.0196
[0.0910]

0.0131
[0.0362]

-0.0605
[0.0436]

0.0895∗
[0.0538]

Dept. var mean
Indiv. obs.

0.0120
18586

0.00181
18217

0.172
11527

0.0858
18481

0.176
18481

0.678
18508

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate regression. See notes under Appendix Table A.8 for
description of the outcomes. The sample is limited to singleton sibling births by mothers who resided in
single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens during the first pregnancy with conception years
2004-2012. Regressions include controls for the following time-varying maternal and paternal
characteristics: maternal and paternal age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for
mother being married, maternal and paternal education dummies (less than high school and no diploma,
high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree or more, missing),
paternal race/ethnicity and nativity dummies (to account for possible different fathers across pregnancies),
child parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing), and birth interval dummies (1st birth, < 12 months from
previous birth, 12-24 months from previous birth, 24-36 months from previous birth, 36-48 months from
previous birth, 48+ months from previous birth). The regressions also control for conception year,
conception month, and mother fixed effects, and the standard errors are clustered on the mother.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

52

Appendix Table A.10: Effects of Assault During Pregnancy on Summary Index Outcomes,
Additional Specifications
A. Include Mothers with Assaults Before Pregnancy
(1)
(2)
Severe Birth Out Broad Birth Out

(3)
Med Serv

(4)
Behav/Well

Assault During
Pregnancy

0.0643∗∗
[0.0324]

0.0512∗
[0.0309]

0.0513∗∗∗
[0.0189]

0.0252
[0.0164]

Indiv. obs.

3074

3074

3074

3074

B. Multi-Family Home Sample
(1)
(2)
Severe Birth Out Broad Birth Out

(3)
Med Serv

(4)
Behav/Well

Prob. of Assault 0.0261∗
During Pregnancy [0.0151]

0.0359∗∗
[0.0154]

-0.0446∗∗∗
[0.0110]

0.00762
[0.0107]

Indiv. obs.

29183

29183

29183

29183

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate regression. The outcomes are four summary
indices: severe birth outcomes index, broad birth outcomes index, use of medical services index, and a
maternal behaviors and well-being index. See text for more details. In Panel A, the sample is limited to
births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception
years 2004-2012, where the mother experienced an assault at her home during either 10 months before the
conception month, 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected month of delivery. In
Panel B, the sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in multi-family homes with 3 floors or less
in the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012, where the mother experienced an
assault in her building during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected month
of delivery (mothers in single-family homes are excluded). The treatment variable in Panel B is the
probability of assault, assuming that the probability is equal to the number of assaults in the 10 months
post conception divided by the number of units in the building. Controls are the same as in Panel A of
Table 3. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

53

Appendix Table A.11: Sensitivity of Estimates to Changing Control Variables, with Oster
(2017) Calculation
Outcome: Severe Birth Outcomes Index

Assault During
Pregnancy
Conception Year & Month FE
Child Characteristics
Maternal Characteristics
Paternal Characteristics
Borough FE
R2
Lower Bound Treatment Effect (β)
Null Effect Selection Ratio (δ)
No. of obs.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.083**
[0.037]

0.083**
[0.037]

0.080**
[0.036]

0.077**
[0.036]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.040
0.031
1.411
2045

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.048
0.044
1.759
2045

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
0.052
0.035
1.556
2045

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.054
0.025
1.361
2045

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression, where the dependent variable is the severe birth
outcomes index. Sample is limited to births by mothers who reside in single-family homes in the Bronx,
Brooklyn, and Queens with conception years 2004-2012. Only observations where the mother experienced
an assault at her home during either 10 months post conception month or 10 months post expected month
of delivery are included. The controls for child characteristics are: indicator for singleton birth and parity
dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd+, missing). The controls for maternal characteristics are: maternal age dummies
(<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing), indicator for mother being married, indicators for maternal nativity
status (U.S.-born, foreign-born, missing), maternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, Hispanic,
non-Hispanic black, other, missing), maternal education dummies (less than high school and no diploma,
high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree or more, missing). The
controls for paternal characteristics are: paternal age dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing),
indicators for paternal nativity status (U.S.-born, foreign-born, missing), paternal race/ethnicity dummies
(non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, other, missing), paternal education dummies (less than
high school and no diploma, high school or GED diploma, some college or associate’s degree, bachelor’s
degree or more, missing). The reported β parameter is a lower bound on the treatment coefficient under
the assumption of equal degree of selection on included control variables in the model and the
unobservables (δ = 1). The reported δ parameter is the ratio of the selection on unobservables to the
selection on included control variables that would be required to obtain a treatment coefficient of zero
(β = 0). The calculation assumes Rmax = 0.18, which is the R2 from our maternal fixed effects model that
includes all time-varying maternal and paternal controls (equation (4)) for the severe birth outcome index
as the outcome. We follow Oster (2017) in using a within-family regression model to choose Rmax . Note
that Oster (2017) also proposes setting Rmax to be equal to 1.3 × R˜2 , where R˜2 is the R2 from the
regression with all observable controls (column 4). If we were to set Rmax = 1.3 × 0.054 = 0.07, we would
obtain larger δ and β parameters, making our choice of Rmax = 0.18 conservative. Robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

54

Appendix Table A.12: Placebo Effects of Assault Post-Pregnancy, Maternal Fixed Effects Model

55

(1)
Severe Birth Out

(2)
Broad Birth Out

(3)
Med Serv

(4)
Behav/Well

Assault Post
Pregnancy

0.0545
[0.126]

0.0480
[0.118]

0.00597
[0.0722]

-0.144∗
[0.0744]

Indiv. obs.

18107

18107

18107

18107

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcomes are four summary indices: birth outcomes index, broad birth outcomes index,
use of medical services index, and a maternal behaviors and well-being index. See text for more details. The sample is limited to singleton sibling
births by mothers who resided in single-family homes in the Bronx, Brooklyn, or Queens during the first pregnancy with conception years 2004-2012,
where mothers who experience an assault in their home during any pregnancy are additionally dropped. Regressions include the same controls as in
Appendix Table A.9. Standard errors are clustered on the mother.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

B

Details on the Data Merge

This section provides details about the merge of the administrative data sets described in Section 3. First, we use the mother’s self-reported residential address from the birth certificate,
and standardize it in the form of the BBL. We rely on a program known as “Geosupport”
(specifically NYCgbat.exe), published by New York City Department of City Planning (NYC
DCP), which is a customized “fuzzy matching” algorithm designed specifically to address
common matching challenges in New York City.39 NYCgbat.exe reads in the recorded street
address along with the borough of residence and returns the BBL on file at NYC DCP for
the address. Once the BBLs are identified, they are then merged back onto the original birth
records data.
The crime data, which also includes latitude and longitude for each event, is mapped
onto BBLs using ArcGIS. Our BBL shapefile is published by NYC DCP, and allows us to
calculate the minimum distance between a crime and the surrounding BBLs. Crimes are
assigned to the nearest BBL.40 The crime and births data are linked using the common
BBL identifier, yielding a data set that matches mothers with crimes that occurred at their
building of residence.
The PLUTO data set is merged in at this stage using the BBL. Since our crime data is
recorded at the building level and does not include an exact apartment number, we cannot
tell whether an assault happened in the mother’s apartment or in another one in the same
building. PLUTO allows us focus our main analysis on single-family homes where this
problem does not arise. We also investigate a larger sample of assaults in multi-family
complexes as a robustness check.

39

The issue at hand is that there are potentially many different spellings for the same street name or
address, which need to be harmonized into one single identifier. Geosupport also accounts for nuances in
address formats in each borough.
40
We use a minimum distance measure to deal with the fact that all crime reports appear geocoded on the
sidewalk in front of a building or residence based on data processing practices at the NYPD, which would
otherwise not be directly mapped to a BBL identifier.

56

C

Comparison of Our Estimates to Data From PRAMS

To determine the degree of bias that may arise from measurement error issues in our data,
we compare our counts of the total number of pregnant women impacted by assaults with
NYC-specific estimates from the Center for Disease Control’s Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Monitoring System (PRAMS). PRAMS starts with the universe of vital statistics natality
records, and then surveys a random sample of new mothers. PRAMS data for 2004 to 2012
suggest that 28,593 NYC mothers suffered physical abuse during pregnancy. Since PRAMS
may include some offenses that were never reported to law enforcement, we could scale this
number down by 0.42, the average reporting rate in the NCVS for violent offenses from a
known offender between 2004 and 2012 (Bureau of Justice Statistics). This scaling would
yield 12,009 reported episodes of abuse among pregnant women from PRAMS.
Appendix Table C.1 shows a variety of scaling factors based on different assumptions
about measurement error. In our data, 25 percent of births were to mothers who resided in
a building with a reported felony or misdemeanor assault during months 0-9 post-conception.
An additional 25 percent of births were to women who lived in a building with a harassment
claim (harassment includes cases of physical altercations that did not result in serious injury,
e.g., a slap, a push, etc.).41 However, these figures dramatically overstate the actual likelihood that someone in the woman’s own home was victimized. Assuming each residential unit
in a building has an equal probability of having an incident of victimization, we can scale the
counts down by the inverse of the number of residential units in each building. This simple
correction results in prevalence rates of 0.011 for felony and misdemeanor assaults and 0.011
for harassment, respectively, which is much closer to estimates in the literature. Remarkably, if we apply this unit-adjustment, and focus only on counts of felony and misdemeanor
assaults, our count is within 250 cases of the 12,009 cases we estimated from PRAMS, under
the assumption of a police reporting rate of 0.42.

41

The PRAMS data does not differentiate by degree of abuse. Harassment charges can also include nonphysical offenses.

57

Appendix Table C.1: Assessing Measurement Error in the Merged Data

Total Affected Pregnancies
Share mismeasured relative to PRAMS baseline
Implied Scaling Factor for Estimates

Types of Crimes included:
Felony Assaults
Misdemeanor Assaults
Criminal Harassment
Reweighted according to # Residential Units in Building

267,241
0.96
22.25

534,482
0.98
44.51

11,759
-0.02
0.98

×
×

×
×
×

×
×

×

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on administrative records from the New York City Department of Hygiene
and Mental Health, the New York Police Department, and the New York City Department of City Planning.
To determine the mismeasurement rate and implied scaling factor, we count all reports of physical abuse
during pregnancy from the PRAMS data between 2004-2012 (28,593) scaled by the average violent crime
reporting rate for known offenders (42%), which gives us a baseline target of 12,009 domestic violence
episodes.

58

D

Supplementary Analysis of Data from the Fragile Families and
Child Wellbeing Study

An important concern for our research design is that our treatment and comparison groups
differ on margins not observable in our administrative data set. To address this concern,
we supplement our analysis with one of the few other data sources that has information on
IPV exposure during pregnancy and in the postpartum period: The Fragile Families and
Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS). FFCWS is a panel survey data set that follows a cohort
of new births in 20 large U.S. cities between 1998 and 2000. Although the survey yields
a much smaller sample size than our administrative data from New York City, FFCWS
oversamples births to unmarried parents, which leads to an increased prevalence rate of domestic violence among respondents. Importantly, FFCWS contains detailed information on
the mothers, as well as their relationships and evolving family circumstances, which helps
us provide a more thorough evaluation of the plausibility of our identifying assumptions.
Specifically, we examine differences in available time-invariant and time-varying characteristics across mothers with exposure to IPV during pregnancy and those with exposure in the
year following childbirth.
Among respondents who completed both the baseline survey and the year one follow-up
survey, 295 (11%) of respondents report some degree of IPV either while pregnant or in the
year following childbirth.42 In Appendix Table D.1, we divide the sample into two groups:
those who report IPV initiation in the baseline survey (“IPV Baseline”) and those who report
IPV initiation in the year one follow-up (“IPV 1-Year”). Note that these groups conform
with the definitions that we use in our main analysis.
Appendix Table D.1 shows that the sample is roughly equally split between mothers
for whom IPV initiated during the baseline (pregnancy) period and those for whom IPV
initiated one year later, which is consistent with the fact that we observe similar levels
of assault initiations in our treatment and comparison groups in the administrative data.
The table also demonstrates balance on a range of fixed baseline characteristics observed in
FFCWS, both factors that we can also measure in the administrative records as well as a
number of additional individual and household characteristics only available in survey data
(e.g., baseline relationship status, household composition, and household income).
Dynamic selection, however, is likely the larger concern given that we show balanced on
fixed maternal characteristics in our main analysis sample. It may be that the determinants
42

We measure this rate through combining several questions from the baseline and year one follow-up
survey. From the mother’s baseline survey, we use questions: B7B, B13B, and B25B. From the mother’s
year one follow-up survey, we use questions: D6H, D6I, D8H, D8I, D9A2, D9A3, E8H, E8I, E9A2, and E9A3.
When questions ask about the frequency of occurrence, we code any positive response as experiencing IPV.

59

of IPV during versus after pregnancy are different, and that these omitted characteristics
evolve over time and directly influence both IPV and birth outcomes. For example, some men
may initiate IPV because of paternity uncertainty, which is amplified once the baby is born
and has a physical resemblance to someone other than the father. Thus, the types of children
exposed to IPV during gestation may be systematically different from those whose mothers
experience IPV postpartum. Another possibility is that changes in household income or
employment could both influence IPV and infant health.
Appendix Table D.2 examines these hypotheses. The first four rows evaluate whether
the resemblance of the baby at baseline and the child’s sex are correlated with the timing
of IPV. The last two rows consider whether changes in the household’s income and poverty
ratio from the baseline survey to the one year follow-up influence the likelihood of post-natal
IPV initiation. The results show only modest differences between those with IPV initiation
during versus post pregnancy in each of these potential dynamic mechanisms. Across all
of the comparisons, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that there is no difference in the
sample means. We conclude that, even if this form of dynamic selection is a factor, it likely
plays only a modest role in the overall determinants of IPV in the household.

60

Appendix Table D.1: Balance on Fixed Baseline Characteristics in the FFCWS Sample
Variable
Race/Ethn. = Hispanic
Race/Ethn. = White, Not Hisp.
Race/Ethn. = Black, Not Hisp.
Age at Birth
Educ. = Less than High School
Educ. = High School
Educ. = Post-Secondary Education
Married
Cohabiting, Not Married
Years knowing father before pregnancy
Total minors in Household
Total adults in Household
Baseline Household Income

Observations

IPV Baseline

IPV 1-Year

Difference

0.350
(0.030)
0.140
(0.020)
0.470
(0.040)
23.98
(0.420)
0.560
(0.040)
0.220
(0.030)
0.230
(0.030)
0.090
(0.020)
0.430
(0.040)
3.720
(0.270)
1.410
(0.090)
2.290
(0.080)
21,185
(1,380)

0.310
(0.030)
0.150
(0.030)
0.530
(0.040)
23.2
(0.360)
0.520
(0.040)
0.230
(0.030)
0.250
(0.030)
0.080
(0.020)
0.490
(0.040)
3.150
(0.230)
1.280
(0.100)
2.270
(0.070)
23,596
(1,672)

-0.040
(0.050)
0.010
(0.040)
0.060
(0.050)
-0.780
(0.550)
-0.040
(0.050)
0.010
(0.040)
0.020
(0.040)
-0.010
(0.030)
0.060
(0.050)
-0.570
(0.360)
-0.130
(0.140)
-0.020
(0.100)
2,411
(2,163)

200

195

* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

61

Appendix Table D.2: Potential IPV response to Birth Characteristics in the Fragile Families
Sample
Variable

IPV Baseline

IPV 1-Year

Difference

0.260
(0.040)
0.570
(0.040)
0.170
(0.030)
0.540
(0.040)
-1,558
(1,380)
-0.260
(0.080)

0.330
(0.040)
0.520
(0.040)
0.150
(0.030)
0.470
(0.040)
-1613
(1,984)
-0.390
(0.120)

0.070
(0.050)
-0.050
(0.060)
-0.020
(0.040)
-0.070
(0.050)
-55
(2,406)
-0.130
(0.140)

200

195

Baby resembles Mother
Baby resembles Father
Baby resembles non-parent
Baby is male
∆ Household Income
∆ Household Poverty Ratio

Observations
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

62

