                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   FINANCING VENTURES

                                       Jeremy Greenwood
                                           Pengfei Han
                                        Juan M. Sanchez

                                       Working Paper 24808
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24808


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2018




Address correspondence to Juan M. Sanchez at vediense@gmail.com. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jeremy Greenwood, Pengfei Han, and Juan M. Sanchez. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financing Ventures
Jeremy Greenwood, Pengfei Han, and Juan M. Sanchez
NBER Working Paper No. 24808
July 2018, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E13,E22,G24,L26,O16,O31,O40

                                             ABSTRACT

The relationship between venture capital and growth is examined using an endogenous growth model
incorporating dynamic contracts between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. At each stage of financing,
venture capitalists evaluate the viability of startups. If viable, venture capitalists provide funding for
the next stage. The success of a project depends on the amount of funding. The model is confronted
with stylized facts about venture capital: viz., statistics for each round of funding that concern the
success rates, failure rates, investment rates, equity shares, and IPO values. Counterfactual experiments
suggest that long-term U.S. growth would drop from 1.8 percent to 1.4-1.5 percent if venture capital
were replaced by more traditional methods of finance. Likewise, it would drop from 1.8 percent to
1.62 percent if VC-funded startups in the United States are taxed at the German rate. The welfare losses
associated with these declines in long-term growth rates are large.


Jeremy Greenwood                                    Juan M. Sanchez
Department of Economics                             Research Department
University of Pennsylvania                          Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Perelman Cntr for Pol Sci and Econ                  One Federal Reserve Bank Plaza
133 South 36th Street                               St. Louis, MO 63102
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297                         sanchez@stls.frb.org
and NBER
do-not-use@jeremygreenwood.net

Pengfei Han
Department of Finance
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
P.R. China
pengfeih@sas.upenn.edu
1    Introduction
      “I think the development of the venture capital system has been an example of some-
      thing which is a successful improvement in risk-bearing. It doesn’t exactly remove the
      risks at the beginning, but at least creates greater rewards at a slightly later stage and
      therefore encourages, say, small companies to engage in technologically risky enter-
      prises. If you like innovation, you expect 50 percent to 60 percent failure. In a sense,
      if you don’t get that, you’re not trying hard enough. Venture capital has done much
      more, I think, to improve e¢ ciency than anything.” Kenneth J. Arrow, The Region,
      December 1995

     Kenneth J. Arrow highlights the role that venture capital (VC) plays in improving the
e¢ ciency of …nancing ventures. Still, not much e¤ort has been devoted in macroeconomics
to incorporating VC into a model with endogenous growth. Such an initiative is crucial for
answering questions such as: (i) What is the contribution of VC to growth beyond more
traditional forms of …nancing? (ii) How does the taxation of the pro…ts from VC a¤ect
growth? (iii) Is VC important for the di¤erences in the growth rates between continental
Europe and the United States? Providing such a model and using it to answer these three
questions is the goal of this paper.
     The importance of venture capital in the U.S. economy has skyrocketed over the past 50
years. Investment by venture capitalists was roughly $303 million in 1970. This soared to $54
billion by 2015 (both numbers are in $2009). The rise in venture capital …nancing is shown in
the right-hand-side panel of Figure 1. While the share of VC funding in total investment is
still relatively small, around 2 percent in 2015, its punch far exceeds its weight. The fraction
of public …rms that have been backed at some time by venture capitalists is now around 20
percent, compared with just 4 percent in 1970–see the left-hand-side panel of Figure 1. (See
the Empirical Appendix for the sources of all data used in the paper.) Such …rms presently
account for about 20 percent of market capitalization. The capitalization line lies below
the fraction-of-…rms line because VC-backed companies tend to be more recent entrants
that are younger and smaller in size, whereas their non-VC-backed counterparts tend to be
established incumbents. Today venture capitalists are signi…cant players in job creation and
technological innovation. Public …rms that were once backed by venture capitalists currently
make up a signi…cant fraction of employment and an even larger share of R&D spending,
as opposed to virtually nothing in 1970, as the left-hand-side panel of Figure 2 makes clear.
The right-hand side of the …gure displays their enormous contribution to the generation of
patents, both in raw and quality-adjusted terms. The employment share of VC-backed …rms

                                                  1
                                      0.25                                                                                              6
                                                                                       Dotcom bubble
                                                    Fraction of Firms      140

                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                            VC-to-Total Investment Ratio, %
                                      0.20                                 120




                                                                                       VC Investment, $bl 2009
                                                                           100                                                          4
                                      0.15




                           Fraction
                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                        3

                                      0.10                                     60
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                               40
                                      0.05
                                                                                                                 Ratio                  1
                                                                               20
                                                       Capitalization
                                      0.00                                                                                              0
                                                                                0

                                             1974     1988     2002     2016        1965                         1980     1995   2010

                                                        Year                                                             Year



Figure 1: The rise of venture capital, 1970 to 2015. The right-hand-side panel shows in-
vestment by venture capitalists. The left-hand-side panel plots both the fraction of public
…rms …nanced by venture capitalists and the share of VC-backed public …rms in market
capitalization.


is far less than the R&D (and patents) share. This is because VC-backed companies are more
R&D intensive than their non-VC-backed counterparts. For instance, Google (a VC-backed
company) has far fewer employees than General Motors (a non-VC-backed company), but
Google invests a lot more in R&D than General Motors.
     The VC industry has been an incubator of numerous technological giants in the informa-
tion and communication technology sector as well as the biotechnology sector, plus an array
of star innovators in the service industry. Former VC-backed …rms are household names.
Table 1 lists the top 30 VC-backed public companies by market capitalization. Figure 3
plots the relative signi…cance of the words “banks” and “venture capital,” as re‡ected by
their usage in English language books. As shown, the term venture capital was virtually
unused in 1930. The relative signi…cance of venture capital vis-à-vis banks has increased
considerably since then.


1.1    What’s done here
So what is the evidence linking VC with …rm growth and technological innovation? VC-
backed public companies have higher R&D-to-sales ratios than their non-VC-backed coun-
terparts. (In the Empirical Appendix–Section 13–some regression analysis is presented es-
tablishing the facts discussed here.) Following an IPO, they also grow faster in terms of
employment and sales. VC-backed companies are embraced as “golden geese” by the in-
vestors. They are valued higher than their non-VC-backed counterparts around the time of


                                                                          2
                             0.12
                                                                                              0.40   0.40                              Quality Adjusted
                                                           Employment
                             0.10                                                             0.35   0.35




                                    Employment, fraction
                                                                                              0.30   0.30
                             0.08




                                                                                                            Patents, Fraction
                                                                              R&D, fraction
                                                                                              0.25   0.25

                             0.06                                                             0.20   0.20

                                                                                              0.15   0.15
                             0.04
                                                                                              0.10   0.10
                                                                   R&D
                             0.02                                                             0.05   0.05
                                                                                                                                         Unadjusted
                                                                                              0.00   0.00
                             0.00
                                      1974                  1988       2002   2016                      1970                    1980    1990   2000   2010
                                                                Year                                                                    Year



Figure 2: The share of VC-backed …rms in employment, R&D spending, and patents. The
data in the left-hand-side panel are from 1970 to 2014, while that in the right-hand-side
panel spans 1973 to 2005.




                                                                     Top 30 VC-Backed Companies
 1    Apple Inc. (2012)                                    11       Amgen Inc. (2014)                                                                        21   Fedex Corp. (2013)
 2    Cisco Systems Inc. (2000)                            12       Yahoo Inc. (1999)                                                                        22   Juniper Networks Inc. (2000)
 3    Microsoft Corp. (1999)                               13       Genentech Inc. (2005)                                                                    23   Nextel Communications Inc. (1999)
 4    Alphabet Inc. (2013)                                 14       Celgene Corp. (2014)                                                                     24   Gap Inc. (1999)
 5    Facebook Inc. (2014)                                 15       Ebay Inc. (2004)                                                                         25   Viacom Inc. (2013)
 6    Oracle Corp. (1999)                                  16       Compaq Computer Corp. (1998)                                                             26   Veritas Software Corp. (1999)
 7    Amazon.Com Inc. (2013)                               17       Starbucks Corp. (2013)                                                                   27   Salesforce.Com Inc. (2013)
 8    Sun Microsystems Inc. (2000)                         18       Micron Technology Inc. (2000)                                                            28   Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc. (2014)
 9    Gilead Sciences Inc. (2014)                          19       Applied Materials Inc. (2000)                                                            29   Adobe Systems Inc. (2014)
 10   Dell Inc. (1998)                                     20       Regeneron Pharmaceuticals (2014)                                                         30   Twitter Inc. (2013)

Table 1: The table shows the top 30 VC-backed companies sorted by their highest market
capitalization as of 2014. These companies are identi…ed by matching …rm names in Ven-
tureXpert and CompuStat. The year when a company hit its highest market value is noted
in parenthesis.




                                                                                                3
                                              120
                                                                                                  240
                                                       Banks
                                                                                    VC
                                              100
                                                                                                  220


                                               80                                                 200




                            Venture Capital
                                                                                                  180




                                                                                                        Banks
                                               60
                                                                                                  160

                                               40
                                                                                                  140

                                               20                                                 120

                                                                                                  100
                                                0
                                                                                                   80
                                                1920   1940    1960          1980        2000   2020
                                                                      Year




Figure 3: Banks and venture capital, 1930-2008. The …gure plots the use of the words
“banks” and “venture capital,” relative to all words in English language books, using the
Google Ngram Viewer. For each series, the value in 2008 is normalized to 100.


an IPO. In addition, VC is a potent apparatus for …nancing technological innovation. VC
funding is positively associated with patenting activity by …rms. Those industries where VC
funding is high tend to have higher levels of employment and sales growth.
    To address the importance of VC in the U.S. economy, an endogenous growth model
where VC …nances innovation is developed. At the heart of the growth model is a dynamic
contract between an entrepreneur and a venture capitalist. The venture capitalist invests
in the entrepreneur’s startup as an active participant. The venture capitalist provides seed
money for initial research. The project then enters a funding-round cycle. At the beginning
of each funding round the venture capitalist evaluates the worthiness of the project. Those
projects that pass the evaluation are given funds for development. The contract is designed
so that it is not in the entrepreneur’s interest to divert funds away from their intended
purpose. The venture capitalist can imperfectly monitor at a cost the entrepreneur’s use
of funds, which helps to ensure incentive compatibility. Those ventures that are successful
during a fund round are ‡oated on the stock market.
    The contract speci…es for each funding round the evaluation strategy to gauge the
project’s worthiness, the amount of VC invested in development, the level of monitoring
to avoid malfeasance, and the shares of each party in the proceeds from a potential IPO.
The agreement is optimal, from both the entrepreneur’s and venture capitalist’s perspectives,
given the economic environment that the two parties work within. The predicted features
of the contract are compared with some stylized facts about venture capital: (i) the success
and failure rates by funding round, (ii) investment by funding round, (iii) the value of an


                                                                      4
IPO by duration of the incubation period, and (iv) the venture capitalist’s share of equity
by funding round. The availability of VC funding-round data gives rise to one of the rare
instances where the predictions of dynamic contract theory can confronted with data.
     Despite the importance of VC, the preponderance of U.S. …rms are not …nanced through
this channel. Hurst and Pugsley (2011) show that the great majority of new businesses do
not to plan to innovate or grow. Only roughly 10 percent of all new businesses reported that
they plan to develop proprietary technology, processes, or procedures in the future (Table 8)
and by the fourth year of their life, only 2.7 percent have or are applying for a patent (Table
6). So, the analysis includes a traditional sector that produces the majority of output using
capital that can be thought of as being …nanced through regular banks.
     How large is the impact of VC on growth? A thought experiment is conducted where
all innovation is …nanced through traditional means of intermediation. The analysis debases
the e¢ ciency of evaluation, development, and monitoring to approximate the e¢ cacy of
traditional methods of …nance. It is found that without VC today’s economic growth would
have dropped from 1.8 to 1.4-1.5 percent.
     How does the tax code a¤ect VC activity? The key participants in a VC partnership
receive the majority of their compensation in the form of stock options and convertible
equity. As such, in the United States they are subject primarily to capital gains taxation.
The analysis examines how innovative activity is a¤ected by the capital gains tax rate. The
rates of taxation on VC-funded startups vary widely across countries and with it so do the
levels of VC activity. The calibrated model matches this cross-country relationship. The
impact that taxes on startup have on growth is then examined. Economic growth would
fall from 1.8 to 1.62 percent, if VC-funded startups in the United States are taxed at the
German rate. This leads to a large drop in welfare.
     Some cross-country evidence is presented illustrating that VC investment is positively
related with economic growth. To highlight the role that venture capital may play in gen-
erating di¤erences in growth across countries, a comparison is undertaken between France
with the United States. Compared to France, faster economic growth in the United States
is primarily attributed to better value-added services provided by the venture capitalists to
develop startups, as well as the lower rate of startup taxation. A question then comes to
mind: Why hasn’t U.S. growth picked up with the arrival of VC. Presumably other things
have changed. On this, it has been suggested that ideas are now harder to harvest. A
thought experiment is presented where ideas were easier to reap in the past, …nance was less
e¢ cient, but economic growth was more or less the same as today. This has the implication
that without VC economic growth would have dropped.


                                              5
1.2    Literature Review
Dynamic contract models have now been used for some time to study consumption/savings
cum e¤ort decisions with moral hazard. An early example is Phelan and Townsend (1991),
with Karaivanov and Townsend (2014) being representative of more recent work. Dynamic
contract frameworks that focus on …rms, and VC in particular, are rarer. Bergemann and
Hege (1998), Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), Cole, Greenwood, and Sanchez (2016) and
Smith and Wang (2006) develop contracting structures that share some similarities with the
one presented here. Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006) and Smith and Wang (2016) model
long-term credit relationships between entrepreneurs and lenders. Lenders cannot monitor
the borrower. These analyses stress the e¢ ciency of long-term contracts. Since they do not
focus on VC, they do not formulate the incubation period where a lender supplies funding
for research and development while evaluating the worthiness of the startup and monitoring
the use of funds.
    In Bergemann and Hege (1998) a venture capitalist also learns about a project’s type,
good or bad, over time. Their research yields some valuable insights about how to model
the VC staging process. Unlike in the current analysis, however, a venture capitalist cannot
invest in evaluating a project in each funding round to learn about its type, good or bad.
As noted by Lerner (1998), the Bergemann and Hege (1998) analysis implies that a venture
capitalist’s belief that a venture is bad must rise over time as the project fails to go to market.
An important real-world feature about stage …nancing is that it permits a venture capitalist
to produce information during a funding round about a project’s worth by evaluating it.
While this evaluation process is costly it allows the venture capitalist to cut bad projects
more speedily ensuring, to quote Lerner (1998, p. 737), that the “lemons ripen faster than
plums.” By investing in this additional information acquisition, the odds that a project is
good can rise over funding rounds. This works to generate an upward-sloping investment
pro…le by funding round, something the Bergemann and Hege (1998) framework does not
yield. While the Bergeman and Hege (1998) model shares features with the current analysis,
their structure is linear in nature. While facilitating analytical results, this renders corner
solutions, which makes the framework impossible to match the U.S. data. (For example, in
their setting investment is either zero or at its assumed upper bound, while monitoring is
only done toward the end of contract.) Also since their analysis is partial equilibrium, it is
silent about the impact of VC on the performance of the economy at large.
    VC is taken to be a competitive industry, as in Bergemann and Hege (1998). It is also
similar to Cole, Greenwood, and Sanchez’s (2016) and Smith and Wang’s (2006) assumption
that …nancial intermediation, more generally, is competitive. This is certainly true today,

                                                6
albeit not historically speaking. According to the National Venture Capital Association,
in 2016 there were 898 VC organizations with average assets under management of $243.6
million. Among these VC organizations, only 68 managed $1 billion or more. In contrast, 334
VC organizations managed $50 million or less. The share of total assets under management
is 14.7 percent for the largest …ve U.S. VC …rms and 2.3 percent for the largest …ve U.S.
VC funds. By comparison, the largest …ve U.S. banks control 44.6 percent of the industry’s
total assets.
    The current analysis is done within the context of an endogenous growth model.1 Cole,
Greenwood, and Sanchez (2016) focus on the impact that …nancial intermediation, more
broadly de…ned, has on cross-country technological adoption and income levels. While Cole,
Greenwood, and Sanchez (2016) adopts a dynamic contracting perspective, it does not focus
on the process of innovation. Consequently, there is no evaluation, developing, or learning
over time about the worth an idea. Additionally, as in virtually all of the dynamic contracting
literature, the details of the contract are not confronted with the data; i.e., it is an implicit
contract. By contrast, here the predictions of the dynamic contract are matched up with
the VC funding-round data, a unique opportunity permitted by the focus on VC. As in
Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood (2016), the current work has a distribution of competitive
…rms operating in general equilibrium. This distribution is continually shifting rightward
with technological progress in the economy. A new entrepreneur decides how far to push his
productivity relative to the frontier; this is somewhat reminiscent of Parente (1994). The
position of the frontier in the current analysis is determined by a classic Romer (1986) type
externality. Early work by Schmitz (1989) develops a model in which endogenous imitative
activity by entrepreneurs is a driver of economic growth. These papers do not focus on
the incubation phase of startups. None of the above papers compares the predictions of
their models with the VC process in the United States. And none of them examines how
innovative activity is a¤ected by the rate of capital gains taxation.
    There is, of course, work on VC that does not take a dynamic contract perspective. Sil-
veira and Wright (2016) build a canonical search model of the process where entrepreneurs
are matched with venture capitalists, something abstracted from here. Upon meeting, the
parties bargain in Nash fashion over each one’s investment and how to split the proceeds.
Jovanovic and Szentes (2013) focus on a setting where the incubation period for a project
is unknown. Unlike entrepreneurs, venture capitalists have deep pockets and can weather
supporting a project over a prolonged period of time, if they so choose. A contract speci-
  1
    As far as the authors know, this is the only dynamic contracting model in a model with endogenous
growth.



                                                 7
…es the initial investment by the venture capitalist and some …xed split of the pro…ts. The
analysis focuses on characterizing and measuring the excess return earned by venture capi-
talists, due to the latters’scarcity. A tractable stylized Schumpeterian model of VC that has
analytical solutions is developed by Opp (2019). He estimates that the welfare bene…ts of
VC are worth 1 to 2 percent of aggregate consumption, despite the fact that VC investment
is highly procyclical, which operates to trim the estimates. In his analysis, entrepreneurs
do not choose how far to launch their endeavor ahead of the pack. Also, the likelihood of
success does not depend on the level of development funding. Since the innovation process
is essentially static, there is no investment over time in learning about the project’s quality.
Given the static nature of R&D investment, he does not model the stage-…nancing process;
i.e., the success rates, failure rates, investment rates, equity shares, and values of an IPO by
funding round. Compared with alternative modeling approaches, a dynamic contract theory
of VC is particularly well suited to decompose VC’s contributions into speci…c channels and
assess their relative importance. As taken up later, such a decomposition exercise sheds light
on why the VC system is prosperous in the United States, whereas it is ailing in continental
Europe.
     Last, the current research also relates to work on the connection between …nancial mar-
kets, on the one hand, and …rm growth and exit, on the other. While the focus here is on the
potential of startups to become leading …rms and to study the dynamics of funding during
the early years, Cooley and Quadrini (2001) study how …nancing can shape the relationship
between …rm age, exit, growth, and size. One signi…cant di¤erence with standard models of
…rm dynamics and …nancing, as in Gomes (2001), is that the current analysis does not allow
for retained earnings to …nance investment; startups don’t have retained earnings yet.
     Similarly, the current work does not allow entrepreneurs to use their savings to …nance
investment. For the type of projects that are of interest here, which are in the incubation
stage (before they have pro…ts) and which also require substantial investment in R&D, this
abstraction seems pertinent. Antunes, Cavalcanti, and Villamil (2008), Buera, Kaboski,
and Shin (2011), Castro, Clementi, and MacDonald (2004), Erosa (2001), Midrigan and
Xu (2014), and Moll (2014) use models of entrepreneurship to analyze the role of …nancial
frictions for economic development. A dynamic contracting analysis will draw di¤erent
policy conclusion than borrowing constraint models. Simple borrowing constraint models
will emphasize the need to provide funding for startups. More sophisticated ones may
also stress the importance of bankruptcy laws. The dynamic contracting model developed
here highlights the need to provide information to investors, say via accounting standards,
expert appraisals, and monitoring, as well as the importance of mentoring for startups.


                                               8
More speci…cally, it stresses the need to: (i) make sure that the money is provided to the
right people (evaluation); (ii) that these people use the funds for their designated purpose
(monitoring); and (iii) to guide them through the startup process (development).


2    The Setting
At the center of the analysis is the interplay between an entrepreneur and a venture capitalist,
which is governed by an incentive-compatible …nancial contract. Entrepreneurs have ideas,
but no money, while venture capitalists have expertise and money, but no ideas. Each period
new entrepreneurs bring ideas of their choosing to a venture capitalist to obtain funding.
The parties sign a partnership agreement that has …nite duration. Most VC enterprises
are operated as partnerships. The share of corporate venture programs in total U.S. VC
investment is low, averaging just 9 percent between 1995 and 2015. Also, corporate VC
faces many of same challenges as VC partnerships; viz., the uncertainty about a project’s
quality, the decision about how much to invest at each stage of the development process
based on limited information, and the moral hazard problem connected with lending.
    At the time the contract is signed, the venture capitalist provides seed money to research
initially the idea. After this initial research is …nished, the project enters a funding-round
cycle that may last for many periods. Some ideas brought by entrepreneurs to the venture
capitalist are good, others are bad. Only a good idea has a payo¤, and even then this might
not happen. Neither party knows whether an idea is good or bad. So, at the beginning
of each funding round the venture capitalist evaluates the project at a cost in an attempt
to detect whether the venture is bad. Bad projects are terminated. Projects that aren’t
known to be bad are given development money. The probability of success within a funding
round is an increasing function of the level of investment in development undertaken by the
entrepreneur. How much of the money the entrepreneur actually uses for development is
private information. The venture capitalist can imperfectly monitor development investment
at a cost in an attempt to detect any malfeasance. When malfeasance is detected, the venture
capitalist drops the venture. If successful, the project will be ‡oated on the stock market or
sold to another …rm, which yields a reward that will be a function of the idea’s type. The
reward is split between the entrepreneur and venture capitalist as speci…ed by the partnership
agreement. Any pro…ts from ‡oating a VC-funded enterprise are subject to capital gains
taxation. All revenue from capital gains taxation is rebated back to the populace in lump-
sum transfer payments. If the project is not successful, then it enters another funding round,
provided the contract has not expired, and the funding cycle goes on. At the time a contract

                                               9
Figure 4: The timing of events within a typical funding round. The research underlying the
idea occurs at the very beginning of the funding cycle, or round 0, and is shown to the left of
generic funding round. A surviving project can be sold for scrap at the end of the contract,
or at the end of round T , as shown to the right of the typical funding round.


expires, an unsuccessful surviving project can be sold by the venture capitalist for scrap.
The timing of events within a generic funding round is shown in Figure 4.
   The analysis focuses on a balanced-growth path. The aggregate level of productivity in
the VC sector is denoted by x, which represents the aggregate state of the economy. Along
a balanced-growth path, x will grow at the gross rate gx > 1 so that

                                          x0 = gx x.

The gross growth rate of aggregate productivity, gx , is an endogenous variable in equilibrium.
It will be a function of the e¢ ciency of the VC system. The gross growth rate in wages,
gw , will be a function of the growth rate of aggregate productivity, gx . The discussion now
proceeds by detailing the stages portrayed in Figure 4.


2.1    The Research Stage–Starting a New Venture
Each period an in‡ow of new entrepreneurs in the amount e approach venture capitalists to
obtain funding for their ideas. An entrepreneur incurs an opportunity cost in the amount
wo to run a project, where w is the wage rate for labor. The component o of this cost
is distributed across potential entrepreneurs according to the non-normalized distribution


                                              10
function, O(o). This distribution function O(o) is assumed to be Pareto so that

                                   O(o) = 1        ( =o) ; with ;    > 0:                 (1)

Only those potential entrepreneurs who expect the payo¤ from a startup to exceed their op-
portunity cost, wo, will approach a venture capitalist for funding. This criterion determines
the number of funded entrepreneurs, e.
    A new entrepreneur is free to choose the type of startup, x, that he wants to develop.
In particular, when deciding on the project, the entrepreneur picks x subject to a research
cost function of the form
                                           x        x
                                    i = R( ) = w( ) = R ;
                                           x        x
where i 0 is the initial investment in researching the project. The entrepreneur can choose
how far ahead the productivity of his …rm, x, is from the average level of productivity in the
VC sector, x. The more ambitious he is, or the higher x is relative to x, the greater will be
the research cost, which rises in convex fashion. The cost of research, R(x=x), rises with the
current level of wages, w, which will be a function of the aggregate state of the economy,
x. One can think about these costs as either being directly in terms of labor, R(x=x)=w, or
indirectly in terms of goods, wR(x=x), which are produced using labor. Both types of costs
rise with the wage rate; at a theoretical level it doesn’t matter.2 This structure provides a
mechanism for endogenous growth in the model.


2.2      The Evaluation Stage
Out of the pool of new entrepreneurs, the fraction will have good ideas, implying that the
fraction 1     have bad ones. The venture capitalist can potentially discover a bad project
by evaluating it. Assume that the venture capitalist can detect within each funding round
a bad project with probability , according to the cost function, E( ; x), where E is an
increasing, convex function in . Speci…cally,

                                                          1
                                     E( ; x) = w(             1) =   E.
                                                      1

The productivity of the evaluation process is governed by E . Note that the marginal cost
of evaluating starts at zero when = 0 and goes to in…nity as approaches 1. The cost of
evaluating rises with the level of wages, w. Again, these costs can be thought of as either
  2
      Footnote 10 discusses this in more detail.



                                                      11
being in terms of labor or in terms of goods. Think about E as capturing the e¢ ciency of
investment in evaluation. Projects that are detected to be bad are thrown out. The purging
of bad projects at the start of the …rst funding round, before any investment has occurred,
can be thought of as the venture capitalist selecting which projects to …nance. Venture
capitalists could of course accidentally reject or terminate good projects; i.e., make type-I
errors.3


2.3     The Development Stage
Ventures that pass the evaluation stage are given development funding. The level of funding
depends upon the common prior (held by the entrepreneur and venture capitalist) that the
project is good, which evolves across funding rounds. The odds of success during a funding
round depend on the entrepreneur’s investment in development. In particular, a probability
of success, , can be secured by undertaking development investment in the amount D( ; x),
where D is an increasing, convex function in . The development cost function D( ; x) is
given the form
                                               1
                               D( ; x) = w(          1) = D .
                                             1
The development cost function D( ; x) has a similar form to that for E( ; x).
   There is also a …xed cost, t , connected with developing a startup project in round t.
This …xed cost rises with the level of wages in the economy. In particular,

                                              t   = w1 gwt   1
                                                                 (t);

where w1 represents the round-1 wage rate and gw > 1 is the gross growth rate in wages
(which will be a function of gx ). Additionally, the …xed cost changes by the round of the
project, as re‡ected by the function (t). The shape of the function (t) will be parameter-
ized using a polynomial that is pinned down from the U.S. VC funding-round data.
   3
     There is no reliable empirical evidence about this notion, so it is not pursued here. But, it would be
simple to introduce it into the analysis by assuming that during the evaluation process the venture capitalist
accidentally purges during a funding round the fraction & of goods projects from its portfolio. That is, the
proportion of good projects dropped is some fraction of the bad ones that are eliminated. This formulation
allows the type-I errors to be related to the scale of evaluation activity. This would not change the analysis
in any material way.




                                                      12
2.4    The Monitoring Stage
The venture capitalist provides in a funding round the amount D( ; x) for development.
The entrepreneur may decide to spend some smaller amount D(e; x) D( ; x) and siphon
o¤ the di¤erence, D( ; x) D(e; x). The entrepreneur uses the di¤erence in funds for
his own consumption–these funds cannot be secreted for investment/savings. By diverting
funds the entrepreneur reduces the odds of success in the current funding round; i.e., e .
The venture capitalist can dissuade this fraud by engaging in monitoring. Assume that
the venture capitalist can pick the odds of detecting fraud in a venture during round t
according to the strictly increasing, convex cost function, Mt ( ; x), where

                                                         1
                            Mt ( ; x) = w1 gwt 1 (           1) =   M;t .
                                                     1

This ‡exible monitoring technology is borrowed from Cole, Greenwood, and Sanchez’s (2016).
It implies that the more the venture capitalist invests in auditing, the higher the odds that
he will detect any irregularities. The cost of monitoring rises with wages in the economy.
Additionally, monitoring costs change by the round of the project, as re‡ected by the term
  M;t ; again, M;t represents the productivity of this auditing process in round t. Presumably,
as the venture capitalist becomes more familiar with the project, M;t will rise with t. This
feature implies that the incentive problem will become less severe over time and helps to
generate an upward-sloping funding pro…le. A polynomial for M;t will be …t to the U.S. VC
funding-round data.
    While motivated by the prototypical costly-state-veri…cation paradigms of Townsend
(1979) and Williamson (1986), the monitoring technology employed here is di¤erent. In
those frameworks, getting monitored is a random variable–in Williamson (1986) only those
entrepreneurs declaring a bad outcome are monitored, while in Townsend (1979) some frac-
tion of such entrepreneurs are. The audit will detect any fraud with certainty. By contrast,
here everybody gets monitored, but the detection of any fraud is a probabilistic event.
Also, as will be discussed, a venture capitalist will always monitor his investment, unlike in
Bergemann and Hege (1998). According to Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2016) and
Lerner (1998), venture capitalists devote a considerable amount of time to overseeing their
investments–this fact is returned to in Section 5.




                                                13
2.5    The Success Stage–Floated Firms
A startup of type x turns into a going concern with productivity x, if successful. A successful
VC-backed …rm produces output, o, according to the production process

                              o = x k l ; with         +    +    = 1;                      (2)

where k and l are the amounts of capital and labor used in production. This structure is
borrowed from Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood (2016). It results in the …rm earning pure
pro…ts that are linear in its productivity, x. The lure of capturing these pro…ts is what
motivates entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Labor is hired at the wage rate, w, and
capital at the rental rate, r. The …rm’s per period net takings are

                          T (x; x) = maxfx k l              rk     wlg
                                          k;l

                                    = x(1                )[( ) ( ) ]1= :                  (P1)
                                                            r w
Clearly, as wages rise, which will be a function of the aggregate state of the economy, x,
net takings will shrink for a given level of the …rm’s productivity, x. Operating …rms last
stochastically in accordance with the time-invariant survival rate, s.
    A successful VC-backed project is sold for I(x; x), either through an IPO or an M&A,
just before production starts. The (gross) reward for a successful IPO is

                                          X
                                          1
                              I(x; x) =         (s )t 1 T (x; gxt 1 x);                    (3)
                                          t=1


where is the market discount factor. If the startup is successful, the entrepreneur must pay
the venture capitalist the amount p. So the entrepreneur will reap the amount I(x; x) p,
which is taxed at the capital gains rate, . If a project is not successful, it moves back to
the evaluation stage, assuming that the contract has not expired. An ongoing project that
has not been successful by the time the contract expires at end of round T can be sold by
the venture capitalist for scrap value. The scrap value for a project in the current period is
 I(x; x), where 0 < < 1.




                                                 14
3     The Financial Contract
The …nancial contract between the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist is cast now. VC
is a competitive industry so the entrepreneur shops around to secure the …nancial contract
with the best terms. Venture capitalists cover the cost of research, evaluation, development,
and monitoring. They raise the money to do this from savers, to whom they promise a gross
rate of return of 1= . There are no pro…ts on VC activity in equilibrium. The pro…ts that
accrue to the entrepreneur are subject to the rate of capital gains taxation, . The analysis
presumes that there is a maximum of T rounds of potential funding. The timing of events
for the contract is shown in Figure 4. The research for the idea is done at the start of the
funding-round cycle or in round zero. At the beginning of a generic funding round, the
venture capitalist evaluates projects and purges the ones that are found to be bad. Good
projects are then given an injection of cash for development. The venture capitalist monitors
the use of these funds. If malfeasance is detected, the project is terminated. Some projects
will be successful. These are ‡oated in the next period on the stock market. The unsuccessful
projects then start another funding round, assuming the number of funding rounds doesn’t
exceed T . At the end of round T , any unsuccessful surviving projects can be sold by the
venture capitalist for scrap.


3.1    The Evolution of Beliefs about Project Type
Let t represent the odds of detecting a bad project in round t and t denote the probability
of success for a good project. Now suppose that a unit measure of new entrepreneurs
approaches a venture capitalist for funding. As the funding rounds progress, the numbers of
good and bad projects will evolve as shown in Table 2. For example, of the entrepreneurs
initially applying for funding, the number will have good projects and 1             will have bad
ones. In round 1 the venture capitalist will evaluate the applicants and eliminate (1           ) 1
bad projects, so that (1     )(1      1 ) bad ones will still remain. Of the good projects, the
number 1 will be successful. So, at the beginning of the second round there will be (1 1 )
good projects in the pool. After the second-round evaluation, (1            )(1    1 )(1    2 ) bad
projects will still be around. Table 2 speci…es how the number of good and bad projects
evolves over funding rounds. As can be seen, the number of good and bad projects in
                                  t 1
funding-round t are given by      j=1 (1     j ) and (1    ) tj=1 (1   j ), respectively.




                                                15
              Evolution of Project                       Types across Funding Rounds
              Round Number good                           Number bad
              1                                           (1   )(1   1)
              2       (1   1)                             (1   )(1   1 )(1   2)
              3       (1   1 )(1 2)                       (1   )(1   1 )(1   2 )(1 3)
                ..           ..                                           ..
                 .            .                                            .
                             t 1                                         t
              t              j=1 (1             j)         (1        )   j=1 (1            j)

Table 2: The table shows how the number of good and bad projects change across funding
rounds assuming that the venture capitalist starts with a unit mass of ventures.


   The odds of a project being good in round t are
                                                                              t 1
                                                                              j=1 (1        j)
               Pr(GoodjRound = t) =                       t 1                                    t
                                                                                                                :    (4)
                                                          j=1 (1         j)   + (1          )    j=1 (1    j)


As time goes by, more and more bad projects are purged from the pool. The number of
goods projects will also fall due to the successes. Thus, the odds of being good can rise
or fall with the funding round, depending on which type of projects are exiting the pool
the fastest, at least theoretically. Without the evaluation technology the odds of a project
being good must decline by funding round, since then j = 0 for all j. By this account,
the venture capitalist should invest less in a startup as funding rounds progress, something
at odds with the data as discussed by Lerner (1998). The introduction of the evaluation
technology admits the possibility that “lemons ripen faster than plums.”


3.2    The Optimal Contract
The optimal contract between the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist will specify for
the length of the relationship: (i) the precision of evaluation, as given by the t ’s; (ii)
the investments in development as re‡ected by the t ’s; (iii) the exactness of monitoring
as measured by the t ’s; and (iv) the payments that an entrepreneur who …nds success in
round t must make to the intermediary, or the pt ’s. The agreement is formulated in sequence
space as opposed to a recursive representation; e.g., Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006). Note
a recursive representation is valid only if it satis…es the underlying sequence-space problem.
The optimal contract is summarized by the outcome of the following maximization problem:

                                                         X
                                                         T
                                                                    t 1                t            t
             C(x; x) =        max          (1        )              j=1 (1        j)       t [I(x; gx x)    pt ];   (P2)
                         f   t ; t ; t ;pt g
                                                         t=1


                                                               16
subject to:

  1. The round-t incentive constraints

                                                                                    t
        Pr(GoodjRound = t)                      (1         )      f        t [I(x; gx x)                 pt ]
                                                 X
                                                 T
                                                               i 1                        i+1 t                   i
                            + (1           t)                  j=t+1 (1              j)                  i [I(x; gx x)              pi ]g
                                                i=t+1

                                                      (1          t )max             D( t )              D(et )
                                                                      et

                            + Pr(GoodjRound = t)                                (1            )     f et [I(x; gxt x)                   pt ]
                                                                       X
                                                                       T
                                                                                     i 1                             i+1 t              i
                                                 + (1           et )                 j=t+1 (1                   j)             i [I(x; gx x)          pi ]g ;
                                                                       i=t+1


                                                                                                                                                           (5)

     for t = 1;    ; T , where Pr(GoodjRound = t) is given by (4);

  2. The round-t limited liability constraints

                                           I(x; gxt x)             pt           0, for t = 1;                        ;T;                                   (6)


  3. The round-0 zero-pro…t condition

         X
         T
               t 1                 t                    T                            T
               j=1 (1         j)         t pt   +       j=1 (1              j)           I(x; gxT x)
         t=1
                  X
                  T
                              t 1                                           t                            t 1
                        [     j=1 (1             j)   + (1             )    j=1 (1                j )]          [D( t ) +           t   + Mt ( t )]
                  t=1
                                X
                                T
                                                                                                                                                 x
                                                t 1                                               t 1                        t 1
                                  [             j=1 (1            j)   + (1               )       j=1 (1              j )]         E( t )      R( ) = 0:
                                   t=1
                                                                                                                                                 x

                                                                                                                                                           (7)

    The objective function in (P2) re‡ects the fact that VC is a competitive industry. A
contract must maximize the expected return for the entrepreneur, subject to the two con-
straints (5) and (7). The term I(x; gxt x) pt gives the payo¤ to the entrepreneur should
the enterprise be ‡oated in round t. The payo¤ could come from executing stock options or

                                                                           17
convertible shares. It is taxed at the capital gains rate, . The maximized value of objective
function, C(x; x), speci…es the worth of the …nancial contract for the entrepreneur. This
expected discounted payo¤ is a function of the entrepreneur’s idea, x.
    Equation (5) is the incentive compatibility constraint for a round-t project. The left-
hand side gives the expected return to the entrepreneur when he undertakes the level of
development investment linked with t . The term Pr(GoodjRound = t) represents the
Bayesian odds of having a good project at the beginning of round t, conditional on the
entrepreneur still dealing with the venture capitalist. The right-hand side gives the return
when the entrepreneur deviates and picks the level of development linked with et . The level
of development represented by et maximizes the value of the deviation. The return from
deviating will only materialize if the entrepreneur is not caught cheating, which has the odds
1     t ; if caught cheating, which occurs with probability t , then the contract is terminated
and the entrepreneur receives nothing.
    The incentive constraint has a dynamic element to it. If the entrepreneur invests less in
development today, he lowers the odds that a good project will be successful in the current
period. He increases the probability that a success, if it happens, will occur in the future;
thus, an intertemporal tradeo¤ is involved. It is established in the Theory Appendix that
the solution to the above problem using the one-shot incentive constraint (5) is equivalent
to formulating a more general problem that uses a single consolidated round-0 incentive
constraint where multi-shot deviations are allowed and that takes into account how each
deviation a¤ects the probability of success in the future–Lemmas 3 and 4.
    The limited liability constraint for the entrepreneur in round t is given by equation
(6)The venture capitalist cannot take more than the ‡otation value of the startup. The last
equation, or (7), is the zero-pro…t constraint. The …rst two terms are the expected present
value of the cash that the venture capitalist expects to receive. This includes any scrap
value. The remaining terms are the venture capitalist’s expected costs. Observe that there
is a …xed cost, t , connected with operating a startup project in round t. Last, the venture
capitalist must cover the initial research cost, R(x=x). Since VC is a competitive industry,
the expected present value of the cash in‡ow exactly o¤sets the expected present value of
the cash out‡ow.
    Now, it is easy to see that the ability of the venture capitalist to monitor the entrepreneur
is important. Focus on the incentive constraint (5). If t = 1, say because the cost of
monitoring is zero, then the left-hand side of the constraint will always exceed the right-
hand side. This transpires no matter what the solution for et is, as dictated by the right-
hand side of (5). In this situation, the …rst-best solution to problem (P2) can be obtained.


                                               18
Alternatively, suppose t = 0, because the cost of monitoring is in…nite. Then, the incentive-
compatible contract speci…es that t = et . To see this, pull the D( t ) term over onto the
left-hand side of (5). Note that the terms on the left- and right-hand sides are then the same,
except that they involve t on the left and et on the right. But et maximizes the right-hand
side, implying that the right-hand side must then equal the left-hand side. This can only be
the case if t = et , which greatly limits the contract and may result in an allocation far from
…rst-best. If the incentive constraint binds tightly (i.e., if it’s Lagrange multiplier is positive)
then monitoring is always done. Suppose not. Then the venture capitalist could increase
monitoring slightly. This would increase the value of the Lagrangian, since the multiplier
is positive. But, it would have no impact on the zero-pro…t condition because the marginal
cost of monitoring is zero. Hence, doing no monitoring cannot be optimal when the incentive
constraint binds.

Lemma 1 (Always monitor) If the incentive constraint (5) holds tightly, then 0 <            t   < 1.

Remark 1 The incentive constraint always binds in the numerical analysis. funding rounds
with 0 < t < 1.

Remark 2 (Self …nancing) If an entrepreneur has any funds, he should invest them all.
This does not change the generic form of the contract problem. The entrepreneur’s funds
can merely be subtracted from the expected present value of the …xed costs, or the t ’s, in
(7). (See Cole, Greenwood, and Sanchez (2016, Lemmas 1 and 6)). What matters is how
much the entrepreneur borrows, net of his own investment. The entrepreneur’s funds can be
incorporated in problem (P2) by simply transforming the …xed costs.


3.3    The Choice of Idea
The entrepreneur is free to pick the type of venture, x, that he pitches to the venture
capitalist. He selects the one that maximizes his expected discounted pro…ts. Therefore, x
will solve
                                    V (x) = max C(x; x);                             (P3)
                                                 x

where the value of the entrepreneur’s contract, or C(x; x), is speci…ed by problem (P2). The
shape of the C(x; x) function determines the value of x picked by the entrepreneur. So if
better intermediation increases the marginal return from x, then VC will increase growth.
Note that the cost of researching x, or R(x=x), is embedded in the zero-pro…t condition (7)



                                                19
connected with problem (P2). This problem will give a decision rule of the form

                                       x = X(x)x:

The function V (x) gives an entrepreneur’s expected discounted payo¤ from a startup.


4     General Equilibrium
Attention is now directed to formulating the model’s general equilibrium. To embed the
partial equilibrium analysis into a general equilibrium setting, the in‡ow of new startups
is pinned down and a non-VC-funded sector is introduced. There exists a balanced-growth
path in this endogenous growth framework and the key features of the balanced growth path
are detailed at the end of this section.


4.1    The In‡ow of New Startups
Recall that an entrepreneur incurs an opportunity cost in the amount wo to run a project.
Therefore, only those new entrepreneurs with wo V (x) will choose to engage in a startup.
Now, o is distributed according to the cumulative distribution function O(o). Therefore,
O(V (x)=w) entrepreneurs will approach the venture capitalist for funding. Consequently,
the number of new entrants, e, is given by

                                     e = O(V (x)=w).                                   (8)


4.2    The Non-VC-Funded Sector
Most …rms are not funded by venture capitalists. To capture this, suppose there are always
m …rms operating that were not funded by VC. All …rms in the non-VC-funded sector are
same. These non-VC-funded …rms produce using a production function that is identical to
a VC-funded …rm with one exception: their productivity di¤ers. Speci…cally, they produce
in line with
                            o = z k l ; with + + = 1;

where z represents their productivity. Suppose that

                                   z = !x, with ! < 1.



                                           20
Thus, …rms in the non-VC-funded segment of the economy are on average less productive
than the ones in the VC segment, but will be dragged along by the latter. Average produc-
tivity in the VC sector is de…ned in Section 4.3. For more micro-founded theories about how
ideas di¤use through an economy (either by buying or imitating them) see Akcigit, Celik,
and Greenwood (2016), Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994), Lucas and Moll (2014), and Perla
and Tonetti (2014). The non-VC-funded …rm’s pro…t maximization problem is

                                       maxfz k l         rk    wlg:                                     (9)
                                         k;l


One can think about these …rms as raising the funds for capital through traditional inter-
mediation at the gross interest rate 1= . VC-funded …rms also raise capital this way after
they are ‡oated.
    The assumption that non-VC-funded …rms do not innovate technologically is probably
not a great violation of reality. Again, the great majority of new businesses do not to plan
to innovate or grow, as discussed by Hurst and Pugsley (2011). Electricians, landscapers,
and restaurants exemplify such …rms. Akcigit et al (2019) calculate from the U.S. data that
26 percent of VC-funded startups make into the top 10 percent of all startups ten years after
receiving …rst VC funding. This compares with only 3.5 percent of non-VC-funded startups.
Furthermore, even when making it into the top 10 percent, the patenting levels of non-VC-
funded startups are only 20 percent of the VC-funded ones. Startups that lie in the bottom
90 percent of …rms do relatively little patenting. Their patenting levels are only 4.3 percent
of the VC-funded …rms that make into it into the top 10 percent. In fact, Akcigit et al (2019)
estimate that such …rms contribute negatively to the growth in aggregate TFP; speci…cally,
they have TFP levels 10 years after startup that are below aggregate TFP at the time of their
inception (ten years previously). There is relatively little technological innovation in large
swaths of the economy, such as food (NAICS code: 311), beverage and tobacco products
(NAICS code: 312), paper manufacturing (NAICS code: 322), printing and related support
activities sector (NAICS 323), inter alia.4 Additionally incumbents, even in technologically
innovative sectors, rely on VC-funded startups. They acquire ideas from startups by buying
patents, striking licensing agreements, and increasingly through mergers and acquisitions–as
well as just osmosis.5 So, again modelling growth as originating from VC-funded startups,
   4
     To be more speci…c, the number of patents per 1,000 employees is 0.65 in the food industry, 1.71 in the
beverage and tobacco products industry, and 2.14 in the paper manufacturing, printing and related support
activities sector. Source: Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Patent and Trademark O¢ ce. 2016.
“Intellectual Property and the U.S. Economy: 2016 Update” (Table A1, p. 33).
   5
     For example, Cisco(a prominent VC-backed startup founded in 1984) was a pioneer in the novel tech-
nology of local area network (LAN) when it was founded. Over time, however, Cisco has substantially cut


                                                    21
while a simpli…cation, is not a great departure from the real world. Section 6 asks what
would happens if innovation was instead underwritten by more traditional forms of …nance.


4.3     Balanced Growth
The analysis focuses on analyzing a balanced-growth path for the model. Along a balanced-
growth path, the rental rate on capital, r, is some …xed number. In particular, the rental
rate on capital will be
                                       r = 1=     d;                                  (10)

where is the market discount factor and d is the depreciation factor on capital. In balanced
growth, the market discount factor, , is given by

                                                       = bgw " ;                                        (11)

where b is the representative agent’s discount factor and " denotes his coe¢ cient of relative
risk aversion.6
    The idea distribution for VC-backed …rms will now be characterized. To this end, let
nt represent the number of VC-backed …rms that are operating with an idea, x t , that was
generated t periods ago. Attention will now be turned to specifying the number nt . Now, no
…rms will operate in the VC-backed sector with productivity level x, since this type is not
operational yet. Each period, e new entrepreneurs will be funded by the venture capitalist.
Hence, n1 = e 1 …rms will operate with an idea generated one period ago, x 1 . Likewise,
there will be n2 = e 1 s + e (1    1 ) 2 …rms operating with a two-period-old idea, x 2 . So,
the number of …rms operating with an idea, x t , from t T periods ago is

                                   X
                                   t
                                         i 1                  t i
                          nt = e         j=1 (1         j ) is    ;   for t = 1;   ; T:                 (12)
                                   i=1

its in-house R&D. Instead, its technological progress relies on acquiring other promising startups. Cisco had
acquired 149 companies by 2011. Instead of creating innovations by itself, Microsoft acquired Forethought
(creator of PowerPoint) and Skype Limited, Facebook acquired Instagram and WhatsApp, so on and so
forth.
    6
      That is, in the background there is a representative consumer/worker who inelastically supplies one
unit of labor and has a utility function (in period 1) of the form
                                            1
                                            X
                                                  bt   1 1
                                                        ct    =(1     );
                                            t=1

where ct is his period-t consumption.



                                                         22
The venture capitalist only funds entrepreneurs for T periods. Consequently, the number of
operational …rms with an idea from more than T periods ago is

                                             nT +j = sj nT ; for j         1.                    (13)

The total number of operational VC-backed …rms, n, is given by

                                       X
                                       T             X
                                                     1              X
                                                                    T
                                                                                  nT s
                                 n=          nt +            nt =         nt +         :
                                       t=1          t=T +1          t=1
                                                                                 1 s

In a stationary equilibrium the distribution function over VC-funded …rms using an age-t
idea will remain constant; that is, n0t = nt . It is easy to see from (12) that this will be true
provided that e and the i ’s are constant.
   In balanced growth the wage rate, w, will grow at some constant gross rate, gw . To
determine this growth rate, note that a VC-funded …rm with productivity level x will hire
labor in the amount
                                                             =        ( + )=
                                     l(x; w) =                                   x;              (14)
                                                      r          w
where again w and r are the current wage and rental rates, respectively. For a non-VC-
funded …rm, just replace the x with a z in the above formula. In general equilibrium, the
labor market must clear each period. Suppose that there is one unit of labor available
in aggregate. To calculate the aggregate demand for labor, sum over all operating …rms’
demands for labor, both in the VC- and non-VC-backed sectors. Equilibrium in the labor
market requires that

                        X
                        T                           X
                                                    1
                                nt l(x t ; w) +            nt l(x t ; w) + ml(z; w) = 1,
                         t=1                      t=T +1


where m is the measure of …rms in the non-VC-funded sector. Along a balanced-growth
path, the productivity of the latest idea will grow at rate gx . Therefore, the above condition
can be recast as

                X
                T                                 X
                                                  1
                                    1 t
                       nt l(x    1 gx ; w)   +            nt l(x 1 gx1 t ; w) + ml(!x; w) = 1:
                 t=1                             t=T +1




                                                           23
Using equations (13) and (14), this can be expressed as

                         =                ( + )=            XT
                                                                                      nT sgx T
                                                      [x 1 (   nt gx1        t
                                                                                 +             ) + m!x] = 1:
                   r                 w                        t=1
                                                                                     1 (s=gx )

     The solution for wages, w, obtained from the above labor-market clearing condition, is

                                         =( + )         XT
                                                                             nT sgx T
                 w=                               [x 1 (   nt gx1        t
                                                                             +        ) + m!x]                           =( + )
                                                                                                                                  ;         (15)
                                 r                          t=1
                                                                            1 (s=gx )
                                                  |                      {z           }
                                                                     =nx


where aggregate productivity in the VC sector, x, is
             P                                                                          PT
        x 1 [ Tt=1 nt gx1    t
                                 + nT sgx T =(1              (s=gx )]            x 1[          t=1     nt gx1   t
                                                                                                                    + nT sgx T =(1    (s=gx )]
 x               PT                                                      =                                                                       :
                       t=1   nt + nT s=(1              s)                                                             n

As can be seen, wages rise with the aggregate state of the economy, x, which grows at rate
                                                           =( + )
gx . Therefore, wages will grow at the gross growth rate gx       , so that

                                                       w0
                                                                  gw = gx=(          + )
                                                                                           :
                                                       w
    Attention is now turned to determining the growth rate in aggregate productivity, gx .
All new entrepreneurs will pick the same type of project, x. Now

                                                        gx = x0 =x = x0 =x:

Recall that
                                                              x = X(x)x,

and
                                                        X
                                                        T
                                                                            nT sgx T
                                          x = x 1[            nt gx1 t   +           ]=n:
                                                        t=1
                                                                           1 (s=gx )
Therefore,
                             x    X(x)x        X T
                                                                                                        nT sgx T
                       gx =     =       = X(x)[     nt gx1                                     t
                                                                                                   +             ]=n:                       (16)
                            x 1    x 1          t=1
                                                                                                       1 (s=gx )
This is a nonlinear equation in gx .
   It is easy to see that the aggregate capital stock and output grow at the same rate as


                                                                    24
wages. The demand for capital by a type-x VC-backed …rm is

                                  k(x; w) = ( )(1    )=
                                                          ( )   =
                                                                    x:
                                             r             w
From this it is easy to deduce that k(g x x; gw w) = gw k(x; w). The same is true for a non-
VC-backed …rms; just replace x with z to get k(g x z; gw w) = gw k(z; w). Let the aggregate
capital stock in the current period be represented by k and that for next period by k0 . Then
      P                                                   P1
k0 = 1   t=1 nt k(gx x t ; gw w) + mk(g x z; gw w) = gw [  t=1 nt k(x t ; w) + mk(z; w)] = gw k, so
that the aggregate capital stock grows at gross rate gw . A similar argument can be used to
show that aggregate output grows at the same rate.

De…nition (Balanced-Growth Path) For a given subjective discount factor and coe¢ cient
of relative risk aversion, b and ", a balanced-growth path consists of (i) a …nancial contract,
f t ; t ; t ; pt g; between entrepreneurs and the venture capitalist; (ii) a set of labor inputs for
VC- and non-VC-funded …rms, l(x; w) and l(z; w); (iii) values for the contract, an IPO,
and a startup, C(x; x), I(x; x), and V (x); (iv) a project type, x, for new entrepreneurs; (v)
an in‡ow of new entrepreneurs, e; (vi) a rental rate for capital, r, and a market discount
factor, ; (vii) an idea distribution for VC-funded …rms, fnt g1    t=1 ; (viii) a wage rate, w; and
(ix) a gross growth rate of aggregate productivity, gx , such that:

   1. The …nancial contract, fpt ; t ; t ; t g, solves problem (P2), given the function I(x; x)
      and x, gx , and x. The solution to this problem gives the expected return to a new
      entrepreneur from the contract, C(x; x).

   2. The VC-funded …rm maximizes its pro…ts, given x, r; and w, as speci…ed by problem
      (P1). This determines the value of its IPO, I(x; x), as presented in (3). The solution
      to the …rm’s maximization problem gives the rule for hiring labor (14). Analogously,
      a non-VC-funded …rm maximizes its pro…ts, given z, r and w, as speci…ed by problem
      (9).

   3. A new entrepreneur picks the project type, x, to solve problem (P3), given the value of
      the contract, C(x; x), as a function of x and x. This determines the expected value of
      a startup, V (x).

   4. The in‡ow of new entrepreneurs, e, is regulated by (1) and (8), taking as given the
      value of the startup, V (x).

   5. The rental rate on capital, r, and the market discount factor, , are governed by (10)
      and (11), given gw .

   6. The idea distribution for VC-funded …rms, fnt g1
                                                     t=1 , is speci…ed by (12) and (13).


                                                25
    7. The market-clearing wage rate, w, is given by (15) and grows at the gross rate gw =
         =( + )
       gx       .

    8. Aggregate productivity in the VC sector, x, grows at the gross rate gx speci…ed by (16).

        The lemma below establishes that the setup will have a balanced-growth path.7

Lemma 2 (Balanced Growth) Let x0 = gx x and x0 = gx x for all time. If t ; t ; t ; pt
                                                                        0                   0
and C(x; x) solve the contract speci…ed by (P2) for (x; x), then t = t ; 0t = t ; t = t ,
            0
e0t = et , pt = gw pt , and C(x0 ; x0 ) = gw C(x; x) will solve it for (x0 ; x0 ). Likewise, if it is
optimal in (P3) to pick x for x, then it is optimal to choose x0 = gx x for x0 . The gap
between the frontier, x, and average productivity in the VC sector, x, as measured by x=x,
is time invariant. The in‡ow of new entrepreneurs, e, is a constant, so that e0 = e.

Proof. See Theory Appendix.


5         Calibration
VC partnerships are of a limited duration, usually between 7 to 10 years, as discussed in
Historical Appendix 14. So, the analysis assumes that an entrepreneur’s contract with a
venture capitalist has 7 potential funding rounds each lasting 1.5 years. Thus, partnerships
are structured to last at most 10.5 years. The decreasing returns to scale parameter in the
production function (2) is taken from Guner, Ventura, and Xu (2008), which requires setting
  = 0:20. The exponents for the inputs are picked so that capital earns 1/3 of nonpro…t
income and labor receives 2/3. The survival rate of a …rm is selected so that on average a
publicly listed …rm lives 25 years, as in the U.S. economy. The depreciation rate on capital,
1 d, is taken to be 7 percent. Last, Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016) report that the key
    7
     In this setting the output of a …rm along a balanced growth path drops as its productivity falls behind
the frontier. Most VC-…nanced projects are initially a product. If the model is interpreted in this way,
then every VC-…nanced project is introduced as a business idea for a new product and it is converted into a
single-product …rm upon success. The output of such a (single-product) …rm falls along a balanced growth
path. This is in line with recent evidence by Argente, Lee, and Moreira (2019). To reconcile this …nding with
the increasing size of …rms over their life cycle, they propose a model with multi-product …rms. Similarly,
the current setting could be augmented in principal by letting publicly traded …rms acquire or develop new
products. Nevertheless, such an exercise is not undertaken because the focus of this paper is on how VC
…nancing and taxation a¤ects the births of new …rms (products) instead of on how existing …rms grow.
Incorporating the later would complicate an already complicated model.




                                                     26
personnel connected with VC startups are taxed in the United States at a 15 percent capital
gains rate. So, set = 0:15.8
     The model has 17 remaining parameters, each marked with an asterisk in Table 3, that
will calibrated to match 22 data targets, listed in Table 4. For the most part, the model’s
parameter values are jointly determined as a function of the data targets. Still, some data
targets play a much more central role in identifying a parameter, as discussed now. The
parameters governing the e¢ ciency of VC …nancing, D , E , and the M ’s, are particularly
important here. The identi…cation of these parameters, in addition to research productivity,
  R , is detailed in Appendix 12. Over the period 1948 to 2015, U.S. GDP per hours worked
grew at 1.8 percent per year. This fact is targeted in the calibration procedure. The
parameter governing the e¢ ciency of doing research, R , is important for determining the
economy’s growth rate; again, see the Identi…cation Appendix. The long-run interest rate
is set to 4 percent, a typical value. A standard value of 2 is assigned for the coe¢ cient of
relative risk aversion. The market discount factor is the reciprocal of the equilibrium interest
rate, and it will change as the growth rate of the economy, gw , changes. At the calibrated
equilibrium, the representative agent’s annual discount factor is determined by the formula
to b = (1 0:04)=(1:018) 2 ; cf. (11). This yields a yearly interest rate of 4 percent.
     To calibrate the elasticity of the research cost function, , the following …rm-level regres-
sion is run using VentureXpert data:

         ln(IPO value) = 0:390              ln(VC funding) + Controls, obs. = 1,145,
                                (0:154)


                                                                                                         (17)

where the controls are the logarithm of the …rm’s employment, the …rm’s age at IPO, a 2-
digit SIC industry dummy variable, the logarithm of the aggregate level of VC funding, and a
cluster dummy for whether the venture capitalist was located in California or Massachusetts.
Three instrumental variables are also used: the capital gains tax rate (which varies across
states and time), dependence on external …nance (which varies across industries), and the
deregulation dummy. The coe¢ cient shows the impact of a …rm’s VC funding on its IPO
value and is used to identify a value for , as discussed next.
    To identify , the impact of a change in …rm-level VC funding on its IPO value is calcu-
lated for the model. This calculation is broken down into two steps. First, the elasticity of
I(x; x) with respect to x is computed. Second, the elasticity of VC funding with respect to
   8
    The capital gains tax rate has varied across time in the United States. The 15 percent rate was instituted
under President Bush in 2003. The maximum rate rose to 20 percent in 2012 under President Obama.


                                                     27
x is totted up numerically. This is done in partial equilibrium to match the results of the
…rm-level regression. The ratio of these two elasticities gives the elasticity of IPO value with
respect to VC funding. Thus, the following object is computed for the model:

                                                            d ln IPO=d ln x
                   IPO Value Elasticity =                                     :
                                                      d ln(VC Funding)=d ln x

Ideally, this should have a value of 0.390.
   Another key elasticity in the model is the shape parameter, , for the Pareto distribution
governing the opportunity cost of entrepreneurship. This regulates the in‡ow of entrepre-
neurs. Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016) report that a one percent increase in a country’s
e¤ective tax rate on VC activity leads to a one percent decline in the VC investment-to-
GDP ratio. This elasticity is targeted to recover the shape parameter, . This parameter
can be selected after calibrating the remaining parameters because the scale parameter, ,
can be adjusted, given the choice for , such that the number of entrepreneurs is constant.
This normalization for implies that all the other moments used in the calibration will not
change.
   The process for the e¢ ciency of round-t monitoring, M;t , is taken to be a cubic:

                            M;t   = ln(a0 + a1   t + a2     t2 + a3   t3 ):

This requires specifying four parameters, namely a0 , a1 , a2 and a3 . Additionally, the moni-
toring parameters are selected to match the venture capitalist’s share of equity by funding
round (this pattern is taken up below)–see the Identi…cation Appendix. The more e¢ cient
monitoring is, the higher will be the venture capitalist’s share of equity, as will be seen in
Section 11.
    The time pro…le for the …xed cost, (t), is governed by the quartic

                       (t) = exp(b0 + b1    t + b2      t2 + b3   t3 + b4     t4 ):

Five parameters, b0 , b1 , b2 , b3 , and b4 , govern this speci…cation. The pattern of VC investment
by funding round (discussed below) determines these parameters.
    Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2016) estimate the impact on investment of a venture
capitalist’s time cost for monitoring. To do this, they examine the e¤ect of changes in airline
routes that reduce the commuting time a venture capitalist spends visiting a startup. They
…nd that the introduction of a new airline route (the treatment) leads to a 4.6 to 5.2 percent
increase in VC investment. The average reduction in travel time is signi…cant. The lead


                                                 28
investor visits the company site roughly 20 times per year and spends approximately 12
hours traveling and 5 hours at the company per visit, which amounts to 100 contact hours
annually.9 On average, a treatment saves roughly 2 hours per trip, or 40 hours per year of a
venture capitalist’s time. Accordingly, the treatments correspond to fairly large reductions
in monitoring costs: a reduction of 2 hours per trip translates into a 12.4 percent reduction in
monitoring costs. Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2016) argue that most of the resources
spent by a venture capitalist on monitoring is time. So, assume that monitoring is done
using labor in the model.10
    The size of this micro-level elasticity depends in the model, among other things, on the
quality of the projects, captured by, . As the share of good projects rises, the success rate
for ventures increases while the failure rate falls. The payo¤ from investing in research and
development hence rises. So, does the return from monitoring because more funds are being
invested. Therefore, the size of the treatment e¤ect moves up with . Therefore matching,
in partial equilibrium, the Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend’s (2016) treatment e¤ect helps
to tie down the fraction of good ideas, .
    Next, projects that are funded by venture capitalists have an average success rate per
funding round of 2.0 percent and a failure rate of 3.2 percent. The calibration procedure
attempts to match these two statistics. To construct these statistics for the model, note
that the success rate in funding-round t is just the number of IPOs divided by the mass of
surviving …rms:
                                                                                   t 1
                                   IPOst                                     t     j=1 (1       j)
       Success Ratet =                         =             t 1                                t
                                                                                                                   :
                              Surviving Firmst               j=1 (1          j)   + (1      )   j=1 (1      j ):


The analogous de…nition for the failure rate in round t is
                                                                                      t 1
                          Failurest                                   t (1        )   j=1 (1         j ):
       Failure Ratet =                  =                    t 1                                t
                                                                                                                   :
                       Surviving Firmst                      j=1 (1          j)   + (1      )   j=1 (1      j ):


Not surprisingly, the development e¢ ciency parameter,                D,     is instrumental for determining
   9
      The time spent visiting the company is quoted in the unpublished version of Bernstein, Giroud, and
Townsend (2016).
  10
      Again, it doesn’t matter whether one thinks about monitoring costs as being expressed in terms of
goods or labor. Let m represent aggregate spending on monitoring and o denote aggregate output. Along a
balanced growth path, m=o is constant, since m and o both grow at the same rate as wages. Now, m=o is
the fraction of aggregate labor that is indirectly used to produce monitoring services. These costs show up in
the labor-market clearing condition in a round about way through the demand for labor by …rms producing
output. They can be taken out directly instead, though. This is just a matter of accounting convention.



                                                     29
the average success rate, while the evaluation e¢ ciency parameter, E , impinges heavily on
the average failure rate. The identi…cation of these parameters is discussed in Appendix 12.
Some thought experiments concerning them are presented in Section 11.
    Puri and Zarutskie (2012, Table I) report that ratio of employment in a VC-backed …rm
to a non-VC-backed one is 58.14. This is a calibration target. For the model, the employment
ratio is
                                                    =     ( + )=
                                                r     w
                                                                  nx=n   1
                  Employment Ratio =              =     ( + )=
                                                                       = :
                                                                 m!x=m   !
                                              r      w

This ratio pins down the productivity of a non-VC-backed …rm relative to a VC-backed one,
or !.
    Data on the scrap value of unsuccessful ventures are, unfortunately, not readily available.
So, the parameter governing the scrap value of a …rm is identi…ed by attempting to match
the observed cash multiple for VC investments. The cash multiple is the ratio of the venture
capitalist’s cash receipts to disbursements, and is used as a crude measure of the ex post
return on a VC investment. A venture capitalist’s receipts will include the scrap value on
those unsuccessful projects that are still surviving at the end of the contract.


5.1    Model Fit, Targeted Observations
The upshot of the calibration procedure is now discussed. The parameter values resulting
from the calibration procedure are presented in Table 3, which also gives the basis for their
identi…cation. First, the model matches the average success and failure rates very well, as
shown in Table 4. And, the model replicates perfectly the ratio of VC-backed employment
to non-VC backed employment. The IPO elasticity is duplicated. And the model matches
exactly the Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016) tax rate elasticity. The monitoring-cost treat-
ment e¤ect lies within the range of estimates reported by Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend
(2016).
    Next, note how investment in a project by a venture capitalist increases with the funding
round (see the top panel of Figure 5). This time pro…le is a calibration target. Given
the limited life span of a VC partnership, there is considerable pressure to bring a project
to fruition as quickly as possible. This is true in the model too, which displays the same
increasing pro…le of funding. Two features help to generate this. The …rst is that bad
projects get purged over time through the evaluation process. The second is that the cost
of monitoring drops as the venture capitalist becomes more familiar with the project, which
reduces the incentive problem. Without these features, funding would fall over time. Last,


                                              30
                                               1.0




                            Relative Funding
                                               0.8
                                                                         Data
                                               0.6

                                               0.4                        Model
                                               0.2

                                               0.0

                                                     1   2    3      4      5     6   7
                                               1.0
                                               0.9
                                               0.8           Model
                            Equity Share




                                               0.7
                                               0.6                        Data
                                               0.5
                                               0.4
                                               0.3
                                               0.2

                                                     1   2    3      4      5     6   7
                                                                  Round



Figure 5: Investment and equity share by funding round–data and model. The upper panel
shows the venture capitalist’s investment by funding round. Funding in the last round is
normalized to 1.0. The lower panel charts the venture capitalist’s share of equity by funding
round.


since investment increases over time, one would expect that the venture capitalist’s share of
the enterprise will too. The bottom panel of Figure 5 illustrates this. The model does very
well on this account. Again, the calibration procedure focuses on this feature of the data.


5.2    Model Fit, Non-Targeted Observations
The time pro…les for the success and failure rates are not targeted in the calibration proce-
dure. As shown in the middle panel of Figure 6, in the data the odds of success decline by
funding round or with the passage of time. While the model captures the average success
across funding rounds very well, it has some di¢ culty mimicking the declining time pro-
…le. Failure rates also decline with time, and the model does very well on this dimension.
Now turn to the bottom panel of Figure 6. Observe that the value of an IPO drops with
the incubation time for the project. In the model, as time passes, the value of a project
declines because aggregate productivity in the VC sector catches up with the productivity
of the entrepreneur’s venture; “the thrill is gone,”so to speak. It is a bit surprising that the


                                                                  31
                                      Parameter Values
Parameter value                    Description                   Identi…cation
Firms
  = 1=3 0:80                       Capital’s share               Standard
  = 2=3 0:80                       Labor’s share                 Standard
1 d = 0:07                         Depreciation rate             Standard
s = 0:96                           Firm survival rate            Expected life of Compustat …rms
  R = 4:7                          Research e¢ ciency, x         Growth rate
  = 2:56                           Research cost elasticity, x   Regression (17)
  = 0:025                          Pareto shape parameter        H&S (2016) tax elasticity
  = 0:57                           Pareto scale parameter        Normalization
Consumers
"=2                                CRRA                          Standard
b = 0:994                          Discount factor               4% risk-free rate
VC
T =7                               Number of funding rounds      Partnership length (10.5 years)
  = 0:21                           Fraction of goods ideas       BG&T (2016) treatment e¤ect
  D = 0:0335                       Development e¢ ciency,        Average success rate
  E = 0:0360                       Evaluation e¢ ciency,         Average failure rate
a = f 1:12; 0:12; 0:321; 0:018g    Monitoring e¢ ciency,         Equity share by round
b = f 0:89; 0:80; 0:25;            Fixed costs,                  VC funding by round
           0:12; 0:013g
  = 0:15                           Capital gains tax rate        H&S (2016)
  = 0:375                          Scrap value fraction          Cash multiple
Non-VC-funded
m = 40                             Number non-VC …rms           Relative empl. non-VC …rms
! = 1=58                           Relative prod of non-VC …rms Relative size of non-VC …rms

Table 3: The parameter values used in the baseline simulation. The parameters marked
with an asterisk are …t using the data targets in Table 4.




                                         32
                                  Calibration Targets
                  Target                          Data                 Model
                  Economic growth                 1.80%                1.78%
                  Cash Multiple                   5.5                  5.6
                  Success Rate                    2.0%                 2.0%
                  Failure Rate                    3.2%                 3.3%
                  VC funding                      Figure 5
                  Equity Share                    Figure 5
                  IPO Value Elasticity–…rm level  0.39                 0.39
                  Tax Elasticity of VC Inv/GDP    -1.0                 -1.0
                  Monitoring-Cost Treatment       4.6 to 5.2%          4.9%
                  VC Employment Share             5.5%                 4.8%
                  Employment ratio                58.1                 58.1

            Table 4: All data sources are discussed in the Empirical Appendix.


framework can match almost perfectly this feature of the data, which is not targeted.


6     Venture Capital versus Traditional Forms of Finance
Venture capitalists lend development and evaluation expertise to startups that alternative
forms of …nance, such as angel investors, banking, and more recently crowdfunding, do not.
Arguably, venture capitalists are also better at monitoring projects. Venture capitalists are
highly skilled: 58 percent of them have an MBA degree, 33 percent studied engineering
or science in college, 7 percent have a Ph.D. in science, and 8 percent hold a JD degree.
In addition, they graduated from prestigious universities: 37% attended an Ivy League
university, 19 percent went to Harvard, and 14 percent to Stanford.11
    Wealthy people have always been willing to lend seed money to startups, as discussed in
Section 14. This is what angel investors do today. The sheer size of …nancing needed as a
startup evolves goes well beyond an angel investor’s pockets. The average investment per
deal of an angel investor was $510,000 in 2014. In contrast, the average venture capitalist
invests $4 million and $14 million in seed-stage and later-stage deals. These investments
are 8 times and 28 times larger than those of angel investors. VC organizations feature
substantially higher levels of professionalism and specialization than angel investors: all the
roles of a VC organization (e.g., evaluation, development, and monitoring) are rolled up into
 11
    Source: Zarutskie, Rebecca. 2010. “The Role of Top Management Team Human Capital in Venture
Capital Markets: Evidence from First Time Funds,” Journal of Business Venturing, 25 (1): 155-172.



                                               33
                                             0.08
                                                                    Data
                     Failure Rate




                                             0.06

                                             0.04
                                                                                            Model
                                             0.02

                                             0.00

                                                            1   2     3         4       5      6      7
                                             0.05
                     Success Probability




                                             0.04

                                             0.03
                                                                                              Model
                                             0.02

                                             0.01
                                                                           Data
                                             0.00
                                                            1   2     3         4       5      6      7
                                                      1.1
                              Relative Value of IPO




                                                      1.0

                                                      0.9

                                                      0.8
                                                                                              Data

                                                      0.7                       Model
                                                      0.6
                                                            1   2     3         4       5      6      7
                                                                           Round

Figure 6: The odds of success and failure by funding round and the value of an IPO by
the duration of funding–data and model. The value of an IPO that occurs during the …rst
funding round is normalized to 1.0. None of these pro…les are targeted in the calibration.




                                                                           34
one single angel investor.
    Puri and Zarutskie (2012) track the performance of VC- and non-VC-…nanced …rms using
the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). They identify …rms in the LBD as VC-…nanced
if they can be matched to the VentureSource and VentureXpert databases. They match each
VC-…nanced …rm to a non-VC-…nanced …rm based on four characteristics: age, 4-digit SIC
code, geographical region, and employment size. They …nd that VC-…nanced and non-VC-
…nanced …rms are observationally identical at the time the former …rst receive VC …nancing.
Based on this comparison, they report that the average ratio of the success rate of non-VC-
…nanced …rms to the success rate of observationally identical VC-…nanced …rms is 0.30.12
13

    To approximate more traditional forms of …nance in the model, the e¢ ciency of develop-
ment, evaluation, and monitoring are all debased in an equiproportional manner to render
the same average success-odds ratio for a startup as Puri and Zarutskie (2012) …nd. (Some
thought experiments that independently vary a venture capitalist’s ability to evaluate, de-
velop, and monitor startup projects are presented in Appendix 11.) In order for this ratio
to be comparable with its empirical counterpart, this recalibration is done in partial equi-
librium. The 0.30 ratio is reproduced by reducing in tandem development, evaluation, and
monitoring e¢ ciency to 55 percent of their original values.14 Think about this experiment
as corresponding to the situation where all innovation in the economy is …nanced by banks
or more traditional forms of intermediation.
    The upshot of this exercise is shown in Table 5. Alternative forms of …nance have a
much lower success rate (1.1 versus 2.0 percent) than do VC-…nanced projects. The ratio of
1.1/2.0 is larger than 0.30 because there are general equilibrium e¤ects, inducing a drop in
wages, that partially o¤set the reduction in …nancing e¢ ciency. The …nancier’s share of the
project declines considerably. Since monitoring is less e¢ cient, a larger share of the project
must be given to the entrepreneur to ensure that he will invest all of the development funds.
     12
      Venture capitalists could match with better …rms based on unobservable characteristics. Given that
startups are very young with little in terms of employment and patents, it might di¢ cult to control em-
pirically for this selection e¤ect. To the extent that such selection e¤ects are important, the results in this
section constitute an upper bound for the e¤ect of VC …nancing.
  13
     This number is based on Table VI.B (p. 2271) of Puri and Zarutskie (2012). First, Puri and Zarutskie’s
cumulative success rates are …rst di¤erenced to get the yearly rates. Second, the success-odds ratio (of
non-VC-…nanced …rms to VC-…nanced …rms) is calculated year by year. Third, an average is taken over the
years. Only acquisitions are considered to be successes in this calculation, because Puri and Zarutskie (2012)
don’t report yearly IPO numbers for non-VC-…nanced …rms. This is presumably because IPOs are virtually
non existent for non-VC-…nanced …rms. This implies that the estimated success ratio is conservative in
nature.

     14
          The results are quite similar when only development e¢ ciency is debased.

                                                        35
                 Venture Capital vs Traditional Forms of Finance
                Variable                                  Debasing VC
                                              Baseline Alternative P&Z
                Share of good ideas,           0.210      0.210     0.210
                Monitoring e¢ ciency, M        0.125      0.125     0.067
                Evaluation e¢ ciency, E        0.036      0.036     0.019
                Development e¢ ciency, D       0.034      0.011     0.018
                Success probability, %          2.0        0.9       1.1
                Monitoring probability, %       38.8       32.2     32.8
                VC equity share,%               73.6       62.6      69.4
                Empl share innovative …rms, %    4.9        1.7      2.1
                Growth rate, %                   1.8        1.4      1.5
                Welfare loss, %                  0.0      -15.1     -11.3

Table 5: The table illustrates what would happen if all innovation is …nanced by more
traditional methods of intermediation.


The drop o¤ in the success rate and the …nancier’s share of equity lead to less research and
development in the debased VC-backed …rms. The IPO value of a startup drops a lot, by
43.7 percent (which is not shown in the table). This is in the ballpark of the 31.1 percent
drop predicted by the …rm-value regression in Table 9 for a non-VC-backed …rm (relative
to a VC-backed one). As a result, there is less employment in VC-backed …rms. Long-run
growth also drops from 1.8 percent to 1.4-1.5 percent.15 This generates a large welfare loss.
In a similar vein, other empirical work reports that a dollar of VC investment is worth 3
times as much as a dollar on non-VC investment in generating patents. So, as an alternative
experiment, simply reduce development e¢ ciency by two thirds. As can be seen, the results
for the two experiments are fairly similar.


7      Taxation of Venture Capital Across the World.
Most VC-funded …rms in the United States are setup as partnerships. CEOs, central employ-
ees, founders, and investors are paid in terms of convertible equity and stock options. These
  15
      Cross-country comparisons in the empirical literature on …nance and growth also report changes in
growth rates of a similar magnitude. According to Levine (2005), an exogenous increase in the private-
credit-to-GDP ratio from Mexico’s level (22.9 percent) to the sample median (27.5 percent ) would increase
its per capita GDP growth by 0.4 percentage points. An exogenous increase of stock market turnover ratio
from Mexico’s level (36 percent) to the average of the OECD countries (68 percent) would increase its per
capita GDP growth by 0.6 percentage points. So, the numbers generated from this experiment do not seem
unreasonable.


                                                   36
…nancial assets payo¤ only under certain well-speci…ed contingencies and serve to align the
incentives of key participants.16 Interestingly, the returns on convertible equity and stock
options are taxed in the United States at the capital gains rate, which is 15 percent. The
IRS lets companies assign arti…cially low values to these instruments when they are issued.
So, e¤ectively, participants are only subject to taxation at the time of an acquisition/IPO.
In other countries the rate of taxation on VC-funded startups is much higher. Figure 7
illustrates for a cross section of countries how VC investment as a percentage of GDP falls
with the tax rate on VC pro…ts. The data are from Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016). To
obtain the tax rates on VC pro…ts, they asked the local o¢ ces of PricewaterhouseCoopers in
22 countries to calculate the e¤ective tax rate for a representative VC startup. This way of
computing the tax e¤ective rates is well suited for the current analysis because it takes into
account tax avoidance (i.e., the use of legitimate methods in the tax code for minimizing
taxes paid). So, for example, PricewaterhouseCoopers calculate that is 30 percent in France,
47.5 percent in Germany, and 72 percent in Italy. Using this data in a regression analysis,
Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016, Table 4) report a strong negative correlation between the
tax rates on VC pro…ts and VC investment as a percentage of GDP. The elasticity of the tax
rate on VC activity is about -1.0, as mentioned earlier. This feature of the data is matched
in the model by calibrating the shape parameter for Pareto distribution, which governs the
in‡ow of entrepreneurs. So, the response of VC activity to taxes is the same in the data and
model.
    The model can be used as a laboratory to gauge the e¤ect of taxation on other key
variables, such as growth and welfare, which is shown in Figure 8. As the tax rate on VC
pro…ts rises, not surprisingly economic growth declines. An increase in the tax rate from
-15 percent (a subsidy) to 50 percent, causes economic growth in the model to fall from 1.90
percent to 1.58 percent. The e¤ects on growth might appear small, but lowering the tax
rate from 50 percent to 15 percent produces a long-run welfare gain of 9.4 percent, when
ignoring transitional dynamics. Going further from 15 percent to -15 percent generates an
additional welfare gain of 5.5 percent, all measured in terms of consumption.
  16
     Celik and Tian (2018) analyze how established …rms with better corporate governance (as proxied by
the equity share of institutional investors) also tend to remunerate executives more in terms of incentive pay
than do other …rms, which leads to higher levels of innovation.




                                                     37
Figure 7: The conditional cross-country relationship between the tax rate on VC pro…ts
and the VC-investment-to-GDP ratio. The numbers are expressed as percentages. The
conditioning variables are similar to those used in Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016). See the
Empirical Appendix for a list of the controls.




                             6                                                                     1.95
                                                  Welfare
                                                                                                   1.90
                             3

                                    Growth                                                         1.85
                             0
                                                                                                   1.80
                                                                                                          Growth, %
               Welfare, %




                                                 U.S.
                             -3                                                                    1.75


                                                                                                   1.70
                             -6
                                    U.S. with French Tax Rate

                                                                                                   1.65
                             -9
                                        U.S. with German Tax Rate                                  1.60

                            -12
                                                                                                   1.55
                                  -20      -10          0     10     20    30       40   50   60
                                                        Capital Gains Tax Rate, %

         Figure 8: Impact of VC pro…t taxation on economic growth and welfare.



                                                                    38
7.1     The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) was signed into law in December 2017 and went into
e¤ect in January 2018. The TCJA reduced tax rates for both businesses and individuals.17
This should have increased the market value from ‡oating or selling startups. Once the
TCJA took force there was a boom in VC activity. In 2018, the year-over-year growth rate
was 57.8 percent for VC investment and 62.6 percent for VC fundraising.18 In particular,
corporate VC investment achieved an even higher growth rate of 83.2% in 2018.19 The VC
investment-to-GDP ratio was 0.42 percent in 2017 compared with 0.64 in 2018. This is
suggestive evidence that tax policy a¤ects venture capital investment.


8      What Ails French Growth?
To illustrate how the model can be used to understand the role that venture capital plays in
creating divergences in growth across countries, a comparison of France versus the United
States is undertaken. To do this, four key parameters, namely D , E , M , and , are
calibrated so that the model resembles the French economy. Since these parameters do not
encompass all of the di¤erences between France and the United States, the baseline model
for France will not explain the entire discrepancy between the French (1.3 percent) and U.S.
(1.8 percent) growth rates.
    First, the tax rate on VC activity, or , for France is set at 30 percent, the number re-
ported by Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016). Second, Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2013)
estimate that the French …nancial sector is 23 percent less e¢ cient than in the United States.
Their estimate applies best to the e¢ ciency of evaluation and monitoring undertaken by …-
nancial intermediaries, or E and M –the functional form they use for the cost of monitoring
is a close cousin of the functional forms used here for evaluation and monitoring costs. Third,
the last parameter is D , which represents the e¢ ciency of VC …rms in developing projects.
(Again, some thought experiments analyzing separately the importance of D , E , and M
are presented in Appendix 11.) As mentioned in Section 6, VC …rms in the United States
employ highly skilled individuals. For France, D is calibrated so that its VC-investment-
to-GDP ratio is 25 percent of the U.S. one.
  17
     In particular, the corporate tax rate was reduced from 35% to 21%.
  18
     By comparison, the growth rate of VC investment was 7.4 percent in 2017 and -6.9% in 2016. The
growth rate of VC fundraising was -16.6 percent in 2017 and 13.7 percent in 2016. Source: PitchBook and
National Venture Capital Association (2019).
  19
     In contrast, the growth rate of corporate VC investment was 0.5 percent in 2017 and -2.6 percent in
2016. Source: Again, PitchBook and National Venture Capital Association (2019).


                                                  39
    Taking stock of things, three factors will then contribute to the divide in French-U.S.
growth due to di¤erences in their …nancial systems: (i) …nancial intermediaries’capabilities
to acquire information about projects’worthiness and to tackle agency problems (as captured
by E and M ); (ii) the ability of intermediaries to lend expertise to develop projects (as
re‡ected by D ); (iii) di¤erences in tax rates that a¤ect the pro…tabilities of intermediaries
investing in startups ( ). The results of the exercise are presented in Table 6. To begin
with, the rate of growth in the baseline French economy is 1.44 percent, which is about
70 percent of the actual gap between French and U.S. growth. Factors excluded from the
analysis account for the remaining 30 percent. Next, the ranking in importance of the three
factors considered is (ii) > (iii) > (i).
    There would be only a tiny gain from French intermediaries improving their capabilities
to screen projects and monitor the use of funds. This would close 6 percent of the di¤erence
between French and U.S. growth. This does not say that evaluating and monitoring projects
is not important. The results in Appendix 11 show that they have signi…cant impact on
growth and welfare. Rather, it says that they are not major factors in accounting for the
di¤erence between French and U.S. growth.20 Lowering French taxes on startups to the
U.S. level would make up 18 percent of the gap. While this is a signi…cant e¤ect, tax
reform would be a daunting task for France to undertake. Last, increasing the ability of
French intermediaries to develop startups has the biggest impact, …lling 44 percent of the
divide. These are services that traditional …nancial intermediaries barely provide. Venture
capitalists sit on the boards of directors of their portfolio companies and are deeply engaged
in the management. They provide strategic and operational guidance, they connect the
entrepreneurs with investors and customers, and they are pivotal in the hiring decisions for
the board members and key employees. Venture capitalists spend an average of 18 hours
per week assisting their portfolio companies out of a total reported work week of 55 hours.21
Last, (ii) and (iii) are likely to be related. Financiers are more likely to acquire the skills and
talent to develop startups when the latter is pro…table, a factor omitted from the analysis.



   Does this accord with reality? Continental Europe has been plagued by the “European
Paradox,”strong basic science but a poor commercialization of it. To spur entrepreneurship,
the government weighs heavily in the European VC industry. It is the largest limited partner,
  20
     Indeed, Cole, Greenwood, and Sanchez (2016) illustrate that monitoring could play a signi…cant role in
explaining why poorer countries don’t adopt advanced technologies.
  21
     Again, one can easily think about the development costs as being expressed in terms of labor–see
footnote 10.


                                                    40
                                     France-U.S. Comparison
       Variable          Mon.     Eval. Dev. Taxes VC Inv                 Growth %     Gap …lled
                                                              V C Inv
                                                                                           gw
                           M
                           US
                                   E
                                   US
                                           D
                                           US
                                                               GDP
                                                            V C Inv U S   100    gw     U S gF R
                                                                                       gw
                           M       E       D               ( GDP )                           w

       US Baseline       1.00     1.00    1.00   0.15     1.00            1.78         0*
       FR Baseline       0.77     0.77    0.49   0.30     0.25            1.44         0.70**
          FR & FR        1.00     1.00    0.49   0.30     0.35            1.47         0.06
          M       E
           FR            0.77     0.77    1.00   0.30     0.59            1.66         0.44
           D
           FR            0.77     0.77    0.49   0.15     0.51            1.53         0.18

Table 6: The impact of changes in evaluation, development, and monitoring e¢ ciencies, as
well as taxes, on the French growth rate. The entry with the asterisk signi…es that there is
no gap for the United States, while the one with the double asterisk represents the ratio of
the U.S.-France growth gap under the baseline calibration to the actual gap in the data.


accounting for 29 percent of total VC fund raising. By contrast in the United States pension
funds are the largest limited partners, raising 42 percent of funds. In France, Bpifrance22
invests directly in state-owned VC funds and indirectly by investing in private VC funds. The
return on government-run VC funds have been lackluster.23 In addition, private European
VC funds are demonstrated to have a positive e¤ect on fostering …rm growth, whereas
government-managed VC funds do not. Hiring fund managers or investing in private funds
requires experts. As uncovered by the US-France comparison, a seasoned entrepreneur is a
better …t than an experienced banker. The latter may be skilled at evaluating and monitoring
projects but are poor at developing them; i.e., providing mentoring services. By comparison
Israel has been successful at starting a VC industry. To attract foreign VC investors, the
Israeli government o¤ered tax incentives and matching funds. The foreign venture capitalists
brought expertise to Israel that was then emulated by their Israeli partners.


9      Venture Capital and Growth: A Puzzle
Is the recent rise in VC investment re‡ected in growth statistics? The answer to this question
is nuanced. On the one hand, at the country level VC investment appears to be positively
linked with economic growth. On the other hand, U.S. growth does not appear to have
picked up with the advent of venture capital.
  22
     Bpifrance was established by the French government to support entrepreneurial …nance.
  23
     According to the “Pan-European Private Equity Performance Benchmarks Study”conducted by Thom-
son Reuters and the European Venture Capital Association, the average 10-year internal rate of return ( by
the end of 2013) was 5.03 percent for the U.S. VC funds and 0.84 percent for the European VC funds.



                                                   41
9.1     Venture Capital and Cross-Country Growth
It would not be unreasonable to assume that due to the free ‡ow of information, all countries
largely face the same technological opportunities.24 Hence, a country’s economic growth rate
hinges on its capability to commercialize technological innovations that lie on the world tech-
nology frontier. Through the lens of this model, a country with a more e¢ cient VC sector is
at an advantageous position to monetize the technological opportunities, and, thus, features
faster economic growth. The cross-country empirical evidence (on the VC-investment-to-
GDP ratio as a predictor for future economic growth) lends support to this implication of
the model.
    Figure 9 illustrates for a sample of 40 countries the conditional relationship between VC
investment-to-GDP ratio and the growth rate of real GDP per capita. These countries cover
99 percent of world VC investment and 86 percent of world GDP between 2005 and 2014.
A country is included in the sample if its share of world VC investment is not less than
0.03 percent and the information for the control variables is available.25 The vertical axis
is the median growth rate of per capital real GDP in each country for the period 2005 to
2014, residualized against the following control variables: the initial levels of real GDP per
capita, a human capital index, and the ratio of domestic private credit to GDP. The …rst two
controls are the main factors demonstrated in the empirical literature to be important for
economic growth. Pioneered by King and Levine (1993a, 1993b), the last control variable
has been the most widely used measure for the …nancial development level of a country. The
horizontal axis is the median VC investment-to-GDP ratio (in natural logarithm) between
2001 and 2005 for a country.26 As depicted in Figure 9, a higher VC investment-to-GDP ratio
in a country predicts faster economic growth in the subsequent decade. This relationship is
statistically signi…cant at the one percent level–see the Empirical Appendix.


9.2     Venture Capital and U.S. Growth
Since non-VC methods of …nance are less e¢ cient in encouraging innovation, should one
expect lower growth in the past? Not necessarily, because other things have changed. For
example, Bloom et al. (2018) suggest that ideas are “getting harder and harder to …nd.”How
  24
     In other words all countries largely have the same , the parameter governing the abundance of ideas
in this model.
  25
      An exception is Bermuda, which accounted for 0.15 percent of world VC investment. Bermuda is
excluded because it is a tax haven. Companies set up o¢ ces there, while undertaking virtually no business
activity, just to avoid corporate income taxation.
  26
     In light of the remarkable volitility of VC investment, the median value between 2001 and 2005 is used.



                                                    42
Figure 9: The conditional cross-country relationship between economic growth and VC
investment, 2005-2014.




                                        43
does the abundance of ideas a¤ect things? To gauge this, in Figure 10 the fraction of good
ideas, , is varied. Not surprisingly, when the fraction of good ideas increases, the success
rate rises. So do investment in R&D and growth. As ideas become more plenteous, the
compensation or rents earned by entrepreneurs rise. This occurs for two reasons. First, it is
harder to …nd entrepreneurs to operate the increase in startups so they must be compensated
more. Second, to keep entrepreneurs on the straight and narrow path, in light of the increased
spending on R&D, VC contracts pay and monitor the founders more intensively. Some of
this compensation may not be in salaries. It may be re‡ected in the usage of private jets
for travel, multimillion dollar launch parties, the use of private boxes at sports events, and
luxury vacations, etc.27
    Now consider an experiment where the e¢ ciency of venture capital is debased to approx-
imate earlier non-VC forms of …nance, as in Section 6, while the fraction of good ideas is
boosted, to represent periods of time when ideas may have been easier to harvest. To imple-
ment this idea select so that the economy’s growth rate remains the same as in the baseline
model. To do this, the fraction of good ideas must be increased by either 6 or 8 percentage
points. Still, good ideas are fairly rare. The employment share of innovative …rms remains
close to that in the baseline economy. Economic welfare is slightly higher. The experiment
suggests that the advent of venture capital would not show up in economic growth if at the
same time ideas became hard to …nd. In fact, without venture capital growth would have
fallen from 1.8 percent to around 1.4 to 1.5 percent.


10      Conclusion
Venture capital is important for economic growth. Funding by venture capitalists is positively
associated with patenting activity. VC-backed …rms have higher IPO values when they are
‡oated. Following ‡otation they have higher R&D-to-sales ratios. VC-backed …rms also
grow faster in terms of employment and sales.
    An endogenous growth model where technological innovation is …nanced by VC is con-
structed and taken to the data. In the framework, entrepreneurs bring ideas to venture
capitalists for funding. Venture capitalists provide seed money to research the ideas. After
this projects enter a funding-round cycle. During each round, projects are: (i) evaluated to
  27
     An example is given by this quote about dot-com parties: “This week, Elvis Costello will play at a bash
hosted by AskJeeves, while a collection of works by Picasso never before shown in the United States will be
shown at a much more upscale Hewlett-Packard-sponsored party. Such decadent a¤airs are in keeping with
current party expectations. A Respond.com party late last year featured performers from Cirque du Soleil.”
Source: Cave, Damien. 2000. “Dot-com party madness.” Salon.com, (April 25).


                                                    44
                                            4.0
                       Success, %




                                                                                          Average µ, %
                                                                                                         39
                                            3.5
                                                                                                         38
                                            3.0       Detection Pr                                       37
                                            2.5
                                                                                                         36
                                            2.0
                                                                                                         35
                                            1.5
                                                                                                         34
                                            1.0              Success Rate                                33
                                            0.5
                                               0.10   0.15     0.20      0.25      0.30             0.35
                                2.50
                                                                                                         0.04
                                2.00                     Entrants




                                                                                             Entrants
                                                                                                         0.03
                      R&D




                                1.50                                                                     0.02
                                                                      R&D
                                1.00                                                                     0.01
                                0.50                                                                   0.00
                                    0.10              0.15     0.20      0.25      0.30             0.35
                       Rents, relative, %




                                             80                                 Rents
                                             60                                                          2.4
                                                                                            Growth, %



                                             40
                                             20                                                          2.1
                                              0                                 Growth                   1.8
                                            -20
                                            -40                                                          1.5
                                            -60                                                          1.2
                                              0.10    0.15     0.20      0.25      0.30             0.35

                                                         Share of good projects, ρ


Figure 10: The fraction of good ideas, . The top panel shows how the average success rate
across funding rounds varies with the fraction of good ideas. It also shows how the average
probability of detecting fraud in the economy varies with . The middle panel illustrates how
the in‡ow of entrants, e, and spending on both research and development respond. Growth
and the entrepreneur’s rents are illustrated in the bottom panel.




                                                                    45
                             Ideas and Venture Capital
             Variable                               More abundant ideas
                                           Baseline Alternative P&Z
             Share of good ideas,           0.210      0.294    0.266
             Monitoring e¢ ciency, M        0.125      0.125    0.067
             Evaluation e¢ ciency, E        0.036      0.036    0.019
             Development e¢ ciency, D       0.034      0.011    0.018
             Success probability, %          2.0        1.6     1.7
             Monitoring probability, %       38.8       35.2    34.3
             VC equity share,%               73.6       67.4    70.7
             Empl share innovative …rms, %    4.9        4.3    4.3
             Growth rate, %                   1.8        1.8    1.8
             Welfare gain, %                  0.0        0.2    0.3

Table 7: The table illustrates a situation where ideas are more plentiful but is intermediation
less e¢ cient. This might have characterized in United States in the past.


assess their ongoing viability; (ii) those that pass are then provided with VC to develop the
project; (iii) the use of funds is monitored is done to ensure that there is no malfeasance;
and (iv) successful projects are ‡oated on the stock market or sold to other businesses. The
evaluation plan, development funding, the monitoring strategy, and the equity share of the
venture capitalist are governed by a dynamic contract between the entrepreneur and a ven-
ture capitalist. The contracts between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists are optimal,
given the economic environment they operate within. The model is capable of matching
several stylized facts of the VC process by funding round. In particular, it mimics the
funding-round pro…les for the success and failure rates of projects, the injections of VC for
development, the venture capitalist’s share of equity, and the value of an IPO by the time
it takes to go to market. This is done while matching the share of VC-backed …rms in total
employment, the average size of a VC-backed …rm relative to a non-VC-backed one, the elas-
ticity of IPO value with respect to VC funding, the cross-country elasticity of VC investment
with respect to pro…t taxes, and the impact of monitoring costs on VC investment. This is
one of the rare instances where the predictions of dynamic contract theory can be matched
with the data.
    One could ask what would happen if all innovation was funded by more traditional means
of …nance, which are less e¢ cient at evaluating, developing, and monitoring projects. The
answer here is that growth would fall by 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points with an associated long-
run consumption-equivalent welfare loss of 11 to 15 percent. The key personnel involved with
starting up enterprises funded by venture capitalists are rewarded in the form of convertible

                                              46
equity and stock options. Therefore in the United States venture capitalists are subject only
to capital gains taxation. The rate at which VC-funded startups are taxed in the United
States is low relative to other developed countries. Does this promote innovative activity?
The analysis suggests that raising the tax on VC-funded startups from the U.S. rate of 15
percent to the Norwegian rate of roughly 50 percent would shave 0.2 percentage points o¤
growth and lead to a welfare loss of 9.4 percent. The cross-country evidence suggests that
economic growth is positively related with investment by venture capitalists. Compared with
countries in continental European, such as France, a more advanced VC sector is a blessing
for economic growth in the United States. In particular, 44 percent of the di¤erence between
French and U.S. growth is attributed to better value-added services provided by American
venture capitalists to develop startups. This begs the question why hasn’t U.S. growth picked
up with the advent of VC. The answer here is that other things changed. In particular, it
is shown that a relatively small reduction in new technological opportunities will result in
economic growth remaining constant notwithstanding the rise of venture capital.


References
     Akcigit, Ufuk, Celik, Murat Alp, and Jeremy Greenwood. 2016. “Buy, Keep or Sell:
     Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas.”Econometrica, 84 (3): 943-984.

     Akcigit, Ufuk, Dinlersoz, Ufuk, Greenwood, Jeremy, and Veronika Penciakova (2019,
     research in progress), “Synergizing Ventures.”University of Chicago.

     Antunes, António, Cavalcanti, Tiago, and Anne Villamil. 2008. “The E¤ect of Finan-
     cial Repression and Enforcement on Entrepreneurship and Economic Development,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 55 (2): 278-297.

     Argente, David, Lee, Munseob, and Sara Moreira. 2019. “How Do Firms Grow? The
     Life Cycle of Products Matters.” Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
     neapolis.

     Bergemann, Dirk and Ulrich Hege. 1998. “Venture capital …nancing, moral hazard,
     and learning.”Journal of Banking and Finance, 22 (6): 703-735.

     Bernstein, Shai, Giroud, Xavier, and Richard R. Townsend. 2016. “The Impact of
     Venture Capital Monitoring.”Journal of Finance, 71 (4): 1591–1622.

     Bloom, Nicholas, Jones, Charles I., Van Reenen, John, and Michael Webb. 2018. “Are
     Ideas Getting Harder to Find?”American Economic Review, forthcoming.



                                             47
Buera, Francisco J., Kaboski, Joseph, and Yong Shin, 2011. “Finance and Develop-
ment: A Tale of Two Sectors,”American Economic Review, 101 (5): 1964–2002.

Castro, Rui, Clementi, Gian Luca, and Glenn MacDonald. 2004. “Investor Protection,
Optimal Incentives, and Economic Growth,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119
(3):1131-1175.

Celik, Murat Alp and Xu Tian. 2018. “Corporate Governance, Managerial Compensa-
tion, and Disruptive Innovations.”Unpublished paper, University of Toronto.

Clementi, Gian Luca and Hugo Hopenhayn. 2006. “A Theory of Financing Constraints
and Firm Dynamics.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1): 229-265.

Cole, Harold L., Greenwood, Jeremy and Juan M. Sanchez. 2016. “Why Doesn’t Tech-
nology Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”Econometrica, 84 (4): 1477-1521.

Cooley, Thomas F. and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2001. “Financial Markets and Firm Dy-
namics,”American Economic Review, 91 (5): 1286-1310.

Erosa, Andres. 2001. “Financial Intermediation and Occupational Choice in Develop-
ment,”Review of Economic Dynamics, 4 (2): 303-334.

Gomes, Joao F. 2001. “Financing Investment,” American Economic Review, 91 (5):
1263-1285.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Sanchez, Juan M., and Cheng Wang, 2013. “Quantifying the
Impact of Financial Development on Economic Development.” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 16 (1): 194-215.

Guner, Nezih, Ventura, Gustavo, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2008. “Macroeconomic Implica-
tions of Size-Dependent Policies.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 11: 721-744.

Henrekson, Magnus and Tino Sanandaji. 2016. “Stock Option Taxation and Venture
Capital Activity: A Cross-Country Study.” IFN Working Paper No. 1104, Research
Institute of Industrial Economics.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. “What Do Small Businesses Do?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall: 73-118.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald. 1994.“Competitive Di¤usion.” Journal
of Political Economy, 102 (1): 24-52.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Balazs Szentes. 2013. “On the Market for Venture Capital.”
Journal of Political Economy, 121 (3): 493-527.




                                     48
Karaivanov, Alexander and Robert M. Townsend. 2014. “Dynamic Financial Con-
straints: Distinguishing Mechanism Design From Exogenously Incomplete Regimes.”
Econometrica, 82 (3): 887–959.

Kerr, William R. 2010. “Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innova-
tion.”Journal of Urban Economics, 67 (1): 46–60.

Khan, Hashmat and Pythagoras Petratos. 2016. “Entrepreneurship and the Business
Cycle: Stylized Facts from U.S. Venture Capital Activity.”CEP 16-09, Carleton Uni-
versity.

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine. 1993a. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might
Be Right.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (3): 717-738.

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine. 1993b. “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth:
Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 32 (3): 513-542.

Lerner, Josh. 1998. “Comment on Bergemann and Hege.” Journal of Banking & Fi-
nance 22 (6-8): 736-740.

Levine, Ross, 2005. “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,”In Philippe Aghion
and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. 1, vol. 1. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 865-934.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Benjamin Moll. 2014. “Knowledge Growth and the Allocation
of Time.”Journal of Political Economy, 122 (1): 1-51.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu. 2014. “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from
Plant-level Data,”American Economic Review, 104 (2): 422-58.

Moll, Benjamin. 2014. “Productivity Losses From Financial Frictions: Can Self-
Financing Undo Capital Misallocation?”American Economic Review, 104 (10): 3186–
3221.

Opp, Christian. 2019. “Venture Capital and the Macroeconomy.”Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.

Parente, Stephen L. 1993. “Technology Adoption, Learning-by-Doing, and Economic
Growth.”Journal of Economic Theory, 63 (2): 346-369.

Perla, Jesse and Christopher Tonetti. 2014. “Equilibrium Imitation and Growth.”Jour-
nal of Political Economy, 122 (1): 52-76.

Phelan, Christopher and Robert M. Townsend. 1991. “Computing Multi-Period,
Information-Constrained Optima.”Review of Economic Studies, 58 (5): 853-881.



                                      49
       Puri, Manju and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. “On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-
       Capital and Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms.” Journal of Finance, LXVII (6):
       2247-2293.

       Romer, Paul M. 1986. “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.”Journal of Political
       Economy, 94 (5): 1002–1037.

       Schmitz, James A., Jr. 1989. “Imitation, Entrepreneurship, and Long-run Growth,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 97 (3) :721-739.

       Silveira, Rafael and Randall D. Wright. 2016. “Venture Capital: A Model of Search
       and Bargaining.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 19: 232–246.

       Smith, Anthony Jr. and Cheng Wang. 2006. “Dynamic Credit Relationships in General
       Equilibrium.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 53 (4): 847-877.

       Townsend, Robert M. 1979. “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
       State Veri…cation.”Journal of Economic Theory, 21 (2): 256-293.

       Williamson, Stephen D. 1986. “Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and Equi-
       librium Credit Rationing.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 18 (2): 159-79.


11      Thought Experiments
The analysis stresses the ability of a venture capitalist to evaluate, develop, and monitor
startup projects. The importance of these three factors is investigated one by one here.
These experiments present some useful background material relevant for Section 6, Section
8, and Appendix 12.


11.1     Changes in Monitoring E¢ ciency,                    M;t

How important is the venture capitalist’s ability to monitor the use of funds by entre-
preneurs? Figure 11 shows the general equilibrium impact of improving the e¢ ciency of
monitoring in the model. To undertake this thought experiment, the monitoring e¢ ciency
pro…le, f M;1 ;     ; M;7 g, is changed by a scalar, which takes the value of 1 for the baseline
calibration. Monitoring e¢ ciency is measured in terms of the percentage deviation of this
scalar from its baseline value. As monitoring e¢ ciency improves, there is an increase in
the average odds of detecting fraud across funding rounds (see the top panel). The venture
capitalist’s share of equity rises, on average, because it is now easier to ensure that funds are
not diverted. Compliance with the contract can still be guaranteed when the entrepreneur


                                               50
is given a lower share of an IPO. The venture capitalist must still earn zero pro…ts, how-
ever. Part of the increased return to the venture capitalist is soaked up by letting the new
entrepreneur be more ambitious about his choice of technique, which raises the initial cost
of research, R(x=x); the rest of the increased return is absorbed by increased investment in
development. As a result, VC-backed …rms have a higher level of productivity and are more
successful. This results in a higher share of employment for VC-backed …rms (as shown in
the middle panel). Additionally, the economy’s growth rate moves up, which results in a
welfare gain (measured in terms of consumption; see the bottom panel).28


11.2      Changes in Evaluation E¢ ciency,                         E

The importance of e¢ ciency in evaluation is examined now. The results are displayed
in Figure 12, where E is measured in terms of percentage deviations from the baseline
equilibrium. As evaluation becomes more e¢ cient, the odds of detecting a bad project
increase. Hence, the average failure rate across funding rounds moves up (see the top panel).
The success rate rises, both due to the purging of bad projects and the resulting increased
VC investment in development. The purging of bad projects dominates the exit of good
ones so that the fraction of good projects in the last round increases with E (as the middle
panel illustrates). The fact that it is more pro…table to invest in research and development is
re‡ected by an upward movement in the share of VC-backed …rms in employment. Economic
growth and welfare move up in tandem as evaluation e¢ ciency improves (see the bottom
panel).


11.3      Changes in Development E¢ ciency,                            D

The impact of changes in development e¢ ciency is studied next. Again, D is measured in
terms of percentage deviations from the baseline calibration. As it becomes less expensive
to develop a project, the odds of success improve. The failure rate also rises because fewer
good projects remain in the pool over time. VC-backed …rms’ share of employment picks
up, as it is more pro…table to fund a project. Last, economic growth and welfare rise with
development e¢ ciency.
  28
     See Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood (2016, Section 5.1) for details on how the welfare gain is computed.
In the current work, the initial level of consumption across balanced-growth paths is held …xed, though, as
opposed to aggregate productivity.




                                                    51
                                      77                                                                       44
                                      76                 Average Detection Pr                                  42
                       Share, %




                                      75                                                                       40




                                                                                                   µ, %
                                      74                                                                       38
                                      73                                    Equity Share                       36
                                      72                                                                       34
                                           -100    -75    -50   -25     0     25    50        75       100
                                 5.2
                                 5.0
                      Share, %




                                 4.8
                                 4.6                                  Employment Share
                                 4.4
                                 4.2
                                           -100    -75    -50   -25     0     25    50        75       100
                                       4
                                                                                                               1.85
                         Welfare, %




                                       2
                                                                                                   Growth, %



                                                                                                               1.80
                                       0           Growth
                                                                                                               1.75
                                      -2                        Welfare
                                                                                                               1.70
                                      -4
                                        -125 -100 -75 -50       -25     0    25    50    75    100 125
                                                  Monitoring Efficiency, χM -- % deviation




Figure 11: E¢ ciency in monitoring, M;t . The top panel shows how the average probability
of detecting fraud across funding rounds and the venture capitalist’s share of equity vary
with e¢ ciency in monitoring. The middle panel illustrates how the share of VC-backed …rms
in employment responds. Growth and welfare are displayed in the bottom panel. Monitoring
e¢ ciency is measured in terms of the percentage deviation from the baseline equilibrium.




                                                                      52
                                    3.0                                                                           8




                       Success, %
                                    2.7                                                                           6




                                                                                                     Failure, %
                                    2.4                     Failure Rate                                          4
                                    2.1
                                                                                                                  2
                                    1.8                                   Success Rate
                                    1.5                                                                           0
                                              -100    -75   -50   -25     0    25    50        75        100


                                        22                                                                        6.5
                          Pr(Good), %




                                                                                                                  6.0
                                                             Employment Share




                                                                                                     Share, %
                                        20                                                                        5.5
                                        18                                                                        5.0
                                                                                                                  4.5
                                        16                               Pr(Good|t=7)                             4.0

                                              -100    -75   -50   -25     0    25    50        75        100

                                         4                                                                        1.88
                            Welfare, %




                                         2                                                                        1.84




                                                                                                    Growth, %
                                                                    Welfare
                                                                                                                  1.80
                                         0
                                                                                                                  1.76
                                         -2                         Growth
                                                                                                      1.72
                                          -125 -100 -75 -50        -25    0   25    50    75    100 125
                                                     Evaluation Efficiency, χE -- % deviation



Figure 12: E¢ ciency in evaluation, E . The top panel shows how the average failure and
success rates across funding rounds vary with e¢ ciency in evaluation. The middle panel
illustrates how the odds of a project being good in the seventh round and the employment
share of VC-backed …rms respond. Growth and welfare are illustrated in the bottom panel.
Evaluation e¢ ciency is measured in terms of the percentage deviation from the baseline
equilibrium.


12     Identi…cation Appendix
What is VC’s secret of success? How can the success of VC in the United States be emu-
lated in the rest of the world? Addressing these questions entails decomposing VC’s contri-
butions into speci…c channels and assessing their relative importance. Modeling VC …nancing
by dynamic contract theory is particularly advantaged to achieve this goal of decomposi-
tion. How are the VC e¢ ciency parameters exactly identi…ed? A heuristic discussion of the
identi…cation strategy is presented here. As was mentioned, at a general level, a shift in
a parameter value in‡uences all of the data targets. Still, at a practical level, some of the
key VC parameters, in particular R , D , E , and the M ’s, a¤ect the VC data targets,

                                                                         53
                                                                                                                          3.6
                                       2.8
                          Success, %




                                       2.4                                                                                3.4
                                                    Failure Rate




                                                                                                             Failure, %
                                       2.0                                                                                3.2
                                       1.6
                                                                         Success Rate                                     3.0
                                       1.2
                                       0.8                                                                                2.8
                                             -100   -75    -50     -25       0        25        50    75        100
                             10.00
                                  8.00                                 Employment Share
                     Share, %




                                  6.00
                                  4.00
                                  2.00
                                  0.00
                                             -100   -75    -50     -25       0        25        50    75        100

                                       16                                                                                 2.2
                                                                                 Welfare
                          Welfare, %




                                        8                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                                             Growth, %




                                        0                                                                                 1.8
                                                                                           Growth
                                        -8
                                                                                                                          1.6
                                       -16
                                                                                                                       1.4
                                         -100 -75         -50    -25     0       25        50    75    100           125
                                                Development Efficiency, χD -- % deviation



Figure 13: E¢ ciency in development, D . The top panel shows how the average failure
and success rates across funding rounds vary with e¢ ciency in development. The middle
panel illustrates how the share of VC-backed …rms in employment responds. Growth and
welfare are illustrated in the bottom panel. Development e¢ ciency is measured in terms of
the percentage deviation from the baseline equilibrium.




                                                                         54
             The Mapping Between Parameters and Data Targets
         Variable Growth Success Rate Failure Rate VC’s Share of Equity
          R       +      '0           '0           '0
          D       +      +            '0           '0
          E       +      +            +            '0
          M ’s    +      +            +            +

Table 8: The block diagonal nature of the mapping from parameter values into data targets.


namely economic growth, the success rate, the failure rate, and the VC’s share of equity, in
a recursive (block diagonal) manner. Table 8 gives a tabular portrayal of the mapping from
the parameters into the data targets. The import of this mapping for identi…cation is turned
to now.

  1. Research Productivity, R . As can be seen from Figure 14, top panel, a shift in research
     productivity primarily has an impact on economic growth. Its e¤ect on the failure and
     success rates and the VC’s share of equity is small. This suggests that after the other
     parameters have been chosen to …t the data targets that R can then be picked to
     match the economy’s growth rate.

  2. Development E¢ ciency, D . A shift in this parameter impacts mainly the success
     rate, as is shown in Figure 14, second panel. It also a¤ects the growth rate, but in a
     more muted way. But, from Point 1, the research productivity parameter, R , can be
     adjusted to compensate for this. The parameter D has negligible e¤ect on the failure
     rate and the VC’s share of equity–these two lines lie of top of each other.

  3. Evaluation E¢ ciency, E . Changes in evaluation e¢ ciency have the largest e¤ect
     on the failure rate–see Figure 14, third panel. The next biggest impact is on the
     success rate, but this can be controlled for by changing D , as discussed in Point 2.
     The moderate e¤ect on growth can be compensated for by shifting R –Point 1. The
     in‡uence of E on the VC’s share of equity is minimal. (The lines for growth and
     equity share lie on top of each other.)

  4. Monitoring E¢ ciency, the M ’s. To implement this experiment the monitoring e¢ -
     ciency pro…le, f M;1 ;   ; M;7 g, is shifted by a scalar. Now, the VC’s share of equity
     changes–Figure 14, bottom panel. While the other targets move as well, this can be
     adjusted for by following the steps outlined in Points 1 to 3.




                                            55
                                                1.2                                                    Growth

                                                1.1           Failure Rate

                                                1.0
                                                                                                                         Success
                                                        Equity Share
                                                0.9                                                                      Rate

                                                0.8
                                                      -40     -30     -20     -10     0       10      20       30        40
                                                1.4                  Research Efficiency, χR -- % deviation
                                                                                      Success Rate
                                                1.2
                                                        Equity Share
                                                1.0                                                                           Failure
                                                                                                                              Rate
                    Target -- deviation from




                                                0.8         Growth
                                                0.6

                                                      -80     -60      -40     -20        0     20      40          60        80
                                                2.1                 Development Efficiency, χD -- % deviation
                                                1.8                                           Failure Rate
                                                                                                                 Success Rate
                                                1.5
                                                1.2    Equity Share                                                       Growth
                                                0.9
                                                0.6
                                                0.3
                                                   -120 -90     -60            -30        0     30      60          90        120
                                               1.08                  Evaluation Effficiency, χE -- % deviation
                                                                                                   Success Rate
                                               1.04                                                                        Equity
                                                                                                                           Share
                                               1.00
                                                                                                Failure Rate
                                               0.96
                                                        Growth
                                               0.92
                                                   -120       -90      -60     -30        0     30      60          90        120
                                                                     Monitoring Efficiency, χM -- % deviation



Figure 14: Identi…cation of the research, development, evaluation, and monitoring parame-
ters, R , D , E , and the M ’s. The horizontal axis shows the percentage deviation from
the calibrated equilibrium. The vertical axis displays how the target changes relative to the
benchmark equilibrium.




                                                                                     56
13       Empirical Appendix
13.1     Evidence on Venture Capital and Firm Performance
Some regression evidence is presented here on the link between VC, …rm growth, and inno-
vation.

13.1.1   Venture Capital and Firm Growth

Regression analysis is now conducted to evaluate the performance of VC-backed and non-
VC-backed …rms along four dimensions for years following an IPO: the R&D-to-sales ratio,
the growth rate of employment, the growth of sales revenue, and the (natural logarithm
of the) market value of …rms. The results are presented in Table 9. The regressions are
based on an unbalanced panel of U.S. public companies between 1970 and 2014. To compare
VC-backed companies with their non-VC-backed counterparts, a VC dummy is entered as
an independent variable that takes the value of 1 if the company is funded by VC before its
IPO. In all regressions, industry dummies, year dummies, and a year dummy for the IPO
are included. In addition, a cross term is added between the VC dummy and the number of
years since the …rm’s IPO.
    As shown by the …rst row of regression coe¢ cients, VC-backed companies are more R&D
intensive and grow faster than their non-VC-backed counterparts. On average the R&D-to-
sales ratio of a public VC-backed company is higher than its non-VC-backed counterpart by
5.2 percentage points, and it grows faster–by 4.9 percentage points in terms of employment
and 7.0 percentage points in terms of sales revenue. These superior performances translate
into higher market values: VC-backed companies are valued 37.3 percent higher than their
non-VC-backed counterparts. The di¤erence in performance, however, gradually dwindles
over the years, as shown by the negative signs of the regression coe¢ cients in the second
row. As a consequence, the performances of VC- and non-VC-backed public companies tend
to converge in the long run, though the speed of convergence is fairly low, as revealed by the
magnitude of the regression coe¢ cients in the second row.

13.1.2   Venture Capital and Innovation

The role of VC in encouraging technological innovation is now gauged at an annual period-
icity; speci…cally, the impact of VC funding on patent performance is evaluated at the …rm
level and at the industry level for employment and sales growth. The data contains all com-
panies funded by venture capitalists between 1970 and 2015. These VC-funded patentees

                                             57
                    VC- versus Non-VC-Backed Public Companies
 Dependent variable      R&D / Sales Employment growth Sales growth                             ln(Firm value)

 VC (= 1, if backed by VC)          0.0521***             0.0490***             0.0696***           0.373***
                                    (0.00169)              (0.00206)             (0.00270)           (0.0141)
 VC     years since IPO           -0.000780***           -0.00304***           -0.00406***         -0.0110***
                                   (0.000132)             (0.000165)            (0.000215)          (0.00110)
 ln(employment)                    -0.0133***            -0.00567***           -0.00641***          0.851***
                                   (0.000248)             (0.000254)            (0.000335)          (0.00170)
 + controls
 Observations                         84,116               148,834               149,672            168,549
 R-squared                            0.383                 0.084                 0.108              0.737

Table 9: All speci…cations include year dummies, industry dummies (at the 4-digit SIC),
and a year dummy for the IPO. Standard errors are in parentheses and signi…cance at the 1
percent level is denoted by ***.


are identi…ed by matching …rm names in VentureXpert and PatentsView.
    Firm-Level Regressions. In the …rm-level regressions, the primary independent vari-
able is (the natural logarithm of) annual VC funding, while the dependent variable is a
measure of patenting performance 3 years after the …rm receives the funding. The primary
independent variable may su¤er from both measurement error and selection issues. So, an
instrumental variable (IV) is used in some of the regressions. The IV is based on the dereg-
ulation of pension funds in 1979, as highlighted in Section 14. The deregulation of pension
funds reduced the fundraising costs of VC and led to increasing VC investment in all indus-
tries. In addition, industries that relied more on external …nance enjoyed a stronger boost in
VC funding.29 Hence, a cross term between a “deregulation dummy”and a variable re‡ecting
the industry’s (in which the …rm operates) dependence on external …nance is introduced as
an IV. The deregulation dummy takes the value of 1 after 1979. The dependence on external
…nance is a Rajan-Zingales type measure that re‡ects the extent to which outside funds are
used in the industry for expenditures on property, plant and equipment, R&D, advertising,
and employee training. In all of the regressions, controls are added for the number of patents
held by the …rm at the beginning of the year, the age of the …rm, and the total amount of
private- and federally-funded R&D of the industry in which the …rm operates. Additionally,
both a year dummy and an industry dummy (at 2-digit SIC) are entered. Last, since both
innovation and VC activities are remarkably clustered in California and Massachusetts, a
  29
     This is revealed by the …rst stage results of the IV regressions. Though the …rst stage results are not
presented due to space limitations, they can be sent upon request.


                                                    58
“cluster dummy”for a …rm headquartered in California and Massachusetts is included.
    The results of the regression analysis are reported in Table 10. Panel A of Table 10
conducts the analysis along the extensive margin; that is, whether the …rm obtains any
patents 3 years after receiving VC funding. In regressions (1) and (2), the dependent variable
is a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the …rm …les any successful patent applications at
the U.S. Patents and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) within the 3 years following funding.
Regressions (3) and (4) focus on “breakthrough” patents, a measure pioneered by Kerr
(2010). Breakthrough patents refer to those in the right tail of the citation distribution.
Here the dependent variable in regressions (3) and (4) is a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if the …rm …les any patents in the top 10 percent of the citation distribution in
its cohort (i.e., those patents with the same technological class and same application year)
within the 3 years following funding. Panel B of Table 10 turns to the intensive margin.
In regressions (5) and (6) the dependent variable is (the natural logarithm of) the number
of patents within the 3 years ensuing the …rm’s funding. The (natural logarithm of the)
number of patents is weighted by citations in regressions (7) and (8).
    As shown by the positive regression coe¢ cients of VC funding in Panel A, a …rm is
more likely to …le a patent and come up with a breakthrough patent the larger is the
funding from a venture capitalist, although the impact of VC funding is somewhat smaller
in spurring breakthrough patents than ordinary patents. According to the IV estimates in
regressions (6) and (8), a 10 percent increase in VC funding will induce a boost, in the 3
years subsequent to funding, of 7.9 percent in patenting and 7.5 percent in quality-adjusted
patenting. In addition, across all the regressions in Table 10, the estimates are consistently
higher in the IV regressions.
    Impact of Venture Capital on Industry Growth. How does VC a¤ect growth at
the industry level? Attention is now turned to evaluating the impact of VC funding on
the growth of industries between 1970 and 2011. The main explanatory variable is the
(natural logarithm of the) amount of VC funding each industry receives in each year. The
dependent variables are the average annual growth rate of employment and sales for the
3 year period after an industry receives VC funding.30 In all the regressions, controls are
added for logged employment in each industry, year dummies, and industry dummies (at
2-digit SIC). An instrumental variable (IV) is applied to address the issues of measurement
errors and selection bias in the OLS regressions. As detailed earlier, the IV is a cross term
between the deregulation dummy and a variable re‡ecting the industry’s dependence on
 30
     The employment and sales information is based on the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database
available at https://www.nber.org/nberces/.



                                               59
                            VC Funding and Patenting
              Panel A: Firm-Level Regressions, Extensive Margin Analysis
         Dependent variable   1{Patent > 0}     1{“Breakthrough patent” > 0}
                                Probit       IV       Probit            IV
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)
         ln(…rm VC funding)    0.126***   0.610***   0.125***        0.525***
                               (0.0123)   (0.0932)   (0.0118)         (0.123)
         + controls
         Observations            7,589     7,589      7,589           7,589
              Panel B: Firm-Level Regressions, Intensive Margin Analysis
         Dependent variable    ln(Patent)           ln(Patent, quality adj)
                                 OLS         IV        OLS              IV
                                  (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)
         ln(…rm VC funding)    0.137***   0.792***   0.182***        0.748**
                               (0.0107)    (0.233)   (0.0173)        (0.369)
         + controls
         Observations            5,538     5,538      4,958           4,958
         R-squared               0.244                0.135

Table 10: See the main text for a description of the dependent and independent variables.
Standard errors are in parentheses. *** denotes signi…cance at the 1 percent level, ** at the
5 percent level.




                                             60
                          VC Funding and Industry growth
          Dependent variable     Employment growth     Sales Growth
                                          OLS            IV           OLS            IV
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
          ln(industry VC funding)    0.00338***     0.00608***    0.00495***    0.00898***
                                      (0.000748)     (0.00178)    (0.000958)     (0.00228)
          ln(employment)             -0.00646***    -0.00817***   -0.00476**    -0.00730***
                                       (0.00161)     (0.00189)     (0.00207)     (0.00243)
          + controls
          Observations                   1,909          1,909           1,909      1,909
          R-squared                      0.285                          0.334

Table 11: See the main text for a description of the dependent and independent variables.
Standard errors are in parentheses. *** denotes signi…cance at the 1 percent level.


external …nance.
   As demonstrated in Table 11, increasing VC funding in an industry in a given year is
associated with a higher growth rate of employment and sales in the subsequent 3 years.
According to the IV regressions (2) and (4), a one-standard-deviation increase in logged
industry-level VC funding is associated with increases of 1.3 and 1.9 percentage points in
annual employment and sales growth following funding. As complementary evidence on the
cyclicality of VC activities, Khan and Petratos (2016) document that VC-backed …rm entry
(the number of startups) and exit (the number of IPOs and M&As) are respectively almost
three and …ve times as volatile as business …xed investment.


13.2       Figures
       Figure 1: The rise of venture capital, 1970 to 2015. Investment by venture capitalists
       is obtained from the VentureXpert database of Thomson ONE. The fraction of public
       …rms backed by VC companies is created by matching …rm names in VentureXpert
       and CompuStat; the latter are available from Wharton Research Data Services.31

       Figure 2: The share of VC-backed companies in employment, R&D spending, and
       patents. The employment and R&D shares of VC-backed public companies are calcu-
       lated by matching …rm names in VentureXpert and CompuStat, as in Figure 1. The
       share of patents for VC-backed public companies is computed by matching …rm names
 31
      Source link: https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/index.cfm?




                                                   61
      in VentureXpert and the NBER Patent Data Project.32

      Figure 5: Investment and equity share by funding round. Investment in each funding
      round is based on the VC-funded deals in Crunchbase between 1981 and 2015. Crunch-
      base has better funding-round information than VentureXpert. The vertical axis is the
      mean of funding in a round across all deals, from round 1 (i.e., series A) to round 7
      (i.e., series G). Funding is converted into millions of constant $2009 using the GDP
      de‡ator. The mean duration of a funding round in Crunchbase is 1.4 years, which is
      taken to 1.5 years here. The share of equity transferred to the venture capitalist in each
      funding round is calculated as the ratio of VC funding in each round to the post-money
      valuation of the company after the VC investment. For each funding round the mean
      equity share across all deals is calculated. The vertical axis is the cumulated share of
      equity transferred to the venture capitalist.

      Figure 6: The odds of success and failure by funding round and the value of an IPO by
      the duration of funding. The underlying data source is Puri and Zarutskie (2012, Table
      VI.B, p. 2271). The success rate refers to …rms that have an IPO or that are acquired
      by another …rm. The acquisitions in Puri and Zarutskie (2012) are converted into
      successes by multiplying by 0.629. This is based on the fact that the cash multiple for
      acquisitions is 37.1 percent lower than for IPOs, as reported in Achleitner et al. (2012).
      In addition, the success and failure rates by funding round are obtained by interpolating
      the original annual data using a cubic spline to get a periodicity of 1.5 years. Puri
      and Zarutskie (2012, Table V) classify a …rm “as having failed if it disappears from
      the LBD in its entirety.” The value of an IPO, as a function of the duration of VC
      funding, derives from regression (2) in Table 13 (discussed in Section 13.4).

      Figure 7: The cross-country relationship between the tax rate on VC activity and the
      VC investment-to-GDP ratio. The source for the cross-country data is Henrekson
      and Sanandaji (2016, Table 1). The VC investment-to-GDP ratio on the vertical
      axis is residualized against the following control variables: GDP per capita, the Barro
      and Lee (2013) human capital index, the ratio of R&D to GDP, the ratio of market
      capitalization of all listed …rms to GDP, and the “distance to frontier score” of the
      World Bank (a measure of the ease of doing business in a country).

      Figure 9: Economic growth and VC investment. VC investment and the growth rate
      of real GDP per capita are based on VentureXpert of Thomson ONE and the World
32
     Source link: https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home


                                                  62
              VC Investment and Growth: Cross-Country Regressions
              Dependent Variable         Growth of GDP pc., %
              ln(VC Investment/GDP)            0.718***
                                                (0.223)
              + control
              Observations                         40
              R-squared                          0.602

Table 12: The control variables are the initial levels of real GDP per capita, the Barro and
Lee (2013) human capital index, and the ratio of domestic private credit to GDP. Standard
errors are in parentheses. *** denotes signi…cance at the 1 percent levels.

       Development Indicators of the World Bank, respectively. The growth rate of real GDP
       per capita on the vertical axis is residualized against the following control variables:
       the initial levels of real GDP per capita, the Barro and Lee (2013) human capital
       index, and the ratio of domestic private credit to GDP. The Barro and Lee (2013)
       human capital index is a measure of educational attainment in a country. The data
       for the domestic private credit-to-GDP ratio was gathered from the Global Financial
       Development Database of the World Bank. The regression results are reported in Table
       12.


13.3       Tables
       Table 1: Top 30 VC-Backed Companies. As in Figure 1, the list of VC-backed public
       companies is gathered by matching …rm names in VentureXpert and CompuStat.

       Table 9: VC- versus Non-VC-Backed Public Companies. The VC-backed public com-
       panies are singled out by matching …rm names in VentureXpert and CompuStat. Since
       the R&D-to-sales ratios and growth rates can be very volatile across …rms, the top and
       bottom 5 percent of the outliers are trimmed in this regression. The results are robust
       to changing the trimming threshold (at the 1 percent versus 5 percent level).

       Table 10: VC Funding and Patenting, Firm-Level Regressions. The VC-funded paten-
       tees are identi…ed by matching …rm names in VentureXpert and PatentsView.33 The
       dependence on external …nance measure is motivated by Rajan and Zingales (1998). In
       calculating the dependence on external …nance, 30 percent of selling, general, and ad-
       ministrative expenses is taken as intangible investment. The industry levels of private-
 33
      Source link of PatentsView: http://www.patentsview.org/download/.


                                                  63
       and federally-funded R&D are collected from the Business R&D and Innovation Survey
       by the National Science Foundation.34 A truncation adjustment for citations is made
       following Bernstein (2015). The industry dummies in this regression are at the 2-digit
       SIC level.

       Table 4: The sources for the data targets are: Economic growth–BEA; cash multiple–
       a large-scale survey on 681 venture capital …rms; success rate, failure rate, VC em-
       ployment share and employment ratio–Puri and Zarutskie (2012, Tables I and VI.B);
       VC funding and equity share–Crunchbase; IPO value elasticity (…rm level)–Regression
       (17); tax elasticity of VC Investment/GDP–Henrekson and Sanandaji (2016); Monitoring-
       cost treatment–Bernstein et al. (2016, Tables IAVI & IAVII).

       Table 11: VC Funding and Industry Growth, Industry-Level Regressions. The em-
       ployment and sales information is based on the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
       Database.35 The industry panel is based on the 4-digit SIC. The industry dummies in
       this regression are at 2-digit SIC level.


13.4        Duration of VC Funding and the Value of an IPO
The relationship between the …rm’s value at an IPO and the number of years it received
funding from the venture capitalist is examined using regression analysis. The regressions are
based on public companies funded by venture capitalists between 1970 and 2015. These VC-
backed companies are identi…ed by matching …rm names in CompuStat and VentureXpert.
The dependent variable in the regressions is the natural logarithm of the market value of
the …rms at IPO (in $2009). A three-year average is used for market value because of the
notorious volatility of share prices following an IPO. IPOs are excluded when they take more
than 11 years for the …rms to go public after receiving the …rst VC funding. This is for two
reasons: (i) the sampling period is formulated to be consistent with the model where the
maximum duration for each VC investment is 10.5 years, and (ii) only 4.5 percent of the
observations occur after 11 years with the data being very noisy. The main explanatory
variable is the number of years between the …rm’s …rst VC funding and the date of its IPO.
The …ndings are shown in Table 13. The …rst coe¢ cient in regression (2) is used in Figure
6 to plot the decline in the value of an IPO across successive funding rounds.

 34
      Source link of BRDIS: https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyindustry/#tabs-2.
 35
      Source link of NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database: https://www.nber.org/nberces/.



                                                 64
                        VC Funding and Years to Go Public
           Dependent variable                 ln(Firm value at IPO, real)
                                                   1              2
           years btw …rst VC funding and IPO -0.0470***     -0.0385***
                                               (0.0161)       (0.0146)
           …rm age at IPO                                   -0.0246***
                                                             (0.00495)
           # of employees at IPO (log)                       0.709***
                                                              (0.0375)
           year dummy for IPO                     N              Y
           industry e¤ect                         N              Y

           Observations                                         1,042             1,006
           R-squared                                            0.008             0.627

Table 13: Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote signi…cance at the 1, 5
and 10 percent levels.


References
      Achleitner, Ann-Kristin, Braun, Reiner, Lutz, Eva and Uwe Reiner. 2012. “Venture
      Capital Firm Returns from Acquisition Exits.” Unpublished paper, Technische Uni-
      versität München.

      Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 2013. “A New Data Set of Educational Attain-
      ment in the World, 1950–2010.”Journal of Development Economics, 104 (C): 184-198.

      Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.”
      American Economic Review, 88 (3): 559-586.


14      Historical Appendix: The Rise of Venture Capital
        as Limited Partnerships
Financing cutting-edge technologies has always been problematic.36 It is di¢ cult to know
whether new ideas are viable, if they will be saleable, and how best to bring them to mar-
ket. Also, it is important to ensure that entrepreneurs’and investors’incentives are aligned.
Traditional …nancial institutions, such as banks and equity/securities markets, are not well
 36
    This section draws heavily on Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokolo¤ (2007) for the period prior to World
War II and on Kenney (2011) for the period after.



                                                   65
suited to engage in this sort of underwriting. Historically, the introduction of new technolo-
gies was privately …nanced by wealthy individuals. Investors were plugged into networks
of inventive activity in which they learned about new ideas, vetted them, and drew on
the expertise needed to operationalize them. These …nanciers are similar to today’s “angel
investors.”
    The Brush Electric Company provided such a network for inventors and investors in
Cleveland around the turn of the 20th century. Electricity was one of the inventions born
during the Second Industrial Revolution. Individuals linked with the Brush Electric Com-
pany network spawned ideas for arc lighting, liquefying air, smelting ores electrically, and
electric cars and trolleys, among other things. The shops at Brush were a meeting place
for inventors; they could develop and debug new ideas with help from others. Investors
connected with the Brush network learned about promising new ideas from the scuttlebutt
at the shops. They became partners/owners in the …rms that they …nanced. Interestingly,
in the Midwest at the time, proli…c inventors (those with more than 15 patents) who were
principals in companies were much more likely to keep their patents or assign them to the
companies where they were principals as opposed to other inventors, who typically sold
them to businesses where they had no concern. This aligned the incentives of innovators
and investors.
    World War II and the start of the Cold War ushered in new technologies, such as jets,
nuclear weapons, radars, and rockets. There was a splurge of spending by the Defense
Department. A handful of VC …rms were formed to exploit the commercialization of scienti…c
advances. American Research and Development (ARD), founded by General Georges Doriot
and others, was one of these. ARD pulled in money from mutual funds, insurance companies,
and an initial public stock o¤ering. The founders knew that it was important for venture
capitalists to provide advice to the ‡edging enterprises in which they were investing. In 1956
ARD invested $70,000 in Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in exchange for a 70 percent
equity stake. ARD’s share was worth $38.5 million when DEC went public in 1966, which
represented an annual return of 100 percent. While this investment was incredibly successful,
the organizational form of ARD did not come to dominate the industry. The compensation
structure of ARD made it di¢ cult for the company to retain the VC professionals needed
to evaluate startups and provide the guidance necessary for success.
    An alternative organizational form came to emblematize the industry; viz., the limited
partnership. This form is exempli…ed by the formation of Davis and Rock in 1961. These
partnerships allowed VC professionals to share in the gains from startups along with the
entrepreneurs and investors. Limited partnerships served to align venture capitalists’ in-


                                             66
terests with those of entrepreneurs, investors, and key employees. Money was put in only
at the beginning of the partnership. The general partners received management fees as a
salary plus a share of the capital gains from the investments, say 40 percent, with the limited
partners earning 60 percent. The limited partners had no say in the decisions of the general
partners. The partnerships were structured for a limited length of time, say 7 to 10 years.
The returns from the partnership were paid out to the investors only when the partnership
was dissolved–there were no dividends, interest payments, etc. Therefore, the returns upon
dissolution were subject only to capital gains taxation at the investor level. The VC industry
also rewarded founders, CEOs, and key employees using stock options. Thus, they too were
subject to capital gains taxation and not taxation on labor income. The short time horizon
created pressure to ensure a venture’s rapid success.
    Banks and other …nancial institutions are not well suited to invest in cutting-edge new
ventures. While banks are good at evaluating systematic lending risk, they have limited
ability to judge the skill of entrepreneurs, the worth of new technologies, and the expertise
to help commercialize them. The Glass-Steagall Banking Act of 1933 prohibited banks
from taking equity positions in industrial …rms–the act was repealed in 1999. Allstate
Insurance Company created a private placements program in the 1960s to undertake VC-
type investments. It abandoned the program because it could not compensate the VC
professionals enough to retain them. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
prevented pension funds (and dissuaded other traditional …duciaries) from investing in high-
risk ventures. The act was reinterpreted in the 1980s to allow pension funds to invest in
VC-operating companies, which provided a …llip for the VC industry.


References
     Kenney, Martin. 2011. “How Venture Capital Became a Component of the US National
     System of Innovation.”Industrial and Corporate Change, 20 (6): 1677–1723.

     Lamoreaux, Naomi, Levenstein, Margaret, and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤. 2007. “Financing
     Invention during the Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920.” In
     Naomi Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤, eds., Financing Innovation in the United
     States, 1870 to the Present. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 39-8




                                              67
15      Theory Appendix
Proofs for Lemmas 2 and 4 are supplied in turn here. Lemma 2 establishes the existence
of a balanced-growth path. Lemma 4 shows that solving the contract problem (P2) subject
to a sequence of one-shot incentive constraints is equivalent to solving it subject to a single
consolidated round-0 incentive constraint that allows for multi-shot deviations. This is
proved using Lemma 3 as an intermediate step.


15.1     Balanced Growth
Lemma 2 (Balanced Growth) There exists a balanced-growth path of the form outlined in
Section 4.3.
Proof. Suppose that fpt ; t ; t ; t g solves the old problem for x and x. It will be shown that
fgw pt ; t ; t ; t g solves the new one for x0 = gx x and x0 = gx x. First, observe that if x0 = gx x
and x0 = gx x, then I(x0 ; gxt x0 ) = gw I(x; gxt x). This occurs because T (x0 ; x0t ) = gw T (x; xt ).
                                                                                   0
This can be seen from (P1) because x will rise by gx and wages by gw . If pt = gw pt , then it
is immediate from the objective function in (P2) that C(x0 ; x0 ) = gw C(x; x). Now, consider
the incentive constraint (5). At the conjectured solution, the left-hand side will in‡ate by the
factor gw . So will the right-hand side because D( 0t ) D(e0t ) = gw [D( t ) D(et )], since all
costs are speci…ed as a function of w. Therefore, the new solution still satis…es the incentive
constraint. Move now to the zero-pro…t constraint (7). Again, the left-hand side will in‡ate
                               0            0
by the factor gw , since pt = gw pt , t = gw t , D( 0t ) = gw D( t ), Mt ( 0t ) = gw Mt ( t ),
     0
E( t ) = gw E( t ), and R(x0 =x0 ) = gw R(x=x). This is trivially true for the right-hand side.
Hence, the zero-pro…t constraint holds at the new allocations. It is easy to deduce from the
right-hand side of (5) that the old solution for et will still hold. This can be seen by using
the above argument while noting that D1 (e0t ) = gw D1 (et ). To sum up, at the conjectured
new solution, the objective function and the constraints all scale up by the same factor of
proportionality gw . By cancelling out this factor of proportionality, the new problem reverts
back to the old one. Likewise, it is easy to deduce that if x solves problem (P3) for x,
then x0 = gx x solves it when x0 = gx x. The occurs because problem (P3) also scales up
by the factor of proportionality gw . When x=x remains constant along a balanced-growth
path, then the initial research cost of the project will rise at the same rate as wages, gw .
Additionally, V (x) will grow the same rate as wages, w, so from (8) it is apparent that e will
remain constant.




                                                  68
15.2          One-Shot Deviations versus Multi-Shot Deviations
This is an intermediate step toward solving Lemma 4. To this end, it will be shown that if
the incentive constraint (5) holds for round t, when the entrepreneur has not deviated up
to and including round t 1, then it will also hold when he follows some arbitrary path of
deviations up to and including round t 1. Let t represent that the probability that a
project is good at round t as de…ned by (4). These odds evolve recursively according to

                                                             (1         t) t
                                       t+1   =                                                    ;
                                                 (1   et ) t + (1            t+1 )(1         t)


where 1 = =[ +(1 )(1 1 )] and et is the success probability chosen by the entrepreneur.
For use in proving Lemma 3, note that t+1 is increasing in t and decreasing in et . This
implies that if the entrepreneur deviates in round t, so that et < t , he will be more optimistic
about the future, as t+1 will be higher. This increases the value of the ’s for future rounds
as well. With this notation, the round-t incentive constraint (5) then reads

                                                            X
                                                            T
                              t                                       i 1                    i+1 t             i
     t (1      )f    t [I(x; gx x)     pt ] + (1       t)             j=t+1 (1         j)             i [I(x; gx x)      pi ]g
                                                            i=t+1

                                                 (1   t )max        D( t )       D(et )
                                                          et

                                                              X
                                                              T
                                                                        i 1                      i+1 t
 +     t (1     )f   et [I(x; gxt x)     pt ] + (1     et )             j=t+1 (1            j)
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                         i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g :
                                                              i=t+1


Lemma 3 If the incentive constraint (5) holds for round t, when the entrepreneur has not
deviated up to and including in round t 1, then it will also hold when he follows some
arbitrary path of deviations up to and including in round t 1.

Proof. Suppose that the entrepreneur deviates in some manner before round t. Let b t be
the prior associated with this path of deviation. Since the e’s will be less that than the ’s,




                                                               69
it follows that b t >         t.   Let bt be the optimal round-t deviation associated with b t . Now,

                                                                X
                                                                T
                               t                                            i 1                   i+1 t            i
     t (1      )f     t [I(x; gx x)     pt ] + (1         t)                j=t+1 (1        j)            i [I(x; gx x)       pi ]g
                                                               i=t+1

                                                    (1         t)    D( t )        D(b)

                                                                     X
                                                                     T
                                                                              i 1                     i+1 t
 +     t (1      )f   bt [I(x; gxt x)     pt ] + (1       bt )                j=t+1 (1           j)
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                              i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g ;
                                                                    i=t+1


because et is maximal when the prior is                         t,   while bt is not. Next, replace                  t   with b t to get

                                                  X
                                                  T
                     t                                         i 1                     i+1 t              i
  btf       t [I(x; gx x)    pt ] + (1       t)                j=t+1 (1         j)               i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g
                                                  i=t+1

                                                  (1           t)    D( t )        D(bt )

                                                                     X
                                                                     T
                                                                              i 1                     i+1 t
              + btf    b[I(x; gxt x)      pt ] + (1       bt )                j=t+1 (1           j)
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                              i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g ;
                                                                    i=t+1


since b t > t . Last, if the prior is b t , then bt is maximal, so the above equation can be
rewritten as

                                                                X
                                                                T
                               t                                            i 1                   i+1 t            i
  b t (1       )f     t [I(x; gx x)     pt ] + (1         t)                j=t+1 (1        j)            i [I(x; gx x)       pi ]g
                                                               i=t+1

                                             (1          t ) max          D( t )       D(bt )
                                                              bt

                                                                     X
                                                                     T
                                                                              i 1                     i+1 t
 + b t (1        )f   bt [I(x; gxt x)     pt ] + (1       bt )                j=t+1 (1           j)
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                              i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g :
                                                                    i=t+1


Hence the round-t incentive constraint hold when for some arbitrary path of deviations up
to and including in round t 1.




                                                                     70
15.3         The Consolidated Round-0 Incentive Constraint
The consolidated round-0 incentive constraint is

                 X
                 T
                            t 1                 t            t
  (1         )              j=1 (1        j)        t [I(x; gx x)        pt ]
                 t=1
                                                X
                                                T
                                                       t 1       t 1                                 t
                                      max f                  [   j=1 (1         ej ) + (1        )   j=1 (1        j )]
                                     fet gT
                                          t=1   t=1

                                                          (1        t )[D( t )         D(et )]
                                                                                      X
                                                                                      T
                                                                    + (1          )           t 1
                                                                                              j=1 (1       ej ) t et [I(x; gxt x)     pt ]g:
                                                                                      t=1


                                                                                                                                         (18)

Lemma 4 (Equivalence of contracts) A contract f t ; t ; t ; pt g solves problem (P2) subject
to the sequence of one-shot incentive constraints (5) if and only if it solves (P2) subject to
the consolidated round-0 incentive constraint (18).

Proof (by contradiction). (Necessity) Suppose that an allocation satis…es the one-shot
incentive compatibility constraints (5) but that it violates the consolidated one (18). This
implies that at some round in the problem with the consolidated constraint it pays to deviate
and pick a et 6= t . Pick the last round of deviation (which may be T ). It must be true that
et solves the maximization problem


  (1         t ) max        D( t )        D(et )
                  et

                                                                         X
                                                                         T
                                                                                   i 1                    i+1 t
  + b t (1             )f   b[I(x; gxt x)           pt ] + (1     et )             j=t+1 (1          j)
                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                  i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g ;
                                                                         i=t+1


where b t is the prior associated with the path of ’s up to round t 1, which may include
previous deviations. But, from Lemma 3, this is less than the value of sticking with the
contract or

                                                                         X
                                                                         T
                                     t                                             i 1                    i+1 t            i
    b t (1         )f       t [I(x; gx x)           pt ] + (1       t)             j=t+1 (1          j)           i [I(x; gx x)     pi ]g;
                                                                         i=t+1




                                                                          71
when the round-t one-shot incentive constraint (5) holds, as assumed. Thus, a contradiction
emerges.
   (Su¢ ciency) Suppose f t gTt=1 satis…es the consolidated incentive constraint, but violates
the one-shot incentive constraint at round k. Then, using (4) and (5), it follows that

                                                                                            X
                                                                                            T
     k 1                 k 1                              k                                       t 1                       t+1 k            t
     j=1 (1         j)         (1    )f          k [I(x; gx x) pk ]+(1              k)            j=k+1 (1         j)               t [I(x; gx x)     pt ]g
                                                                                         t=k+1

                                                        X
                                                        T
                                                                 t 1                t             t
                                    = (1            )            j=1 (1        j)        t [I(x; gx x)     pt ]
                                                        t=k

                     k 1                            k 1                                  k
                <           (1      k)       [      j=1 (1       j)   + (1          )    j=1 (1     j )][D( k )             D(ek )]

                                                                                X
                                                                                T
     k 1                                                                                     t 1                  t+1 k
+    j=1 (1         j )(1        )f ek [I(x; gxk x) pk ]+(1 ek )                             j=k+1 (1      j)
                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                              t [I(x; gx x)   pt ]g :
                                                                               t=k+1


                                                                                                                                              (19)

The left-hand side gives the payo¤ in the contract at the optimal solution from round k on,
when using the consolidated incentive constraint, while the right-hand side represents the
payo¤ from a one-shot deviation at round k.
   Now the objective function for the contract can be written as

          X
          k 1                                                                               X
                                                                                            T
                     t 1                 t                t                                       t 1                   t             t
(1    )              j=1 (1         j)           t [I(x; gx x)     pt ] + (1            )         j=1 (1          j)         t [I(x; gx x)    pt ]:
          t=1                                                                               t=k


Evaluate this at the optimal solution for the contract when using (18) instead of (5). Next,
in this objective function, replace the payo¤ from round k on, as represented by the left-hand
side of (19), with the payo¤ from the one-shot deviation as given by the right-hand side.
This deviation increases the value of the objective function for the entrepreneur under the
contract with the time-0 incentive constraint, which contradicts its optimality.




                                                                          72
