NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEER EFFECTS IN WATER CONSERVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMER MIGRATION
Bryan Bollinger
Jesse Burkhardt
Kenneth Gillingham
Working Paper 24812
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24812

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

The authors are grateful for conversations and comments from Kerry Smith, Matt Kotchen, Erich
Muehlegger, Sheila Olmstead, Michael Hanemann, Soe Myint, and from seminar participants at
NBER EEE, Arizona State, Northwestern, and UCLA. The authors would also especially like to
thank the staff at the Phoenix Metropolitan Water District, including Doug Frost, Darren
Sversvold, and Jamie Campbell. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bryan Bollinger, Jesse Burkhardt, and Kenneth Gillingham. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Peer Effects in Water Conservation: Evidence from Consumer Migration
Bryan Bollinger, Jesse Burkhardt, and Kenneth Gillingham
NBER Working Paper No. 24812
July 2018
JEL No. L95,Q25,R23
ABSTRACT
Social interactions are widely understood to influence consumer decisions in many choice
settings. This paper identifies causal peer effects in water conservation during the growing
season, utilizing variation from consumer migration. We use machine learning to classify highresolution remote sensing images to provide evidence that conversion to dry landscaping
underpins the peer effects in water consumption. We also provide evidence that without a price
signal, peer effects are muted, demonstrating a complementarity between information
transmission and prices. These results inform water use policy in many areas of the world
threatened by recurring drought conditions.
Bryan Bollinger
Duke Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
bryan.bollinger@duke.edu
Jesse Burkhardt
Colorado State University
1200 Center Ave. Mall
Fort Collins, CO 80523
jesse.burkhardt@colostate.edu

Kenneth Gillingham
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24812

1

Introduction

Social interactions have been shown to play a pivotal role in the diffusion of many new
technologies and practices, and undergird classic economic models of technology diffusion (Griliches 1957; Bass 1969; Rogers 1995). The idea that individuals learn from their
peers, neighbors, or friends to adopt behaviors or technologies has been explored in settings ranging from agriculture (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995; Conley and Udry 2010) to
foreclosures (Towe and Lawley 2013) and schooling (Sacerdote 2001; Graham 2008). In
the environmental realm, such ‘peer effects’ have been shown in the adoption of solar
photovoltaic panels (Bollinger and Gillingham 2012; Graziano and Gillingham 2015) and
hybrid vehicles (Narayanan and Nair 2013; Heutel and Muehlegger 2015).
This paper is the first to identify causal peer effects in water consumption. Our identification strategy relies on quasi-experimental variation from consumer migration in
which new households move into peer groups and make water consumption and landscape changes. We use water billing and housing transaction data from over 300,000
households in Phoenix, Arizona to identify households that make substantial and persistent reductions in growing season water consumption that are consistent with a switch
to dry landscaping. We find that a 10% increase in the fraction of peer group households
who substantially reduce their growing season water consumption from one year to the
next increases the probability that a focal household will also reduce their growing season water consumption by 3%.1 We use a machine learning approach on remote sensing
data to classify the greenness of a household’s landscaping and provide evidence that the
peer effects in water consumption are underpinned by a switch to dry landscaping. We
further demonstrate a complementarity between economic incentives and peer effects by
exploiting a natural experiment to show that a non-negligible price is necessary for these
peer effects to influence consumer behavior.
Access to water is a major issue in many locations around the world. Over the 20th
1

Peer group households in our primary specification are defined as other households with a 500’ radius
of the focal household.

1

century, global water use experienced a sixfold increase and by 2025, the U.N. Environmental Program estimates that over two-thirds of the world’s population will live in
water-stressed regions. Concerns about water availability are equally important in many
regions of the United States. For example, the California droughts of 2012 and 2015 led
to combined economic losses of approximately $5.2 billion, and only a few years earlier,
droughts in the Southwest and Midwest led to losses of $20 billion.2 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency predicts up to a 40% decrease in snow runoff and soil moisture in parts of the Western United States by 2050, further exacerbating concerns about
droughts.3
Residential water demand is of further interest due to rapid changes in both technologies and practices. For example, between 1990 and 2010, the diffusion of higher water
efficiency appliances and a shift towards dry landscaping reduced per capita residential
water use by roughly 10%.4 This decline in per capita water usage is a positive development for concerns about water availability, but can pose challenges for municipalities
that designed water systems for greater demand. Thus, understanding residential water
demand and the diffusion of technologies and practices that influence demand is of major
interest to policymakers.
Causal peer effects have the potential to be a major influencer of the diffusion of watersaving practices, but it is well understood that these effects are challenging to identify.
Challenges include simultaneity, endogenous group formation leading to issues of selfselection of peers, and correlated unobservables (Manski 1993; Brock and Durlaf 2001;
Moffitt 2001; Hartmann et al. 2008). This study addresses simultaneity by using a predetermined variable for peer group decisions: switches in peer water consumption that
occurred in the previous year. We address concerns of endogenous group formation and
correlated unobservables using an instrumental variables strategy to exploit a source of
2

See https://www.ama.org/publications/eNewsletters/Marketing-News-Weekly/Pages/economicloss-us-droughts.aspx
and
http://www.cnbc.com/2015/03/03/california-drought-seen-havingworsening-3-billion-economic-impact-in-2015.html
3
See https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climate-impacts/climate-impacts-southwest .html
4
See https://water.usgs.gov/watuse/data/2010/index.html

2

quasi-random variation in peer group decisions. New residents to a particular house often change the landscaping of that property within a short period of time after the move.
At the same time, there is a broader trend towards dry landscaping occurring in Phoenix,
which we document. Accordingly, we observe a much higher probability of a switch
from green to dry landscaping just after a housing transaction. Our identification strategy
therefore uses shocks in consumer migration as an instrument for changes in the water
consumption of a household’s peer group during the growing season, while focusing on
the variation remaining after inclusion of trends in housing prices, new construction, and
a fine level of time-varying geographic fixed effects.
This work contributes to several literatures. Most directly, it adds new, well-identified
evidence to the large and growing literature on peer effects in the diffusion of consumer
behaviors. In addition, it adds to the literature on how information transmission, in our
case through social learning, can influence consumer decisions about energy and water
use. Several papers explore how social norm-based messages aimed at energy conservation can reduce energy use (e.g., Allcott 2011; Allcott and Rogers 2014; Ayres et al.
2012; Costa and Kahn 2013; Dolan and Metcalfe 2015; Tsvetanov and Gillingham 2018;
Bollinger and Gillingham 2018) or how prosocial appeals influence energy use relative to
economic incentives (e.g., Reiss and White 2008; Ito et al. 2017; Burkhardt et al. 2017).
Our paper is the first to explore how the effect of social interactions can be directly
influenced by economic incentives. Jessoe and Rapson (2014) show that households are
three standard deviations more responsive to temporary price increases when provided
with high frequency information on electricity usage, and Dolan and Metcalfe (2015)
show that the effect of financial incentives can disappear when information on social
norms is provided. In the context of residential water demand, Ferraro and Price (2013)
show that social comparison messages are the most effective among the least price sensitive households. However, in these studies, information transmission is exogenously
manipulated. In contrast to these previous findings, we show that social interactions–
a phenomenon involving endogenous information transmission–is instead muted in the

3

absence of a non-negligible price signal.
Our findings contribute to active policy discussions. Water districts make large upfront infrastructure investments and face continual planning challenges. Understanding
the speed and pattern of the diffusion of water conservation activities, such as a transition from green to dry landscaping, is immediately valuable for water planning purposes. An understanding of such diffusion can also enable better targeting of policies.
Neighborhoods that begin with some landscape transitions in a given year may be expected to experience contagion from these first transitions, and observe a greater number
of transitions in the future relative to other neighborhoods. Policymakers may be interested in one-time targeted information campaigns or subsidies for dry landscaping for
fast-growing areas that are straining the water system, while such efforts may be of less
interest for areas that have too much water system capacity.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we provide
some background on water use in Arizona and describe our unique dataset, which combines water bills, remote sensing images, and housing transaction data. Section 3 presents
the model and discusses our identification strategy. Section 4 describes the results and
mechanisms underlying the peer effect. Section 5 concludes.

2

Background and Data

2.1

Background on Water Use in Arizona

Residential water in Phoenix comes from three sources: wells owned by individuals or
the city, the Salt and Verde rivers, and the Colorado river.5 These sources are constrained
and access to them is politically contentious. Moreover, between 1980 and 2010, the population of Phoenix increased by approximately 83%, leading to an increase in residential
water use of 23%.6
5

Phoenix receives only 8 inches of rain a year on average.
http://archive.azcentral.com/members/Blog/ShaunMcKinnon/123051
6
See https://www.biggestuscities.com/city/phoenix-arizona

4

For

details

see

Fortunately for Phoenix and many arid regions of the United States, while water use
may be increasing, water use per household has been trending downwards over time.
Figure 1 shows the average water use per household in Phoenix between 1986 and 2012.7
While there was a slight increase in the late 1990’s, there is a clear downward trend
throughout the entire time period. The broader decline in per household water use is
primarily attributed to improved water efficiency of appliances, such as low-flow toilets
and shower heads or water-efficient washers/driers and dishwashers. Yet there is a growing consensus among practitioners that the low hanging fruit in improvements in indoor
water efficiency has mostly been picked (CUWA 2017).
More recently, water districts have thus been focusing on behavior change and outdoor water use. Water conservation campaigns have become popular (Ferraro and Price
2013; Brelsford and De Bacco 2018), and some areas have changed water pricing schedules. Promoting a shift to dry landscaping, with less grass and more drought-tolerant
plants, is another option that has been adopted in numerous arid water districts, including several in the Phoenix metro area. Furthermore, in some cases this transition to dry
landscaping is occurring without policy action. As we will see shortly, Phoenix has seen
just such a trend towards dry landscaping in recent years.

2.2

Data

The foundation of our data set is monthly water billing data from the City of Phoenix
water department for all single-family households served by the water department between 2004 and 2012 (308,529 households in the raw data). These contain the address of
the land parcel, allowing us to geocode all parcels. They also contain the total monthly
water consumption for each household, with the exception of parcels that are eligible to
receive a defined amount of extremely reduced-cost flood irrigation water from the Salt
River Project (SRP), a relic from previous agricultural uses whose boundaries are based
on historic water rights. Roughly 43% of households in the city of Phoenix Water District
7

A similar trend exists in landscaping. See Figure A.1 in the Appendix.

5

are within the boundaries of the SRP, and the general topography and climate is the same
everywhere within the Phoenix basin.
SRP-eligible households only pay a small fee for the water delivery; currently, this fee
is on the order of $5 per month for most households and has not appreciably changed in
recent years. Relative to the cost of city water, this SRP water is nearly free. However,
the SRP flood irrigation water is only suitable for outdoor uses and households must construct berms to direct the water.8 For this reason, not all eligible houses use SRP water,
and eligible houses must supplement SRP water with municipal water. We do not observe the consumption of SRP irrigation water, but from conversations with the water
department we were able to verify that SRP water provision did not change over the time
frame of our study.
We complement the water billing data with remote sensing images provided by the
City of Phoenix in order to develop a measure of landscape greenness. These images,
taken once a year in the fall, have resolutions ranging from 0.3 to 0.8 feet. All years are
available at high resolution except 2010, which is only available at a lower resolution.
Therefore, our remote sensing dataset spans 2004-2012, excluding 2010. Each image has
three color bands (red, green, and blue). There are standard software packages for developing vegetation indices, such as the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, but our
remote sensing images lack the infrared band needed for such standard packages. Therefore, we used a machine learning approach to train the computer to find green pixels
through a series of iterations. The approach we used is a supervised maximum likelihood
classification routine developed by the company Imagine Software, Inc. To verify the algorithm, we compared the machine learning results to hand-coded results9 and found
that the machine learning approach provided the same coding as the hand-coded pixels
in 85-90% of the parcels. The mean greenness based on the machine learning and hand8

SRP water is provided to households based on plot size and is distributed in 45 minute increments.
We find that annually, off-project houses use approximately 12 cubic feet of municipal water more than
on-project houses on average, but this difference is not statistically significant once lot size is controlled for.
9
Specifically, a group of interns visually estimated the percentage of turf and greenery in 30,293 parcels
and we consider the coding to be accurate if it is within 1-2 percentage points.

6

coding are not statistically different from one another using a simple t-test of differences
in means.
Figure 2 provides an example of the output of the classification process. The photo on
the left shows several randomly chosen parcels while the photo on the right shows the
same parcels with the pixels the computer designates as green landscaping, including tree
tops, grasses, and other vegetation, highlighted in green. As is seen in the photo, trees
and bright green lawn are coded green. Dry grass is coded (correctly) as not green. It
may be hard to see in the photo, but succulents (like cacti) are not coded as green. Figure
3 shows a map of Phoenix with the water department territory, SRP territory, and the
remote sensing subsample of 71,477 parcels.
Our next data source is the Maricopa County Assessor’s Office, which provided data
on housing sales and other other physical housing characteristics including pool size, lot
size, construction date, home size, and garage size. Importantly, we observe the date on
which the housing transactions occur and the address of the parcel, allowing us to match
these data with the previous data sets. Summary statistics for physical house characteristics are presented in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
For both the water billing data and the landscape data, we geocode all addresses. To
create a measure of peer decisions, we create a radius around the center of each household’s parcel. In our primary specifications, we use a radius of 500 feet, but we also
explore different radii in our robustness checks. Using the migration data, we also create
a variable for the fraction of households sold within that radius and during or prior to that
year. As we are interested in water consumption and outdoor water use is very important
in a dry climate like Phoenix, we focus on the growing season water consumption, where
the growing season as defined as April-September. Likewise, the non-growing season is
defined as October-March.
In this study, we are especially interested in substantial changes in water consumption
that would be consistent with a switch to dry landscaping. We explore a variety of specifications, but in our preferred specification we consider a substantial change to be roughly

7

half of the average difference between growing season and non-growing season water
consumption. The average difference between water consumption in the growing season
and non-growing season is 5.7 ccf (one ccf equals 748 cubic feet), so half of this is 2.83 ccf
and this is the threshold we use. This also happens to be the 25th percentile of all changes
in water use.10 We thus define a switch in water consumption as a decrease of at least 2.83
ccf in monthly water consumption during the growing season that is persistent through
at least the following year. For example, the dummy variable for a switch is equal to one
for household if the household exhibited a decrease in consumption between growing
season t − 1 and growing season t that was greater than 2.85 ccf and persisted for at least
one more season. We similarly define our peer decision variable as the average fraction of
houses in i0 s peer group that made a switch between the t − 2 and t − 1 growing seasons.
Finally, we create a variable for the fraction of houses in i0 s peer group that were sold between the growing and non-growing seasons of t−1 and t−2 (including the non-growing
season of t − 1).
Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the water consumption data, landscape
data, and moving data. It shows that the average house consumes 17.3 ccf (about 13,000
gallons) of water during the growing season and only 12.5 ccf (about 9,300 gallons) of water during the non-growing season. Approximately 27% of households observe a switch
in landscaping in a given year t. The average number of switches by the peers is about
28%. The mean fraction of landscape greenness is 37% (with the mean taken over parcels).
Further details on the data cleaning process used to develop this final dataset are included
in the Appendix.
10

For example, the median (50th percentile) change in water use between growing season t and t − 1
would be 0. Below median changes in water use are negative while above median changes in water use are
positive.

8

3

Empirical Specification

3.1

Challenges in Identifying Peer Effects

Peer effects are notoriously challenging to identify. A first question in any model of social interactions is how to define the peer group. Defining the peer group membership
too broadly could pick up sufficient heterogeneity in the group that it leads to spurious
correlations. Indeed, a careful definition of the peer group is central to identification in
some studies (e.g., Bertrand et al. 2000). In our setting, we are interested in how peer
effects influence the choice of water usage. While water usage itself may not be visible,
landscaping is usually highly visible. This lends itself to a definition of the peer group
based on spatial proximity to the focal household parcel. In a similar setting, Towe and
Lawley (2013) define neighbors as the nearest 13 and nearest 25 neighbors by distance.
Because there is variation in parcel sizes, we prefer a measure based on the radius around
the focal household parcel (our 500’ radius includes 25.3 neighbors on average). Using
a geographic peer group is also common in the literature (Topa 2001; Arzaghi and Henderson 2007; Bell and Song 2007; Manchanda et al. 2008; McShane et al. 2012; Narayanan
and Nair 2013). Households can naturally also be expected to have other social groups as
well, such as those relating to family, friends, schools, and jobs. So we view our measure
as a minimal measure of the social group relevant to water and landscape decisions.
Identification of peer effects also relies on addressing the aforementioned list of common concerns: simultaneity, self-selection of peers, and correlated unobservables. Simultaneity (sometimes called ‘reflection’) refers to the concern that just as peers may influence the focal household, the focal household may influence peers. At the extreme this
can lead to mathematical non-identification of peer effects. Simultaneity in this context
can be thought of as an endogeneity issue analogous to the classic simultaneity of supply
and demand. In the supply/demand context, the standard instrumental variables approach requires an exclusion restriction, such as a supply shifter to identify demand or a
demand shifter to identify supply. Empirical peer effects studies often use predetermined

9

(lagged) values of the peer group variable.
The challenge of self-selection of peers (sometimes described as ‘homophily’) can be
a concern for identifying the relationship between an individual’s decision and the average decisions by the peer group because individuals endogenously choose their social
networks. In the case of housing choice, consumers with similar preferences can be expected to sort into neighborhoods. Empirical studies often address this issue with a rich
set of fixed effects that remove variation stemming from endogenous selection of the peer
group, controls for important correlated observables, or instrumental variables strategies.
Correlated unobservables refer to the many other factors that may influence both the
individual and peers. For example, if there is an economic downturn facing all households in a neighborhood, their decisions may appear to be aligned, but this alignment is
due to the conditions faced by the households, rather than peer effects. Likewise, gentrification may influence whether households change their landscaping to potentially raise
the resale value of the home. Studies address this issue in various ways, including timevarying fixed effects or an instrument that provides a source of exogenous variation that
shifts the peer characteristics but does not shift the individual characteristics.
For all three of the issues, the fundamental challenge is one of research design. Angrist (2014) clearly points out the ideal characteristics of a well-identified peer effects
study: “Research designs that manipulate peer characteristics in a manner unrelated to
individual characteristics provide the most compelling evidence on the nature of social
spillovers.” Our research design aims to manipulate peer decisions in a manner unrelated
to individual decisions by exploiting plausibly exogenous shocks.

3.2

Empirical Strategy

Our empirical specification is inspired by a long line of literature that models the likelihood of a transition from one state to another as affected by social interactions (Brock
and Durlaf 2001; Sirakaya 2006; Towe and Lawley 2013). In our context, we are interested
in how transitions in outdoor water consumption can influence peers. Thus, we exam10

ine how social interactions influence the probability that an individual household makes
a transition in water consumption during the growing season. Consider a specification
that models a transition in water consumption during the growing season by household
i in year t as a function of the peer group’s aggregate choices in t − 1, peer group housing
attributes, time-invariant household characteristics, and time-varying characteristics of
the local neighborhood or Census block b:

1(∆wi,t ) = θ∆wi,t−1 + δHi,t + ηi + φt,b + i,t .

(1)

The term 1(∆wi,t ) is a dummy for a persistent switch in growing season water conP
sumption. If we denote household i’s peer group as the set Pi , then ∆wi,t−1 = |P1i | i0 ∈Pi 1(∆wi0 ,t−1 )
is the fraction of household i’s peers that complete a major transition in the previous
growing season, not including household i. Hi,t is a vector that includes the average
house price in the peer group in t, the change in the average house price in the peer
group between t and t − 1, and the fraction of homes in the peer group that are new
construction. ηi contains time-invariant household characteristics, which we model as a
household fixed effect (i.e., a fixed effect for each parcel x owner combination, so that
there is a different fixed effect after a sale). φt,b captures time-varying factors such as localized economic shocks, gentrification, or major new development in a neighborhood,
and we model this with Census block x year fixed effects.
Identification in this model rests on addressing the three key issues described above:
simultaneity, self-selection of peers, and correlated unobservables. Our research design
addresses simultaneity by using recent, but not contemporaneous, decisions by peers.
This use of predetermined peer group decisions to overcome reflection follows several papers in the recent literature (e.g., Towe and Lawley 2013; Bollinger and Gillingham 2012).
Endogenous group formation or self-selection of peers is addressed in several ways. First,
we estimate the model only on the sample of households that do not move in the previous
year (this includes moves during the growing season of year t, the non-growing season
of year t, and the growing season of t − 1). This may be important if exit from the neigh11

borhood is due to self-selection or neighborhood sorting, and we explore its importance
in our robustness checks.
Second, we use household fixed effects. As long as households and their neighbors
remain in the same dwelling, these fixed effects capture the preferences of the household
and surrounding neighbors. Third, we include Census block-by-year fixed effects to capture time-varying factors at a fine level of geographic disaggregation. In our sample, there
are 12,485 Census blocks, and each Census block has on average 37 households. These
controls are particularly useful because there are frictions in the housing market, such
that homebuyers may be able to choose a given broad neighborhood, but are not typically going to be able to choose the exact location of the purchase. Thus, as long as any
time-varying sorting into the neighborhood occurs at the Census block level or a greater
level of aggregation, then the block-by-year fixed effects nonparametrically control for
such sorting. Bayer et al. (2008) make a similar but stronger assumption, arguing that
a neighborhood corresponds to a Census block, but that the housing market works at
an even higher level of aggregation–at the Census tract level. Our approach allows for
sorting at the Census block level, but like Bayer et al. (2008), we rely on frictions in the
housing market to rule out sorting within our level of geographic aggregation (i.e., within
Census block in our case or within Census tract in the case of Bayer et al. (2008)).
Correlated unobservables that are at a finer geographic level than the Census block
group may still be a remaining issue. To address this, our research design is based on an
instrumental variables identification strategy. We instrument for ∆wi,t−1 using the fraction of households in the peer group that move into that peer group in t − 1. Differences
in annual home sales across neighborhoods in Phoenix may be driven by a number of
factors including urbanization, gentrification, housing prices, changes in local amenities
(e.g., revitalization of an old park), and new construction. A concern about using this
instrument is that some of these factors may be correlated with major changes in water
consumption, such as changes in the housing stock that possibly relate to gentrification.
We address this concern in several ways. Most importantly, by including both household

12

and Census block-by-year fixed effects, we focus inference on the variation in our instrument that results from hyper-local variation in which house is for sale. This a strategy
employed by Bayer et al. (2016) to study housing investment decisions, Towe and Lawley (2013) to study foreclosure decisions in Maryland, and McCartney and Shah (2018) to
study the decision to refinance.11
In these aforementioned papers, the key assumption for identification is that conditional on controls, shocks to peer group decisions (foreclosure, investments, or refinancing) and the focal household’s decision are not correlated. Our dataset allows us to take a
different approach and instrument for peer group reductions in water consumption with
consumer migration decisions. Fundamentally, our approach relies on the assumption
that housing market frictions rule out any sorting that could relate to water consumption within a Census block (recall that a block has only 37 parcels on average), which is a
more mild assumption than in the previous literature. Furthermore, there is support for
it. McCartney and Shah (2018) provide survey evidence indicating that realtors do not
field housing requests at the block level, with the exception of new construction of the
most expensive homes. Thus, the remaining variation in the fraction of movers into and
out of the peer group must be due to individual shocks, such as peer moves for family
reasons or a job. These shocks can be considered plausibly random with respect to major
changes in a focal household’s water consumption. Census data from 2014 indicate that
roughly 50% of moves are for family or job reasons and it is this idiosyncratic variation
we are exploiting.12
Should there still be sorting into a 500’ radii peer group that happens to be correlated
with preferences for switching to dry landscaping, we could still have biased results.
Graham (2018) describes the bias that may result if sorting occurs on correlated unobservables that remain even after the extensive use of control variables. In this discussion
11

For comparison, these papers also use predetermined peer group variables, and in terms of the granularity of the fixed effects and controls, Bayer et al. (2016) uses zip code fixed effects and other controls at
larger geographic aggregation, Towe and Lawley (2013) includes controls for housing prices as the Census
tract level and county fixed effects, while McCartney and Shah (2018) uses Census block fixed effects.
12
See https://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/p20-574.pdf.

13

he also points out that “sorting into neighborhoods is mediated by the housing market,
for which we observe a price.” Thus, to address any potential correlated unobservables
relating to the housing market, we also include peer-group measures of housing prices,
changes in housing prices, and new construction in our vector Hi,t . These additional controls directly address the possibility of a bias from sorting of households due to gentrification or the construction of new dwellings at this finer level of geography. For there to be
a remaining threat to the validity of our instrument, one must believe that people disproportionally move to the radius around a household in a particular year–relative to the rest
of that Census block–for factors that both directly influence the focal household’s water
consumption and are not already captured by our controls for gentrification, new home
construction, focal household fixed effects, and Census block-by-year fixed effects.13 We
find this difficult to imagine.
Of course, for our research strategy to work, the instrument cannot be weak. Fortunately, we find a strong relationship between the fraction of movers into the peer group
and the peer group’s decision (see Table A.4 in Appendix C for full first-stage results).
The F-statistic for the first stage is 3,075. The economic explanation for this relationship is
that when peers move into a new house, they are likely to use the opportunity to change
things about the house, including the landscaping. We find that when there is a greater
fraction of sold homes in the peer group, the changes in water use and landscape greenness are negative, suggesting that peer households that move into the peer group tend
to transition to drier landscapes. This is consistent with the broader trend towards drier
landscapes in the Southwest, and consumer migration provides the exogenous shock to
spur the transitions by peer group members.
13

The common assumption that this does not hold is stated formally in Graham (2018) as the conditions
for no sorting or matching on unobservables conditional on predetermined attributes. Graham (2018) further states that such approaches “... have a meaningful role to play in neighborhood-effects research.”

14

4

Results

4.1

Peer Effects in Water Consumption

We begin by estimating our primary specification examining peer effects in water consumption (equation (1)). Table 2 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates in columns
1 and 2, and instrumental variables (IV) estimates in columns 3 and 4. Columns 1 and 3
include household and subdivision-by-year fixed effects while columns 2 and 4 include
household and Census block-by-year fixed effects. All specifications include the controls
for housing prices and new construction and omit households who moved that year. The
IV estimations instrument for the fraction of households in the peer group that make a
switch in water consumption with the fraction of parcels in the peer group that observe a
housing transaction in the previous year.
Our preferred specification is in column 4, which indicates that if the fraction of peers
who made a switch in the previous year increases by 10 percentage points, then the probability that the focal household will make a switch in this growing season increases by 3%.
A switch in water consumption under our definition translates to a savings of 2,117 gallons per month out of an average monthly consumption of 12,532 gallons. For reference,
a typical load of laundry uses 30 gallons of water. Thus, if even 1% of the households
in the Phoenix water district make a switch in their water consumption, total residential
monthly water use would decrease by 6.6 million gallons, which is equivalent to the average monthly water consumption of approximately 525 households. For comparison, if
we use the -0.33 water demand elasticity from Olmstead et al. (2007), water prices would
have to change by 5.15% or $3.13 per month to achieve a similar change in water consumption.
One question that may arise in interpreting these results is whether we are actually
estimating demand-side peer effects. It is possible that there are also supply-side factors
that influence the decision to change water use through landscaping decisions. Landscaping firms may implement focused localized marketing campaigns, such as door-to-door

15

canvassing. However, any localized marketing campaign is likely to be at the block level,
rather than just around the radius of a single parcel. Moreover, we are examining the effect of predetermined peer decisions on the household’s decision, and any door-to-door
canvassing marketing campaign that induces peers to change water use would be typically over by the next year. For supply-side factors to play a role in our estimation, these
factors would have to be persistent for over a year and truly focused on marketing to an
incredibly narrow set of customers. One example of this might be a yard sign put up by
the landscaping firm that a household in the peer group uses, with the goal of increasing the visibility of the landscape change to the surrounding peers. Such efforts can be
viewed are firms attempting to leverage demand-side peer effects to increase sales, and
are certainly possible. Thus, we interpret our results as an the combined effect of demandside peer effects and any hyper-localized persistent marketing designed to leverage such
peer effects.
To provide further evidence that our results are well-identified, we run a set of placebo
tests. In our first and most important placebo test, we switch the ordering of the timing.
In our specifications above, we examined the effect of switches in water consumption by
peer group households in the previous growing season (t − 1) on switches by the focal
household this growing season (t). In our placebo test, we examine the effect of switches
in water consumption by peer group households today (t) on switches by the focal household during the previous growing season (t − 1). The only reason that we should find
statistically significant results from the effect of peer decisions in t on the household decision in t − 1 is if there are correlated trends that are influencing both the peers and the
focal household. Indeed, it would be physically impossible for such a relationship to be
due to peer effects. Thus, if we find a statistically significant effect in our placebo test, that
would raise questions about whether there are other unobservable trends influencing our
results, rather than actual peer effects.
Table 3 presents the results of our placebo tests. Just as in Table 2, the first two
columns present the OLS results, while the second two present the IV results. The first

16

two columns indicate a statistically significant relationship between peer group water
consumption switches in t and the household’s decision to switch in t − 1. This immediately raises concerns about the identification of peer effects in the OLS specifications, even
with the rich set of fixed effects. We view this result as indicating that there is a severe endogeneity issue, likely due to trends that affect both peer group water consumption and
the household’s water consumption. On the other hand, the IV results show no statistically significant relationship. Indeed, the coefficients themselves are much closer to zero
than the coefficients in the same columns in Table 2. While this result alone cannot rule
out all possible identification concerns, it shows that there is no evidence of unobservable
trends confounding identification, further supporting the validity of our primary results.
It also highlights the great extent to which an instrumental variables strategy leveraging
conditionally exogenous variation might be essential in identifying peer effects, consistent with the arguments made by Angrist (2014).
To provide more evidence regarding the validity of our instrument, we run an additional placebo-type test relating to the concern that households may be sorting in a way
that might be due to highly localized shocks. If the variation in our instrument–the fraction of households that move in the peer group–is due to highly localized trends that lead
to sorting on preferences, we would expect new moves to be clustered. Thus, we use the
full sample (including houses that are sold) and regress a dummy for whether the focal
house is sold in that year on the fraction of households that moved in the peer group in
the previous year, as well as household fixed effects and block-by-year fixed effects. We
find a small and statistically insignificant coefficient, which indicates that, after including
our controls, the moving process (entry or exit from the neighborhood) does not appear
to show clustering.14 We view this as further suggestive evidence that localized trends
leading to sorting is unlikely to be a confounding factor in our empirical design.
Table 4 illustrates the robustness of our results to a variety of checks. In columns 1 and
2, we present the same IV specifications as columns 3 and 4 of Table 2, only we add zip
code-specific time trends as further controls to address potentially localized unobserved
14

Results shown in Table A.5 in the Appendix.

17

trends in water consumption. These do not significantly change the results, which may
not be surprising given the highly disaggregated Census block x year fixed effects already
included. Columns 3 and 4 are the same as the same columns in Table 2 only instead of
dropping all parcel that had a recent sale, we include the parcels that were sold in the
current growing season, previous non-growing season, or previous growing season and
control for whether there was a transaction with a dummy. Again, the coefficients of interest barely change. These results underscore the robustness of our results to both the potential for unobserved trends and the modeling decision we made to exclude parcels that
observed a transaction. In the Appendix, we provide further robustness checks, including examining different thresholds for determining a ‘switch’ in water consumption and
examining different definitions of the peer group (Tables A.6 and A.7 respectively). Notably, we find no substantial difference in estimated peer effects for larger radii through
700 feet. However, the peer effects become statistically insignificant around 1,000 feet.

4.2

Are the Peer Effects Due to Dry Landscaping?

Our primary results provide strong support for peer effects in major decreases in water consumption and we defined a major decrease in water consumption based on the
amount of water savings that would be expected to occur with a typical switch to dry
landscaping. In this section, we examine whether dry landscaping is a primary driver of
these results.
Table 5 presents the results of several analyses. First, if landscape changes are the primary driver of the peer effects we observed above, we would expect to see little or no
effect in non-growing season water consumption. To test this hypothesis, we created a
new dependent variable: a major decrease in water consumption in the non-growing season months of the year (October-March). We similarly created a variable for the fraction
of the peer group that make a major decrease in water consumption in the non-growing
season months. For both variables we use the same definition of a major decrease in water consumption (i.e., same ccf reduction) as was used in the variables in our preferred
18

specification. In column 1 of Table 5, we see that the coefficient on the peer group variable
is not statistically significant. This finding, along with our primary result, indicates that
the peer effects in water consumption occur due to growing season water consumption,
which is more likely to be outdoor water consumption.
To further explore whether a change to dry landscaping is a driving force behind our
results, we next re-create our water consumption variables using increases instead of decreases in water consumption in the growing season. Thus, our dependent variable is a
major increase in water consumption in the growing season of year t, and our variable
of interest is the fraction of households in the peer group with a major increase in water
consumption in the growing season of t − 1. Again, we use the same definition of a major
increase: an increase of 2.83 ccf. Column 2 of Table 5 shows no statistically significant
relationship between the peer group increases in water consumption in the previous year
and the household decision to increase water consumption.15 This finding suggests that
it is a shift towards dry landscaping that is underpinning our results, rather than broader
peer effects in water consumption.
Both of these results are strongly suggestive that the peer effects in our primary results
are due to a shift toward dry landscaping. Next, we shift our attention to the subsample
for which we also have remote sensing landscape data. The landscape data can be useful
in several ways. First, we can examine a descriptive regression of the log of the landscape
greenness in a given year on the log of the household water consumption by month of the
year. A strong relationship between landscape greenness and water consumption in the
growing season would suggest that water consumption is being used for outdoor water
use to increase the greenness of the landscape. Indeed, we find a statistically significant
positive relationship between landscape greenness and water consumption in all months
of the year, with the largest coefficients in the growing season, when outdoor water use
is essential to keep green plants alive. This confirms our intuition that there is a clear
link between water consumption and landscape greenness, which is even stronger in the
growing season, as one would expect.
15

This result does not appear to be sensitive to the definition of a major increase in water consumption.

19

Second, we can examine how our primary results change if we add a new covariate
for a decrease in landscape greenness by the peer group into our preferred IV specification. If the channel through which the peer effect operates is a switch to dry landscaping,
then when we include both landscape and water consumption peer group variables, we
should expect to find a statistically significant and meaningful coefficient on the change in
the peer group landscape greenness, but not on the change in the peer group water consumption. Column 3 of Table 5 presents the results of this estimation that includes both
variables. We find that the coefficient on the peer group water consumption variable is
statistically insignificant, while the coefficient on the the change in household landscape
greenness is statistically significant and indicates a negative relationship between changes
in greenness and the probability of a major reduction in water consumption as expected.16
This confirms our hypothesis and provides further evidence that the primary mechanism
underpinning the peer effects in water consumption is a switch to dry landscaping.

4.3

Role of Economic Incentives

We use the Salt River Project’s provision of heavily discounted irrigation water for outdoor use during part of the year as a novel opportunity to test whether the price signal
for water influences the strength of the peer effect. Recall, as mentioned above, that the
boundaries of SRP are based on historic water rights boundaries. More specifically, they
tend to follow the path of canals built in the late 1800s, which themselves follow the paths
of ancient canals built by the Hohokam Indians. These paths were designed to bring
Salt River water to irrigated farmland and were based on convenience and historic land
rights based on where settlers created ranches in the 1800s. Importantly, the areas covered by SRP do not include lands that are of any different quality or climate than the rest
of the Phoenix basin. Also, it is important to note that today’s residential development in
Phoenix is not influenced by the SRP boundaries.17 Thus, we use this historical artifact to
16

See Table A.2 in the Appendix for details on the differences in the landscape subsample and broader
water sample.
17
For more on the history of SRP, see https://www.srpnet.com/about/history/StoryofSRP HistoryBook.pdf.

20

provide a natural experiment to explore whether SRP-eligible households are less influenced by peer water consumption and landscape choices than non-eligible households.
Jessoe and Rapson (2014) and Bollinger and Hartmann (2018) show that in the electricity
context, consumers reduce consumption simply from being exposed to price information,
and here we examine whether consumers respond more to peers when there is a stronger
price signal in landscape decisions.
For this to be a valid analysis, we must be confident that non-eligible households are
a useful control group for SRP-eligible households. As there are modest differences between SRP and non-SRP households (see Appendix B), we view a matching approach
as the most appropriate to assure that we have a valid control group. In our preferred
specification, we match each SRP household with a nearest neighbor based on the Mahalanobis distance (Rubin 1980). We match based on key observables that might influence
water consumption: previous water consumption in the growing season of t − 1, the lot
size, the house square footage, the number of bathroom fixtures, a dummy for whether
the household has a pool, and the median Census tract income.18
In Table A.3, we show the balance of observables between the SRP households and
the matched non-SRP households. The table illustrates that on all of the observables, the
match is very good. For all but one of the variables, the differences are not statistically
significant using a simple t-test for differences in means. For the median Census tract
income, the difference is only $292 out of over $45,000, which is well within the range
of normal variations in income. While one can never fully rule out unobservables, this
success in matching suggests that we are comparing very similar households, some of
whom are eligible for nearly free water for outdoor use and others who are not. Moreover,
because the assignment into the SRP is due to a historical artifact that has no relation to the
economy in Phoenix today, we find it highly unlikely that there are other unobservables
that both influence water consumption and assignment to SRP eligibility.
Our hypothesis is that households that receive heavily discounted outdoor water will
appear less susceptible to peer effects. We do not observe the SRP outdoor water con18

We also explore other matching approaches and find similar results.

21

sumption, but it is important to note that this consumption is limited both in quantity
and in the times it is available (which are not always predictable). Thus, to keep green
plants alive, SRP-eligible households must typically use a combination of city water and
SRP-provided water. We observe this in our data, as city water consumption is much
higher in the growing season than in the non-growing season for SRP households (17.9
ccf versus 12.4 ccf), just as for non-SRP households. Thus, examining how SRP-eligible
households respond differently than non-SRP households in their water consumption,
can shed light on the role of economic incentives. We cannot rule out that SRP-eligible
households exhibit peer effects in SRP water, but we can observe whether the peer effects
exist in the consumption of city water that SRP-eligible households have to use to keep
their plants alive during times when SRP water is unavailable.
Because the water consumption for outdoor use would be expected to be smaller for
SRP-eligible households, we perform our analysis using several different thresholds for
how we define a major change in water consumption. Specifically, we use thresholds that
correspond to 1.5 ccf (low), 2.83 ccf (mid; our preferred), and 7.17 ccf (high). These also
align with the 35th, 25th, and 10th percentiles of all changes in water consumption. Table
7 presents our primary IV specifications run separately for the SRP-eligble households
(columns 1-3) and matched non-SRP households (columns 4-6) at each of the thresholds.
Regardless of the threshold used, the results reveal no statistically significant peer effects coefficients for the SRP households. In contrast, we see a statistically significant
peer effect for all three thresholds when we estimate the model on the matched non-SRP
sample, similar to our primarily results, although somewhat larger in magnitude. The
estimated coefficient using the central case (2.83 ccf) estimate is statistically significantly
different across the two samples. Because SRP households only use city water to complement the SRP water, a more appropriate comparison may be to compare the high change
(7.17 ccf) in the non-SRP sample with the central case in the SRP sample (2.83 ccf). This
comparison also yields a statistically significant difference across the two samples. One
can make a similar comparison between the central case in the non-SRP sample and the

22

low case in the SRP sample, and again we find statistically significant differences.
These results suggest that economic incentives to reduce outdoor water use are important for the operation of peer effects in water consumption. In neighborhoods where
green landscaping is costly, neighbors may discuss xeriscaping (landscaping with slowgrowing, drought-tolerant plants) as a money-saving tool. Economic incentives may affect the peer effects because households are more susceptible to peer effects when they are
looking to save money on their water bill. Alternatively, neighbors may be more likely to
discuss and share information about dry landscaping when there is an obvious monetary
benefit. There may also be a combination of both channels.

4.4

Implications for Policy and Targeted Interventions

Our primary results provide strong evidence that water consumption decisions made by
peers influence the household decision to make a major change in water consumption. We
provided further evidence that switches to dry landscaping appear to be a primary driver
underpinning the observed peer effects. While we are able to show that economic incentives appear to be necessary for the peer effects, we cannot further distinguish between
information channels, social norm channels, supply-side channels, or combinations of all
three. For example, word-of-mouth could provide information transmission that is facilitated by a changing social norm and landscapers could put signs up on parcels where
they just worked (and these signs could remain up for a year). As mentioned previously,
focused neighborhood-wide marketing campaigns, such as door-to-door marketing, cannot be an explanation for our results given that we are examining the effect of the peer
decisions in the previous year on decisions today (and block x year fixed effects also capture the effect of one-time campaigns). But long-term persistent efforts by landscapers to
leverage peer effects would most certainly be included in our estimates.
From a water district policymaker perspective, it is most useful to have the result of
these factors combined. It does not matter whether landscapers are leveraging peer effects
or peer effects stem entirely from word-of-mouth; in both cases the causal peer effects
23

leading to the diffusion of lower outdoor water consumption would occur in a spatial
pattern that has ramifications for water provision. Of course, the welfare effects of our
findings on consumers and firms may be different, but this is a secondary consideration
to the water district policymaker who is primarily focused on water provision and how
the diffusion process of lower outdoor water use occurs.
Our results suggest that policies to promote dry landscaping may have substantial
spillovers due to peer effects. Consider a dry landscaping subsidy that increases the probability of a household making a switch. To calculate the total impact of such a subsidy, we
also need to calculate the effect on the household’s peers. Using our primary specification
in Table 2, we first divide our estimated peer effect by the average number of houses in
the peer group (25.3) to calculate the ‘susceptibility’ of each household to the actions of a
single peer. This can be interpreted as the expected change in the probability of a switch
by the household in response to a switch by one of the peers.
We calculate the average susceptibility of households in our data from a switch by a
single peer, by increasing the peer group switch variable by 4 percentage points (1/25.3).
Our primary results (Table 2, column 4) imply that a 4 percentage point increase in the
fraction of households making a switch will increase the probability a household switching by 1.2%. Each such switch saves 2.83 ccf (2,117 gallons) of water per month. This
yields an average water savings for that household of 25.6 gallons per month. This is
roughly one tenth of the savings from the original intervention–a substantial spillover
from peer effects alone. Extrapolating, if 1,000 randomly distributed households across
Phoenix were influenced by policy to make a switch to dry landscaping, reducing their
water use accordingly, in addition to the monthly growing season reduction by the targeted households of 2,117 thousand gallons, the associated peer effects would lead to an
additional reduction of approximately 25.6 thousand gallons–the equivalent of the average monthly water consumption of 2 additional households.
Of course, these estimates deserve several caveats. Most notably, they are an estimate
of the average effect, but as we saw in the section above, economic incentives matter.

24

Policymakers may not want to target a dry landscaping program to SRP households, as
our results suggest no spillovers for those households. Similarly, the SRP result suggests
that targeting households that have greater economic incentives may lead to even larger
spillovers. Another caveat is that our estimates show the magnitude of causal peer effects
in equilibrium over our sample period. If firms or consumers respond differently in a different empirical setting, the estimated spillovers would of course be different. However,
Phoenix is not only a large desert city itself, but it also has similar water concerns and a
similar diffusion of dry landscaping as many other desert cities, such as San Diego, Las
Vegas, Tucson, Albuquerque, etc.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we estimate causal peer effects in residential water consumption using a
unique IV strategy that leverages consumer migration into the peer group. Specifically,
we study substantial reductions in growing season water usage consistent with (often
observable) dry landscape transitions. To identify the effects of interest, we exploit within
household and within Census block-by-year variation after controlling for housing prices
and new construction; our key identifying assumption is that the remaining variation in
peer housing transactions serves as an exogenous shock to the individual’s peer group.
We further perform a series of placebo tests that uniformly support the contention that
our IV strategy addresses all three known issues in identifying peer effects: homophily,
correlated unobservables, and simultaneity.
Our primary result is that a 10 percentage point change in the fraction of the peer
group that have a major change in their growing season water consumption results in a
3% change in the individual household’s probability of making a similar switch. We then
use machine learning techniques on high resolution remote sensing data to develop a
robust measure of landscape greenness. Using this measure and several other diagnostics,
we provide evidence indicative of a close relationship between outdoor water use, dry
landscape adoption, and switches in water consumption. This evidence supports dry
25

landscape adoption as a primary factor underpinning our water consumption peer effects
results.
One novel finding of this study is that the economic incentives complement the effect of social interactions. By exploiting a natural experiment offered by the existence of
the Salt River Project’s provision of heavily discounted irrigation water and a matching
approach, we show that the peer effect in city water is close to zero and not statistically
significant for households eligible for the discounted water. This provides further evidence that the water consumption peer effect is driven by outdoor water use and is also
suggestive of the power of economic incentives on the influence of peers.
Our results have clear policy implications. The presence of a social spillover suggests that policies may have disproportionately larger indirect effects. For example, a dry
landscaping subsidy that causes 1,000 distributed households within Phoenix to adopt
dry landscaping would lead to a social spillover effect equivalent to the average monthly
water use of two households. We anticipate that targeted policies may be even more effective, such as a policy that avoids SRP households and focuses on households in areas with
a greater economic incentive to reduce water use. Of course, policymakers may be most
interested in such targeted policies when there is a strain on parts of the water system
from increasing demand or reduced supply. Thus, optimal policy design will inherently
involve a consideration of both water district constraints and the potential spillovers possible in the target audience.

26

References
Allcott, H. (2011), ‘Social norms and energy conservation’, Journal of Public Economics 95(910), 1082–1095.
Allcott, H. and Rogers, T. (2014), ‘The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral interventions: Experimental evidence from energy conservation’, The American Economic
Review 104(10), 3003–3037.
Angrist, J. D. (2014), ‘The perils of peer effects’, Labour Economics 30, 98–108.
Arzaghi, M. and Henderson, J. V. (2007), ‘Networking off Madison Avenue’, Review of
Economic Studies 75(4), 1011–1038.
Ayres, I., Raseman, S. and Shih, A. (2012), ‘Evidence from two large field experiments
that peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage’, Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 29(5), 992–1022.
Bass, F. M. (1969), ‘A new product growth model for consumer durables’, Management
Science 15, 215–227.
Bayer, P., Mangum, K. and Roberts, J. W. (2016), Speculative fever: Investor contagion in
the housing bubble.
Bayer, P., Ross, S. and Topa, G. (2008), ‘Place of work and place of residence: Informal
hiring networks and labor market outcomes’, Journal of Political Economy 116(6), 1150–
1196.
Bell, D. R. and Song, S. (2007), ‘Neighborhood effects and trial on the internet: Evidence
from online grocery retailing’, Quantitative Marketing and Economics 5, 361–400.
Bertrand, M., Luttmer, E. F. P. and Mullainathan, S. (2000), ‘Network effects and welfare
cultures’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 1019–1055.

27

Bollinger, B. and Gillingham, K. (2012), ‘Peer effects in the diffusion of solar photovoltaic
panels’, Marketing Science 31(6), 900–912.
Bollinger, B. and Gillingham, K. (2018), Making pro-social social: The effectiveness of
online and offline social communication.
Bollinger, B. and Hartmann, W. (2018), Information versus automation and implications
for dynamic pricing.
Brelsford, C. and De Bacco, C. (2018), ‘Are ‘water smart landscapes’ contagious? an epidemic approach on networks to study peer effects’, Working Paper .
Brock, W. and Durlaf, S. (2001), Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5, Elsevier, chapter 4,
Interaction-based Models, pp. 3297–3380.
Burkhardt, J., Gillingham, K. and Kopelle, P. (2017), ‘How do households respond to critical peak pricing? experimental evidence on the role of information and incentives’, Yale
University Working Paper .
Conley, T. and Udry, C. (2010), ‘Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in Ghana’,
American Economic Review 100(1), 35–69.
Costa, D. L. and Kahn, M. E. (2013), ‘Energy conservation nudges and environmentalist
ideology: Evidence from a randomized residential electricity field experiment’, Journal
of the European Economic Association 11, 680702.
CUWA (2017), ‘Adapting to change: Utility systems and declining flows’, California Urban
Water Agencies Working Paper .
Dolan, P. and Metcalfe, R. (2015), Neighbors, knowledge, and nuggets: Two natural field
experiments on the role of incentives on energy conservation.
Ferraro, P. J. and Price, M. K. (2013), ‘Using nonpecuniary strategies to influence behavior: Evidence from a large-scale field experiment’, The Review of Economics and Statistics
95(1), 64–73.
28

Foster, A. and Rosenzweig, M. (1995), ‘Learning by doing and learning from others: Human capital and technical change in agriculture’, Journal of Political Economy
103(6), 1176–1209.
Graham, B. (2008), ‘Identifying social interactions through conditional variance restrictions’, Econometrica 76(3), 643–660.
Graham, B. S. (2018), ‘Identifying and estimating neighborhood effects’, Journal of Economic Literature 56(2), 450500.
Graziano, M. and Gillingham, K. (2015), ‘Spatial patterns of solar photovoltaic system
adoption: The influence of neighbors and the built environment’, Journal of Economic
Geography 15(4), 815–839.
Griliches, Z. (1957), ‘Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological
change’, Econometrica 25(4), 501–522.
Hartmann, W. R., Manchanda, P., Nair, H., Bothner, M., Dodds, P., Godes, D., Hosanagar, K. and Tucker, C. (2008), ‘Modeling social interactions: Identification, empirical
methods and policy implications’, Marketing Letters 19, 287–304.
Heutel, G. and Muehlegger, E. (2015), ‘Consumer learning and hybrid vehicle adoption’,
Environmental and resource economics 62(1), 125–161.
Ito, K., Ida, T. and Tanaka, M. (2017), ‘Moral suasion and economic incentives: Field experimental evidence from energy demand’, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
forthcoming.
Jessoe, K. and Rapson, D. (2014), ‘Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence from
residential energy use’, The American Economic Review 104(4), 1417–1438.
Manchanda, P., Xie, Y. and Youn, N. (2008), ‘The role of targeted communication and
contagion in product adoption’, Marketing Science 27(6), 961–976.

29

Manski, C. (1993), ‘Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem’,
Review of Economic Studies 60, 531–542.
McCartney, W. B. and Shah, A. (2018), I’ll Have What Shes Having: Identifying social
influence in household mortgage decisions.
McShane, B., Bradlow, E. T. and Berger, J. (2012), ‘Visual influence and social groups’,
Journal of Marketing Research 49(6), 854–871.
Moffitt, R. (2001), Social Dynamics, MIT Press, chapter 3, Policy Interventions, Low-level
Equilibria, and Social Interactions, pp. 45–82.
Narayanan, S. and Nair, H. (2013), ‘Estimating causal installed-base effects: A biascorrection approach’, Journal of Marketing Research 50(1), 70–94.
Olmstead, S. M., Hanemann, W. M. and Stavins, R. N. (2007), ‘Water demand under alternative price structures’, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 54(2), 181–
198.
Reiss, P. C. and White, M. W. (2008), ‘What changes energy consumption? prices and
public pressures’, The RAND Journal of Economics 39(3), 636–663.
Rogers, E. (1995), Diffusion of Innovations, The Free Press.
Rubin, D. (1980), ‘Bias reduction using mahalanobis-metric matching’, Biometrics
36(2), 293–298.
Sacerdote, B. (2001), ‘Peer effects with random assignment: Results for Dartmouth roommates’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 681–704.
Sirakaya, S. (2006), ‘Recidivism and social interactions’, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 101(475), 863–877.
Topa, G. (2001), ‘Social interactions, local spillovers and unemployment’, Review of Economic Studies 68(2), 261–295.
30

Towe, C. and Lawley, C. (2013), ‘The contagion effect of neighboring foreclosures’, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(2), 313–335.
Tsvetanov, T. and Gillingham, K. (2018), ‘Nudging energy efficiency audits: Evidence
from a field experiment’, Journal of Environmental Economics & Management forthcoming.

31

Tables & Figures
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean Std. Dev.
Panel A: Water Consumption (N=1,823,150; 265,789 households)
growing season consumption (ccf/yr)
17.3
11.6
non-growing season consumption (ccf/yr)
12.5
8.2
1(household switch in t)
0.27
0.44
fraction of peer switches in t − 1
0.28
0.11
1(housing transaction)
0.05
0.22
fraction of houses sold within 500’ in t − 1
0.05
0.05
1(SRP-eligible)
0.43
0.5
Panel B: Landscape (N=531,650; 71,477 households)
fraction of green landscape
1(housing transaction)
fraction of households sold within 500’ in t − 1
1(SRP-eligible)
lot size (ft2 )

0.37
0.04
0.04
0.38
9,706

0.10
0.20
0.05
0.49
570

Min.

Max.

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

100
99.3
1
1
1
1
1

0.19
0
0
0
1,537

0.68
1
1
1
299,200

Notes: An observation is a household-year. Sample is sample from preferred specification. SRP refers
to the Salt River Project

32

Table 2: Peer Effects in Water Consumption
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
OLS
IV
fraction of peer switches in t − 1
0.13***
0.24***
0.33***
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.12)
peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft2 )
-0.30
-0.23
-0.02
(0.80)
(0.90)
(0.82)
2
∆ peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft )
0.64
1.01
0.34
(0.97)
(1.07)
(0.99)
fraction peer new construction
-0.35**
-0.25
-0.35**
(0.16)
(0.19)
(0.16)
Household Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Subdivision x Year Fixed Effects
Y
N
Y
Census Block x Year Fixed Effects
N
Y
N
R-squared
0.178
0.211
0.177
N
1,823,150 1,823,150 1,823,150

(4)
IV
0.29***
(0.13)
-0.18***
(0.91)
0.96
(1.08)
-0.26***
(0.19)
Y
N
Y
0.211
1,823,150

Notes: The dependent variable is 1(household switch in water consumption in t), where a switch
is defined as a reduction in a growing season month of at least half the difference between the
growing season and non-growing season consumption that does not return. An observation is a
household parcel-year. The peer group is defined here as all houses within a 500’ radius of the
household and on average, there are 25.3 houses within a 500’ radius of any household in our study.
The ‘fraction of peer switches’ refers to the fraction of households in the peer group that make a
switch in water consumption in the previous growing season. Column 1 and 2 present OLS peer
effect results. Columns 3 and 4 instrument for the fraction of peer switches using the fraction of
parcels with housing transactions within 500’ in the previous year. Standard errors are clustered at
the subdivision level. *** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.

33

Table 3: Placebo Tests
(1)
(2)
OLS
OLS
fraction of peer switches in t
0.13***
0.24***
(0.006)
(0.006)
2
-0.52
0.008
peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft )
(0.77)
(0.97)
∆ peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft2 )
0.72
0.60
(0.94)
(1.13)
fraction peer new construction
-0.20
-0.16
(0.18)
(0.18)
Household Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Subdivision x Year Fixed Effects
Y
N
Census Block x Year Fixed Effects
N
Y
R-squared
0.176
0.210
N
1,823,150 1,823,150

(3)
IV
0.04
(0.10)
-0.52
(0.77)
0.64
(0.94)
-0.21
(0.18)
Y
Y
N
0.176
1,823,150

(4)
IV
0.11
(0.11)
-0.03
(0.97)
0.55
(1.12)
-0.17
(0.18)
Y
N
Y
0.210
1,823,150

Notes: The dependent variable is 1(household switch in water consumption in t − 1), where a switch
is defined as a reduction in a growing season month of at least half the difference between the
growing season and non-growing season consumption that does not return. An observation is a
household parcel-year. The peer group is defined here as all houses within a 500’ radius of the
household and on average, there are 25.3 houses within a 500’ radius of any household in our study.
The ‘fraction of peer switches’ refers to the fraction of households in the peer group that make a
switch in water consumption in the growing season t. Column 1 and 2 present OLS peer effect
results. Columns 3 and 4 instrument for the fraction of peer switches using the fraction of parcels
with housing transactions within 500’ in year t (to align with the fraction of peer switches variable).
Standard errors are clustered at the subdivision level. *** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5%
level, * at 10% level.

34

Table 4: Robustness Checks
(1)
(2)
Time Trends
fraction of peer switches in t − 1
0.32***
0.29**
(0.12)
(0.13)
peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft2 )
-0.003
-0.156
(0.819)
(0.907)
∆ peer sales prices (1000’s$/100ft2 )
0.321
0.928
(0.996)
(1.076)
fraction peer new construction
-0.349**
-0.259
(0.164)
(0.194)
Household Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Subdivision x Year Fixed Effects
Y
N
Census Block x Year Fixed Effects
N
Y
Zip code-specific Time Trends
Y
Y
R-squared
0.177
0.211
N
1,823,150 1,823,150

(3)
(4)
Include Sold Homes
0.34***
0.41***
(0.12)
(0.13)
-0.387
-0.855
(0.740)
(0.828)
0.842
1.816*
(0.919)
(0.989)
-0.371**
-0.272
(0.163)
(0.189)
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
0.169
0.201
1,979,932 1,979,932

Notes: The dependent variable is 1(household switch in growing season water consumption in t).
All specifications instrument for the fraction of peer switches using the fraction of parcels with housing transactions within 500’ in the previous year. The specifications that include sold homes include
a dummy for whether the parcel had a transaction in the last year. An observation is a household
parcel-year. All variable definitions are the same as in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the
subdivision level. *** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.

35

Table 5: Evidence that Landscaping Decisions Underpin Water Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
Off-season Increase Landscape
in use
added
fraction of peer water switches in t − 1
0.09
-0.26
0.04
(0.09)
(0.46)
(0.37)
change in average peer greenness
-27.78***
(0.00)
Housing price controls
Y
Y
Y
New construction controls
Y
Y
Y
Household Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Census Block x Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
R-squared
0.23
0.20
0.43
N
1,823,150 1,823,150
288,006
Notes: Column 1 uses downward switches in water consumption in the nongrowing season for both the dependent variable and the peer group variable.
Column 2 uses increases in water consumption (upward switches) for both
the dependent variable and the peer group variable. Column 3 is identical to
Column 4 in Table 2, only with the new covariate, the average change in the
landscape greenness in the peer group. All specifications instrument for the
fraction of peer switches using the fraction of parcels with housing transactions
within 500’ in the previous year. An observation is a household parcel-year.
Standard errors are clustered at the subdivision level. *** denotes significance
at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.

36

Table 6: Table of Balance for Matched Households
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
SRP Matched Diff
t-stat
lot size (ft2 )
7,952
7,950
1.9
0.10
water consumption (ccf) 19.81
19.81
-0.004
0.09
2
house size (ft )
1,557
1557
-0.2
0.07
# bath fixtures
6.09
6.09
0.001
-0.10
1(has pool)
0.193
0.193
0.000
-0.03
median HH income ($)
45,663
45,955
-292 -4.72***
Notes: Column 1 reports means for SRP households in the water consumption data with standard deviations in parentheses. Column 2 reports means
for the matched non-SRP households, using Mahalanobis matching, in the
water consumption data with standard deviations in parentheses. Column
3 reports the difference in means, while column 4 shows the t-statistic for
a two-sided test of differences in means. Median HH income refers to the
median household income at the Census tract level. *** denotes significance
at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.

Table 7: Role of Economic Incentives
(2)
(3)
SRP-eligible
low
mid
high
0.02
0.18
0.10
(0.24)
(0.18)
(0.15)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.16
0.18
0.20
754,578 754,578 754,578
(1)

fraction of peer switches in t − 1
Housing price controls
New construction controls
Household Fixed Effects
Census Block x Year Fixed Effects
R-squared
N

(4)
(5)
(6)
Matched non-SRP
low
mid
high
0.55**
0.45*** 0.18***
(0.26)
(0.08)
(0.05)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.22
0.24
0.36
843,330 843,330 843,330

Notes: The dependent variable is 1(household switch in growing season water consumption in t−1). An observation is a household parcel-year. The peer group is defined here as all houses within a 500’ radius of the household.
The ‘fraction of peer switches’ refers to the fraction of households in the peer group that make a switch in
water consumption in growing season t, but each column uses a different threshold for defining a switch. low
refers to 1.5 ccf, mid 2.83 ccf, and high 7.17 ccf. All specifications instrument for the fraction of peer switches
using the fraction of parcels with housing transactions within 500’ in the previous year. The ‘matched non-SRP’
estimations in columns 4-6 include only the subsample of matched homes, identified using a Mahalanobis
matching routine. For Columns 1-3, standard errors are clustered by subdivision. For Columns 4-6, standard
errors are bootstrapped clustered by subdivision. *** denotes significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.

37

Figure 1: Binscatter plot of the annual water consumption per household in the Phoenix
City Water District along with a linear best-fit trendline. Source: City of Phoenix Water
Services Department.

Figure 2: Illustrative remote sensing images demonstrating the classification of green
space. Panel A on the right shows what our remote sensing images look like, while Panel
B on the left shows how the machine learning algorithm codes the pixels of green space.

38

Legend
Phoenix Municipal Water District
Salt River Project
Landscape Sample Parcels

Figure 3: Phoenix water district boundary, along with identification of areas under the
Salt River Project and landscape sample parcels.

39

