                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     POSITIVELY AWARE? CONFLICTING EXPERT REVIEWS AND DEMAND FOR
                         MEDICAL TREATMENT

                                        Jorge F. Balat
                                   Nicholas W. Papageorge
                                       Shaiza Qayyum

                                     Working Paper 24820
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24820


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2018




We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Tat Chan, Andrew Ching, Michael Darden,
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Barton Hamilton, Ginger Jin, Stephanie Heger, Mitchell Hoffman,
Jennifer Kohn, Darius Lakdawalla, Michael Makowsky, Patrick McAlvanah, Kevin Thom and
Yiyi Zhou along with seminar participants at the FTC, the 2015 SEA meetings, the 2016 NASM
of the Econometric Society and the 2016 Yale SOM Marketing Science Conference at Olin
Business School. The usual caveats apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jorge F. Balat, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Shaiza Qayyum. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Positively Aware? Conflicting Expert Reviews and Demand for Medical Treatment
Jorge F. Balat, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Shaiza Qayyum
NBER Working Paper No. 24820
July 2018
JEL No. D12,D83,I12,L15,M3

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the impact of expert reviews on the demand for HIV treatments. A novel feature of our
study is that we observe two reviews for each HIV drug and focus attention on consumer
responses when experts disagree. Reviews are provided by both a doctor and an activist in the
HIV lifestyle magazine Positively Aware, which we merge with detailed panel data on HIV-
positive men’s treatment consumption and health outcomes. To establish a causal relationship
between reviews and demand, we exploit the arrival of new drugs over time, which provides
arguably random variation in reviews of existing drugs. We find that when doctors and activists
agree, positive reviews increase demand for HIV drugs. However, doctors and activists frequently
disagree, most often over treatments that are effective, but have harsh side effects, in which case
they are given low ratings by the activist, but not by the doctor. In such cases, relatively healthy
consumers favor drugs with higher activist reviews, which is consistent with a distaste for side
effects. This pattern reverses for individuals who are in worse health and thus face stronger
incentives to choose more effective medication despite side effects. Findings suggest that
consumers demand information from experts whose review is more aligned to their preferences
over health versus side effects, which can vary by health status.

Jorge F. Balat                                   Shaiza Qayyum
The University of Texas at Austin                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          Johns Hopkins University
BRB 3.134C                                       Wyman Building
2225 Speedway                                    3400 N. Charles Street
Austin, TX 78712                                 Baltimore, MD 21218
jbalat@utexas.edu                                sqayyum2@jhu.edu

Nicholas W. Papageorge
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and IZA
and also NBER
papageorge@jhu.edu



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24820
1       Introduction
Consumers facing uncertainty often turn to low-cost sources of information, such as word-
of-mouth, advertisements or product reviews generated by other consumers or by experts.
In the case of expert reviews, the idea is that individuals turn to a trusted or authoritative
information source to help them make decisions. Previous research has demonstrated that
expert reviews help drive demand for a number of products, such as movies, wine and
books. The impact of expert reviews also extends to higher-stakes contexts, such as financial
decisions (Benabou and Laroque, 1992; Reiter and Ziebart, 1991; Cantor and Packer, 1996,
1997).1
    Despite the importance of expert reviews in several economic contexts, little is known
about how consumer demand responds to conflicting expert reviews. Yet, consumers often
have access to multiple reviews from different experts who potentially disagree. One possi-
bility, which we explore in this paper, is that individuals facing conflicting reviews rely upon
expertise from the source they view as best aligned to their preferences and objectives. Seen
this way, individuals facing uncertainty are not passive consumers of available information,
but instead appear to actively choose which information source to incorporate into their
decisions.
    In this paper, we study the impact of expert reviews on the demand for HIV drugs.2 In
our setting, consumers face uncertainty about drug qualities, including treatment efficacy
and adverse treatment side effects. Their choices affect their health, well-being and survival.
At multiple points in its lifecycle, each HIV drug we study is reviewed by both an HIV
physician and an HIV activist, the latter often someone infected with HIV. We demonstrate
that favorable expert reviews increase demand for HIV drugs. This finding provides evidence
that the influence of expert reviews extends to health investments, which affect mortality
risk. Next, we examine patient responses to conflicting reviews, i.e., when the doctor and
activist disagree about a given drug. In such cases, consumer responses vary by their current
health, with sicker consumers choosing treatments recommended by the doctor and healthier
consumers following the activist. To explain this pattern, we argue that consumer responses
to expert reviews depend on their incentives to use effective treatments despite adverse side
effects — and that these incentives shift with health status.
   Examining consumer responses to conflicting reviews requires data that are often lacking
in studies linking expert reviews to demand. To study HIV drug reviews and demand,
    1
     Coffman et al. (2017) show evidence that social information affects decisions in high-stakes contexts, in
their case, career choices.
   2
     HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus, which is a virus that attacks the immune system.



                                                      1
we merge two unique data sets. The first is from a longitudinal study of men infected
with HIV (henceforth, HIV-positive or HIV+), which provides detailed information on a
variety of health measures and also records each individual’s medical treatment consumption
decisions. Using this data set, we can relate patient health outcomes to the treatments they
use, which allows us to construct two objective treatment characteristics: a measure of
treatment effectiveness against HIV and a measure of treatment side effects. We merge this
information with a data set consisting of manually-coded drug reviews. Doctor and activist
reviews are disseminated in a comprehensive HIV drug guide published annually in a widely
circulated HIV lifestyle magazine called Positively Aware. As we explain in detail below, text
reviews are scored as positive, negative or mixed.3 By combining these two data sets, we are
able to relate potentially conflicting activist and doctor reviews to drug demand and health
outcomes. Moreover, since we observe objective product qualities, we not only control for
them, but also use them to better understand how reviews are generated, in particular, why
doctors and activists sometimes disagree about a given drug. Observed objective qualities
are also integral to our identification strategy in a way to be explained below.
    We present two main sets of results. First, we estimate a discrete choice model of demand
for HIV drugs and provide arguably causal evidence that positive reviews increase demand
for HIV drugs. A positive correlation between positive reviews and high demand could
be driven by omitted third factors, such as unobserved drug qualities, which affect both
reviews and demand. We overcome potential endogeneity problems by exploiting rich data
on objective product qualities along with repeated reviews of the same drug over time. Our
identification strategy relies on the idea that as new drugs emerge, reviews for existing drugs
shift in response. Thus, we can use the objective qualities of rival drugs on the market, which
change over time as the market evolves, to instrument for reviews. Our identification strategy
follows the spirit of Berry et al. (1995) (henceforth, BLP), as we exploit characteristics of
a shifting set of rival products on the market to instrument for a drug’s review. Estimates
indicate that reviews have a positive impact on demand. In particular, if both the activist
and doctor’s reviews for a treatment increase from mixed to positive, the average probability
of taking it increases by 0.9 percentage points. To put this into context, an increase in
reviews from neutral to positive has the same positive impact on demand as a 0.09 standard
deviation increase in treatment efficacy and a 0.04 standard deviation reduction in treatment
side effects.4
       Our second set of results focuses on explaining consumer demand responses to conflicting
   3
     Drug reviews from Positively Aware also contain information on a host of additional drug characteristics,
including known interactions, dosage and number of side effects discovered during clinical trials, information
which we also use in our empirical analysis.
   4
     Our measures of treatment efficacy and side effects are discussed below.

                                                      2
reviews.5 We find that, when the reviews of doctors and activists diverge, relatively healthy
patients follow the activist rather than the doctor. Our interpretation is that this pattern
reflects patient distaste for drug side effects. To support this view, we provide three pieces
of empirical evidence. First, disagreements arise when a treatment is highly effective but
has severe side effects, in which case it is given a lower review by the activist, but not by
the doctor.6 If patients favor drugs with fewer side effects and face diverging reviews, they
might choose to follow the expert — in this case an HIV activist who is also a fellow patient
— who tends to downgrade drugs with harsher side effects. Second, using rich data on
individual health characteristics, we show that consumer demand responses lead to declines
in health along with reductions in side effects. This would likewise be expected if consumers
follow activist reviews in an effort to avoid effective drugs with harsh side effects. Third,
we examine demand responses of HIV+ men who are relatively sick (a condition known as
AIDS).7 Previous research has shown that patients who choose less effective treatments to
avoid side effects are more willing to choose effective treatments with adverse side effects
when in poor health since the payoff from doing so in terms of improved health is large
(Papageorge, 2016). This suggests a way to test the validity of our preferred explanation.
The reasoning is that if healthier consumers follow the activist in an effort to avoid side
effects, we would expect sicker patients to respond more positively to the doctor, the expert
who tends to recommend highly effective treatments despite adverse side effects.8 Indeed,
we find that, in contrast to healthier patients, sicker HIV+ men respond positively to higher
doctor reviews.
    In relating expert reviews to demand, this paper contributes to several strands of litera-
ture in economics. The first studies how individuals facing uncertainty rely on a variety of
information sources, such as direct-to-consumer advertising (Ackerberg, 2001; Gordon and
Hartmann, 2013) or social learning, which includes word-of-mouth and peer effects (Moretti,
2011; Liu, 2006).9 More closely related to our study, a number of papers show that “re-
port cards” revealing information about product quality can affect choices when quality is
   5
      As reviews are printed on the same page, one after the other, in the same magazine, the presumption is
that individuals are exposed to both.
    6
      This is in line with research demonstrating that doctors care less about side effects than patients do.
In a particularly striking contribution, Ubel et al. (2011) show that doctors, when they fall ill, avoid drugs
with side effects despite having recommended them to their patients.
    7
      AIDS stands for Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
    8
      To fix ideas, Appendix B presents a theoretical model that formalizes the logic behind our interpretation
of findings.
    9
      The impact of social learning on demand has been shown in a variety of contexts, including the adoption
of new crops (Munshi, 2004; Bandiera and Rasul, 2006; Conley and Udry, 2010) and job uptake (Coffman
et al., 2017). See Dranove and Jin (2010) for a comprehensive review. Other research has studied the effect
of online reviews. Anderson and Magruder (2012) demonstrate how Yelp reviews affect restaurant choices,
and Cabral and Hortacsu (2010) show that eBay reputation affects purchasing decisions.


                                                      3
uncertain.10 In our study, we incorporate consumer-level data, which means we can study
the impact of reviews not only on consumer choices, but also on subsequent outcomes. In
this sense, our study is related to Jin and Leslie (2003), who demonstrate that changes in
restaurant choices in response to the posting of health inspection grades lowered the inci-
dence of hospital admissions related to food poisoning. Also related, Hastings and Weinstein
(2008) show that providing school test score information to lower-income families affects
school choice, which in turn increases students’ test scores. Similarly, we show that expert
reviews affect consumer demand for medical treatment, which has subsequent impacts on
their health outcomes.
    An advantage of our study is that we incorporate information on objective product quali-
ties along with reviews from multiple, possibly conflicting experts. This allows us to examine
how reviews relate to objective product qualities along with heterogeneity in consumer re-
sponses to disagreements. We can thus provide novel evidence that the way in which experts
weight product qualities in their reviews affects how consumers incorporate these reviews
into their decisions. This point relates our study to an emerging literature examining the
demand for information. For example, Hoffman (2016) uses evidence from field experiments
to show that individuals demand information, though they tend to underpay for it. Ganguly
and Tasoff (2016) show that agent willingness-to-pay for information rises when the rewards
from information are higher and Eliaz and Schotter (2010) show that when making risky
decisions, agents pay for information based on the likelihood of information being ex-post
optimal. Relatedly, Dranove and Sfekas (2008) show that when hospital report cards provide
information that differ from patients’ prior beliefs about hospital quality, patients switch to
higher-quality hospitals.
    By focusing on disagreements among experts in high-stakes contexts, we also relate to
a literature demonstrating that reliance on low-cost information sources, such as expert
reviews, can be problematic. For example, Dranove et al. (2003) show that information con-
tained in health care “report cards” decreased patient and social welfare by inducing health
care providers to decline treatment to sicker patients. Mayzlin et al. (2014) find that online
hotel reviews that affect demand are subject to manipulation. Relatedly, in a study of expert
judges of a musical competition, Ginsburgh and Van Ours (2003) show evidence that judges’
rankings are often the result of random ordering of the performers and not the underlying
  10
    Information in the form of audits or report cards affects election winners (Ferraz and Finan, 2008),
stock-buying (Barber and Odean, 2008), Medicare enrollment (Dafny and Dranove, 2008), health plan choice
(Chernew et al., 2008), health care provider choice (Wang et al., 2011), hospital patient volumes (Pope, 2009),
investments in the housing market (Figlio and Lucas, 2004) and education (Andrabi et al., 2017). Fong and
Oberholzer-Gee (2011) show that agents are willing to pay for information about charity recipients when
agents’ charitable giving is responsive to recipient type.



                                                      4
performance quality. Yet, judges’ rankings affect performers’ subsequent careers.11 The idea
is that reviews, either from experts or other users, might not provide useful or accurate
information, but could still affect economic decisions and outcomes. The disagreements be-
tween reviewers that we examine might suggest that at least one expert is “wrong,” which
could mean that reliance on reviews could harm patients. Our findings suggest a different
interpretation. We argue that disagreements reflect that experts generate reviews that place
different weights on multiple drug characteristics. Consumers therefore respond differently
to divergent reviews, which suggests that they demand different information depending on
their current health status and follow conflicting expert reviews accordingly.
    Finally, we contribute to a literature examining health investments under uncertainty.
For example, Crawford and Shum (2005) show the effects of uncertainty and learning in the
demand for anti-ulcer drugs.12 Coscelli and Shum (2004) model how doctors update their
beliefs about drug quality relative to existing drugs after observing the new drug’s effects
on their patients. Further studies examine how direct-to-consumer advertising (Sinkinson
and Starc, 2015), spillover effects from advertising of similar drugs (Shapiro, 2016), detail-
ing (Ching and Ishihara, 2010, 2012) and publicity (Ching et al., 2015) affect demand for
pharmaceuticals when drug quality is uncertain.13 There is also evidence of peer effects in
healthcare adoption (Duflo and Saez (2003); Sorensen (2006); Oster and Thornton (2012)).14
We show evidence of a novel way that consumers making health investments mitigate uncer-
tainty: by incorporating expertise from potentially conflicting sources in a way that depends
on their health objectives.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our data sources and
how we code the expert reviews. In Section 3 we explain how we construct the combination-
level data (as HIV drugs are consumed in combination with one another), and presents a
preliminary analysis at the drug-combination level. Section 4 describes our econometric
model and identification strategy. In Section 5 we present our main results. Finally, Section
6 concludes.
  11
     Relatedly, Bertrand et al. (2010) show that a picture of a smiling woman on a loan brochure affects
demand for the loan.
  12
     Related to learning, Dickstein (2014) designs a framework to analyze how price and promotion influence
the learning process of the doctor and the patient and applies his model to depression care.
  13
     Related, Liu et al. (2014) study promotion spillovers in demand for HIV drugs.
  14
     Theoretical work on social learning from peers can be traced back to Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani
et al. (1992), who show that informational cascades can explain herd behavior and fads. Schotter (2003)
presents a theoretical model of decision making with advice from outside sources (such as word-of-mouth
advice and observational learning). Brown et al. (2012, 2013) write a behavioral game-theoretic model to
explain limited strategic thinking at the movie box-office.




                                                    5
2      Data: Individuals, Drugs and Reviews
In this section, we introduce the individual- and drug-level data sets we use in this study
and explain how we code the expert reviews.


2.1     Data Sources
Our data come from two sources. The first is a large panel data set on HIV+ men’s treat-
ment choices and health outcomes. The second contains expert drug reviews written in the
magazine Positively Aware.

Data from the Multi-Center AIDS Cohort Study. We use the publicly available
dataset from the Multi-Center AIDS Cohort Study (henceforth, MACS), an ongoing study
of the natural and treated histories of HIV+ homosexual and bisexual men that was started
in 1983.15 The study is conducted in four cities: Baltimore, Chicago, Pittsburgh, and Los
Angeles.16 At each semi-annual visit (conducted in March and September of each year), data
are collected on medical treatment choices, health status and a host of socio-demographic
measures, including employment, income and completed education. The MACS data set
consists of 6,843 individuals over 50 (semi-annual) visits. We restrict our attention to HIV+
individuals for the time period from 1997 to 2008, which is when drug reviews from the Posi-
tively Aware Drug Guides — our second data source — are available. Restricting our sample
leaves us with an unbalanced panel of 1,330 individuals consisting of 13,472 observations,
where each observation is an individual-visit dyad.
    The MACS dataset not only provides us with individual-level drug choices but also in-
cludes two measures of health status relevant to individuals with HIV. The first is an objective
measure of the individual’s immune system health. At each interview, a blood test is con-
ducted to measure the subject’s CD4 count, which is defined as the number of white blood
cells per mm3 of blood. Typical CD4 counts range between 500 and 1000 for uninfected
(HIV−) individuals and lower counts indicate that the immune system is compromised by
HIV. Counts below 300 indicate the individual suffers from AIDS, a condition where the im-
  15
      The study also follows HIV-negative (henceforth, HIV−) men, but we exclude them from our analysis
since over our sample period it is exceedingly rare that uninfected men consume HIV drugs.
   16
      Data in this manuscript were collected by the Multi-Center AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) with centers
(Principal Investigators) at The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (Joseph B. Margolick,
Lisa P. Jacobson); Howard Brown Health Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University;
Cook County Bureau of Health Services (John P. Phair, Steven M. Wolinsky), University of California, Los
Angeles (Roger Detels); and University of Pittsburgh (Charles R. Rinaldo). The MACS is funded by the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, with additional supplemental funding from the National
Cancer Institute. UO1-AI-35042, 5-MO1-RR-00052 (GCRC), UO1-AI-35043, UO1-AI-35039, UO1-AI-35040,
UO1-AI-35041. Website located at http://www.statepi.jhsph.edu/macs/macs.html.


                                                     6
mune system has been compromised to such a degree that it loses functionality and cannot
fight off common infections. The second health measure consists of subjects’ own reports of
their physical ailments, including nausea, headache, fever, diarrhea and drenching sweats.
These physical ailments reflect side effects of medical treatments, but can also be symptoms
of HIV infection if CD4 counts are low.
    We report summary statistics for the variables at the individual level in our sample in
Table 1. The average age of individuals in the sample is 47, with 54% of the sample composed
of white individuals. Close to 20% of the individuals have only a high school degree, while
50% of the sample has completed college education, and 54% of people work full time. The
average CD4 count of individuals in our sample is 536, with 54% of individuals reporting
non-decreasing CD4 count from one visit to the next and 63% of the patients reporting no
ailments such as fatigue, drenching sweats, and headaches. Relevant to our later analyses,
20% of patients have a CD4 count of less than 300, which indicates that they are living with
AIDS.

Data from Positively Aware. The second data source we use is a drug guide published
annually since 1997 in an HIV lifestyle magazine known as Positively Aware, which con-
tains drug reviews for all FDA-approved drugs and drugs nearing approval.17 While the
magazine is issued semi-monthly (six regular issues per year), the comprehensive drug guide
is published annually joint with the January/February issue. The magazine’s contributing
writers and columnists are professionals in the field of HIV/AIDS, including HIV specialist
physicians from the US, people living with HIV, and advocates. The magazine is widely
known in the HIV+ community and distributed for free. To get a sense of their outreach,
in their media kit for 2010, the magazine publisher guarantees a minimum circulation of
100,000 copies, with 75,000 copies distributed to more than 1,900 community-based organi-
zations and 700 Walgreens pharmacies across the US, 7,000 copies distributed at more than
200 venues, 5,000 copies distributed at HIV/AIDS conferences and events, 10,000 copies
sent to individual subscribers, 1,500 copies delivered to members of the American Academy
of HIV Medicine, and 1,500 copies delivered to media, HIV advocates and pharmaceutical
representatives.
    The aim of the drug guides is to present information about HIV drugs in a form that is
easy to decipher and comparable across drugs. It is meant as a guide for patients who are
just starting therapy, as well as those who have been on treatment for a long time, helping
patients discuss their treatment options with their doctors and decide whether or not an
 17
    Positively Aware is a not-for-profit HIV/AIDS treatment journal published by Test Positive Aware
Network (TPAN). TPAN is a 501c3, not-for-profit AIDS Service Organization (ASO) based in Chicago, IL.



                                                 7
alternative treatment regimen might be more suitable. From 1997 until 2007, the magazines
and the annual drug guides were only available in print. However, starting in 2007, the Drug
Guides have also been available on the magazine’s website, positivelyaware.com.
    The drug guides offer rich information on HIV drug quality. Measures include the number
of side effects observed in clinical trials, type(s) of side effects, severity of side effects, food
restrictions for each drug, dosage frequency, drug interactions, and the drug’s annual cost.18
Most importantly for this study, the drug guides include reviews for each drug from both
an HIV physician and a community activist (see Figure 1 for a sample page from the 2008
drug guide for AZT). To our knowledge, Positively Aware provides the only source of expert
reviews for all HIV drugs available on the market at a given point in time.19
   Table 2 provides summary statistics for drug characteristics from Positively Aware. In
total, we have data on 27 different drugs produced by 9 unique manufacturing firms that
were on the market at some point during the period between 1997 and 2008.20 In 1997, there
were only 9 drugs to choose from, while in the last period of analysis, patients could choose
from 25 different drugs. On average, drugs have 13 side effects reported in clinical trials
and have molecular interactions with 14 other drugs. The average pill burden for a drug is
roughly 2 tablets, taken twice a day.21


2.2     Coding Textual Expert Reviews
Typically, in the existing literature on the impact of expert or customer reviews on product
demand, the ‘expert’ review variable is binary (Good or Bad) or categorical (for example,
number of stars). As can be seen in Figure 1, our expert reviews are not numerical ratings,
but written text. The analysis of text is problematic and open to subjective interpretation.
Thus, an important question for us is how to code reviews for subsequent analysis. One of
the ways some authors have gotten around this problem is to use the length of the text as a
proxy for whether the review is positive or negative, with longer text signifying a “mixed”
review (Chevalier and Mayzlin, 2006). However, the reviews for most drugs in the Positively
  18
     A list of all variables constructed using information from the magazines, along with their definitions, is
presented in Appendix C.
  19
     An online search of HIV drug guides returns a host of resources available for people who want information
on HIV drugs. However, none of them publishes expert reviews on all FDA-approved HIV drugs on the
market in our time period of analysis. The only source of user reviews for HIV drugs are drugs.com but
they are only available after our period of analysis.
  20
     A detailed description of all the drugs, with information on when each drug entered (and exited) the
market, is presented in Table C1 of Appendix C.
  21
     The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) maintains a list of drugs with ‘preferred regimen’
status, that is, drugs that have been approved as first-line therapy by the DHHS. On average, 7 out of the
27 drugs on the market were given the preferred status.


                                                      8
Aware drug guides are similar in length and gauging the quality of a review from its length
would produce a very noisy measure of the doctors’ and activists’ valuation of the drug.
For some drugs a negative review by the activist is long, as he or she narrates a personal
experience, or the experiences of friends, while for other drugs a positive review by a doctor
or activist may be long, including for example descriptions of specific experiences when a
particular drug helped to save a patient’s life. Another option would be to use text analysis
software to automate the coding of the reviews. Unfortunately, text analysis software is
imperfect and cannot accurately capture the true flavor of the review, especially when the
text may be using euphemisms, analogies or subtle sarcasm to convey the message.
    To circumvent these problems, we assign a ranking to the reviews manually by developing
a numerical scale and by reading each review and assigning a number to it. We use an ordinal
rating of 1, 2 or 3 to classify each drug. A rating of 1 signifies a negative review and a rating
of 3 a positive review. A rating of 2 means we cannot assign a 1 or a 3, which thus means
that a review is mixed.22 In what follows, when we mention the doctor’s or activist’s review,
we in fact refer to our numerical interpretation of them. We provide the details of the criteria
we followed to construct these numerical variables in Appendix C.
    We report descriptive statistics of our expert review variables in Table 2. We observe
that the average rating given by doctors is higher than that given by activists (2.02 versus
1.89) and the difference is statistically significant at the 10% level. This suggests that, on
average, activists are more critical. This result is reinforced when we compare the fraction
of 1’s, 2’s and 3’s given by the two sets of experts, as shown in Figure 2. While an activist
gives the lowest rating 36% of the time, the doctor rates a drug 1 only 26.7% of the time.
On the other hand, a drug gets the highest rating by a doctor 27.2% of the time, while
the activist rates a drug positively 24.7% of the time. While differences in reviews for the
same drug could be random or reflect measurement error, as we argue below, they could also
reflect how experts weight different drug characteristics when generating reviews, which has
implications for how consumers incorporate reviews into their decisions.


3      Combination-Level Data: Preliminary Analysis
HIV drugs are rarely consumed individually and are instead consumed in bundles. Bundles of
HIV drugs are sometimes called cocktails, combination therapy, combos or simply treatments.
  22
    To verify that our results are not being driven by the particular way in which the reviews were coded, we
also employed two undergraduate students at Johns Hopkins University to separately recode the magazine
reviews. Results of the paper are robust to differences in coding, and the robustness checks are available
upon request from the corresponding author.


                                                     9
At a given point in time, a large majority of HIV patients combine two drugs or more in order
to build a regimen that is effective in fighting HIV. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the
number of drugs in the combinations. Conditional on taking at least one drug, around 35%
of HIV+ individuals take 3 drugs at the same time, while 25% are following monotherapy,
i.e., only taking one drug at the time of a visit.
    A challenge for our subsequent analysis is that each drug is reviewed individually. In this
section, we describe how we construct a data set for analysis of demand for combinations,
which requires that we aggregate expert reviews for individual drugs into combination-level
reviews. Then, we conduct a preliminary data analysis relating expert reviews to the de-
mand for HIV drug combinations. We end this section with a brief discussion of alternative
interpretations of the observed relationships between drug reviews and drug demand.


3.1     Combination Data Variable Construction
For our combination-level analysis, we construct the choice set, reviews for combos, combo-
level objective qualities and combo-level market shares.

Constructing the Choice Set. To study bundling, we return to the individual-level data
from MACS and construct a dataset of combination choices. We restrict our attention to
individuals who are taking 5 or fewer drugs during one visit.23 This leaves us with a total of
1,248 unique drug combinations. A large number of these combinations, however, are taken
by a small number of individuals and can be thought of as experimental combos. Therefore,
in order to reduce the choice set so that it is manageable from a computational perspective,
as well as to be able to construct objective quality measures for every combination in our
choice set, we define a ‘fringe’ category, in which we bunch together all combinations that
are taken by fewer than 25 people.24 That leaves us with 79 unique combinations in total
across all years in our sample plus the ‘fringe’ category and the outside option of taking no
HIV drug. Note, however, that the choice set is evolving over time. The number of combos
over time (excluding the outside option) is illustrated in Figure 4.25 We see that patients
have a minimum of 21 drug combinations to choose from for the first year of our sample
(early 1997), and a maximum of 58 drug combinations in late 2004.
  23
     Patients who are taking more than 5 drugs simultaneously are also those who are extremely sick and are
probably taking multiple drugs to find one that can decrease their viral load. Since this is not how patients,
on average, make medication choices, we exclude these people from our sample. By doing so, we lose less
than 2% of observations.
  24
     A combination can belong to the fringe category in some visits, but not others.
  25
     Over the span of 10 years, different drug combinations fall in and out of favor, especially when new
drugs are introduced on the market. The total number of unique alternatives we observe is 81, but not all
of these alternatives are encountered in any given time period.


                                                     10
Constructing Reviews for Drug Combinations. The doctor and activist reviews are
only available for each drug, not all possible drug combinations. Therefore, in order to
construct expert reviews for different drug combinations, we average over the reviews of
each drug component of the combination.26 Table 3 presents summary statistics for the
combo level variables. Panel (a) shows that the average doctor’s rating for a combination
is 2.18, while the average activist’s reviews is 2.07.27 Consistent with our previous results,
doctor’s reviews are significantly higher. Using the average of the individual drug reviews
as our measure of combo-level reviews may overlook factors that consumers consider, such
the minimum or maximum review or the variance. To explore these possibilities, after we
present our main results, we assess robustness to alternative ways of aggregating individual
drug reviews for combinations. Our main findings are robust to these alternatives.

Objective Qualities: Effectiveness and Side Effects. A key advantage of the MACS
data set is that it allows us to construct objective drug combination quality measures that are
crucial for our demand estimation. In particular, we follow Papageorge (2016) and construct
two objective quality measures for each treatment at each point in time.28 The first measure
aims to quantify treatment effectiveness at improving underlying health (as measured by
CD4 count levels). The second provides a measure of the treatment side effects. We allow
these measures to change each period over the lifecycle of a treatment to capture possible
differences over time in treatment quality that arise, for example, if HIV mutates.29
    The way we construct these objective quality measures for the different combinations is
as follows. For each combination c, we run a probit regression on demographic characteristics
to predict c’s probability of non-decreasing CD4 count and probability of no ailment for the
entire sample of HIV positive men. To obtain treatment-level objective quality measures, we
average over all individuals. As we discuss later, a drug’s quality measures might vary over
time and so we allow for this by letting the probit coefficients vary over time. Formally, to
construct combo c’s measure of effectiveness, we first fit a probit model of the likelihood that
a patient will experience an increase in his CD4 count in period t + 1 when taking combo
c at time t, conditional on patient’s characteristics. Letting CD4nt be individual n’s CD4
  26
     For example, if AZT has a rating of 2 and 3TC has a rating of 1, then the combination AZT-3TC will
have a rating of 1.5
  27
     In Liu et al. (2014), who also study HIV drugs, promotions are studied at the individual drug level even
though drugs are prescribed in combinations with others.
  28
     From now on we use the terms “treatment” and “combination” interchangeably even though some
consumers are observed taking a single drug.
  29
     Our results are robust to the use of constant quality measures over time or rolling averages and the
results of this robustness check are available upon request from the corresponding author.




                                                     11
count at time t, we estimate the model

                                                               0   CD4
                                                                                 
                             Prct (CD4nt+1 ≥ CD4nt |Xnt ) = Φ Xnt βct                                       (1)

on the sample of individuals who take combo c at time t, where Xnt is a vector of demographic
controls including patient n’s age, race, education level and work status as well as n’s CD4
count at t, and Φ(·) is the standard normal cdf. We fit the probit for each combo separately
(so that all coefficients can vary for each combo), and obtain the predicted probability of
non-decreasing CD4 count for all individuals in each visit. In order to get the combo-level
predicted probabilities, we average the predicted probabilities over all n at time t. The aim
with this procedure is to compute an average treatment effect, which consumers use when
choosing a treatment.
    Similarly, our measure of combo c’s side effects is calculated as the average likelihood
that combo c produces no ailments.30 Let noailnt be a dummy variable that takes the value
1 if patient n experiences no ailments at time t and 0 otherwise. We fit the model

                                                              0   noail
                                 Prct (noailnt = 1|Xnt ) = Φ(Xnt βct    ),                                  (2)

on the sample of individuals who take combo c at time t and where Xnt is the same vector of
covariates as above and Φ(·) is the standard normal cdf. As before, we fit a probit model for
each combo and obtain the predicted probability of no ailment for each individual in each
visit. In order to get the combo-level predicted probabilities, we then average the predicted
probabilities over all n at time t.31 Table 3, Panel (b) presents the summary statistics for
the constructed objective quality measures. The probability of non-decreasing CD4 count
for the average drug combination is 57%, while the probability of no ailment in the period
after taking the combination is 60%.32
    Constructing treatment quality measures using individual-level data stands in contrast
to other demand estimation contexts, where product characteristics (e.g., car size or horse-
power) are directly observed in the data. Controlling for consumer-level characteristics when
  30
     We define an individual as being free of ailments if he reports no nausea, headache, fever, diarrhea, or
drenching sweats in a period.
  31
     An alternative approach would use probit coefficients to predict treatment effects for each set of consumer
characteristics. We do not follow this approach since the aim is to capture that consumers likely know how
drugs work in general, but not necessarily how they work for each set of characteristics, many of which are
not observable. However, we note that reduced-form estimates remain unchanged if we allow for consumer-
specific treatment effects.
  32
     Since the ‘fringe’ category is composed of different combinations within and across different time periods,
each of which have their own objective quality value, we average over different combos within the same time
period t to obtain one value per time period for the objective quality measures for ‘fringe’.



                                                      12
constructing these measures helps to eliminate potential selection bias. Most importantly,
we control for individual health, which could drive treatment choices along with one-period-
ahead health or side effects, and could thus lead to bias in estimated coefficients if omitted.33
We return to the discussion of the consequences of using constructed treatment characteris-
tics in Section 4.2, when we discuss our identification strategy

Combination Market Shares. As mentioned before, the data in the MACS dataset are
collected twice a year. Thus, we can construct market shares for two six-month periods (one
for April–September and the other for October–March) in each year. Let Cnct be a dummy
variable that takes value 1 if patient n responded as having taken combination c at visit t
and 0 otherwise. Then, the market share for combination c at time period t is given by:
                                                    PNt
                                                      n=1   Cnct
                                            sct =                  ,                                      (3)
                                                          Nt

where Nt is the total number of HIV+ individuals at visit t.
    Table 3, Panel (c) provides some summary statistics of combo-level market shares.The
average market share of the outside option (taking no drug) is 19%, while the market share
of the ‘Fringe’ group is, on average, 32%. The average market share for combos other than
‘fringe’ and the outside option is 1%, with a maximum market share of 18%. Figure 5 shows
how the market share of the outside option evolves over the time frame of our analysis. The
market share for the outside option picks up in October 1999, reaching a peak in April 2003,
going down for the next few visits, and then finally reaching a maximum in October 2007.
In April 2008, the market share of the outside option fall drastically, from 27% to around
15%. This is because in April 2008, the drug Atripla was introduced on the market, which
had a market share of 19% at the time of introduction, suggesting that a large proportion
of patients who were off drugs switched to Atripla after its introduction.34


3.2     Preliminary Combination-Level Analysis
Having constructed combo-level reviews, objective quality measures and market shares, we
now establish key patterns emerging from our data. First, we study objective qualities and
demand to see if individuals prefer higher-quality drugs. Second, we explore the relationship
between combo-level reviews and objective qualities. Third, we relate reviews and demand
  33
     In additional results, we also control for consumer-level fixed effects in constructing treatment quality
measures and find that main results do not change.
  34
     Other significant changes in the share of the outside option can also be linked to years when new drugs
were introduced on the market.



                                                     13
before and after we control for objective qualities to see if reviews have predictive power even
after we control for observable drug quality levels.35 In Appendix A, we report results from
analogous analyses conducted at the drug level (i.e., relating drug-level reviews to drug-level
objective qualities or usage). Empirical patterns remain qualitatively similar, which helps
to alleviate the concern that results are driven by levels of aggregation.
    To conduct our preliminary combination-level analysis, we run logit regressions to es-
timate the effect of objective qualities on the probability of taking that combo. Table 4
shows how objective qualities from the MACS dataset and from the Positively Aware drug
guide relate to combo demand.36 Columns (1) through (3) show that if the probability of
no ailment of a combo increases (i.e., the side effects from taking that combo go down), the
demand for that combo increases. Similarly, if the probability of non-decreasing CD4 count
increases with use of a specific combo, then its demand is also larger. In columns (4) through
(6) we also control for the objective qualities included in the annual guides. As expected,
as the number of reported side effects for a combo increases, or if the pill burden or number
of food restrictions for a combo increases, the demand for that combo goes down. Lastly,
if dosage frequency for a combo increases (which increases the likelihood of missed doses
and not being able to follow the drug regimen strictly), demand for that combo decreases.
Therefore, all these results show that people, on average, prefer better quality drugs. In
particular, a one percentage point increase in the probability of no ailment increases the
probability of taking the combo by 1.8 percentage points, while a percentage point increase
in the probability of non-decreasing CD4 count increases demand by 1.1 percentage points.37
   Next, we show how objective qualities from MACS relate to expert reviews. In Table 5
we report the estimates of a regression of reviews on objective qualities by OLS. We find that
both the doctor and the activist give a higher rating to combos that have a high probability of
non-decreasing CD4 count. However, there is no significant association between the doctor’s
review and the probability of no ailment of a combo. Therefore, we find that activist’s
reviews are higher for combos that are more effective and have lower side effects, but the
doctor’s reviews are higher only for effective combos.
       Table 6 presents results from logit regressions showing how the combo demand is related
  35
     We also construct objective qualities from MACS at the drug level and relate reviews and drug con-
sumption before and after controlling for these objective qualities, and find similar patterns. However, since
that is not how drugs are actually consumed, we do not report these results as part of our reduced form
analysis, though the results are available upon request from the authors.
  36
     We construct combo-level qualities using the Positively Aware data by averaging across all drugs in a
combo. To calculate the combo-level pill burden, however, we sum the total number of pills taken for each
drug in a combination.
  37
     The average marginal effect is calculated by first calculating the marginal effect for each combo-year
dyad and then averaging across the entire sample.


                                                     14
to reviews and combo qualities. In columns (1) and (2), we see that a doctor’s review
positively predicts combo demand, even when we control for objective quality measures.
Columns (3) and (4) show that an activist’s review also positively predicts combo demand,
even after controlling for objective quality measures. However, in columns (5) and (6), when
we include both experts’ reviews together, we see a reversal of sign for the doctor: that is,
the doctor’s review now negatively predicts combo demand (though the coefficient is not
significant when we control for MACS objective qualities). On the other hand, a higher
activist’s review positively predicts combo-level market share, even after we control for the
probability of no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count.
    In our data, drugs are reviewed every year by the two experts and reviews might differ
not only across experts but also over time. In Panel (a) of Figure 6, we show how doctors’
and activists’ reviews evolve over the combo’s lifecycle. We find that combo reviews decline
as the drug combination ages. This could merely reflect that the objective characteristics of
a combo decrease over time as well. Panel (b) shows how the probability of no ailment and
probability of non-decreasing CD4 count of combos changes over the combination lifecycle.
As the combo ages, the probability of no ailment increases, indicating that side effects
decrease as the combination becomes older, while the probability of non-decreasing CD4
count decreases for older combinations, suggesting that old combinations are not as effective
as new ones. These patterns are consistent with drugs losing effectiveness as the virus
mutates and with patients gaining tolerance to side effects as doctors and patients gain
experience with drugs and dosage.
    We argue next that the changes in the combo characteristics only partially explain the
downward trend in combo reviews. To that end, in Panel (c), we plot residual ratings after
controlling for objective quality measures of the combo, and find that even when we control
for the evolution of a combination’s quality, reviews are still decreasing over time. One
possible reason for this “deflation” could be that reviews are relative to other available drugs
in the market. If so, as technology improves, reviewers may lower their reviews for older
drugs. What once was regarded as a stellar drug may now be superseded by a newer, better
drug. If this is the case, we would expect variation in how much reviews change for a given
drug depending on the quality of rival drugs, conditional on a drug’s own characteristics
(which might also change over time). We test this hypothesis in Section 4.2, and we find
that higher rival drug qualities lead to lower drug reviews. This finding motivates our
identification strategy. The idea is to instrument for reviews using the qualities of the set of
rivals at any point in time, where the set of rivals shifts over time due to the emergence of
new drugs.



                                              15
3.3    Expert Reviews and Demand: Alternative Explanations
The previous analysis provides preliminary evidence that expert reviews published in Pos-
itively Aware predict market shares for HIV drugs. However, there are several alternative
explanations which would also explain the correlation between combo reviews and combo
demand that we find in the data. One possibility is that reviews do not drive demand but
simply reflect a drug’s observed qualities which in turn is the demand driver. However, in
the previous section, we showed that reviews continue to predict market shares even after
we control for objective quality measures. Still, it is possible that reviews are not exogenous.
One concern is simultaneity. It may be the case the reviews simply reflect demand patterns.
Another possibility is unobserved drug heterogeneity. Magazine reviews may reflect drug
qualities that are not observable to the econometrician but are observable to patients and
doctors who make treatment decisions and therefore affect demand. We defer the formal
treatment of the endogeneity issue to Section 4.
    A second possibility is that the impact of reviews on demand for HIV drugs is indeed
causal, but that it is not due to patients reading Positively Aware. For example, Positively
Aware magazines are not the only source of information about drugs available to patients.
Other magazines could provide similar information and affect demand. However, to our
knowledge, Positively Aware drug guides are the only source of information in which pa-
tients can read reviews about all FDA approved drugs from a doctor and HIV activist in a
systematic way.
    The third potential story is related to the previous one. It could be that the true demand
driver is collective, evolving knowledge about drug quality and the reviews are just reflecting
it. We provide some suggestive evidence that this is not the case. We do so by exploiting
the timing of the reviews relative to when we observe drug choices. In particular, given that
the annual guide is published in January/February and data on drug choices are collected
both in April and October, we consider three distinct market share windows for our analysis.
Relative to reviews published in Jan/Feb of year t, we can construct market shares realized
before the magazine is published (i.e., market shares for the window April-September in
period t − 1), market shares for the window that overlaps with the period during which
magazine is published (i.e., market shares for the window October-March in period t − 1),
and market shares realized after the magazine has been published (i.e., market share for
the windows April-September and October-March in period t). The timeline of events is
illustrated in Figure 7.
   If the reviews solely capture evolving social knowledge about drugs, by construction they
would only capture knowledge from the 12 months prior to publishing. Thus, we could falsify


                                              16
the social knowledge hypothesis if reviews at period t have no effect on market shares for
the before and during windows at t − 1, after controlling for reviews at t − 1. Running these
two regressions we find that reviews at t have no significant effect.38 Moreover, when we run
the regressions of market shares for the after window at t and t + 1 we find that reviews
published in period t do have a significant effect. We interpret this as suggestive evidence
that reviews from Positively Aware (rather than evolving social knowledge) drive demand
for HIV drugs.


4      Econometric Model and Identification
In this section, we specify an econometric model of demand for HIV combos. The purpose is
twofold. First, the estimates of the coefficients of the structural model will allow us to obtain
own- and cross-review elasticities. Estimates of these elasticities are crucial to quantify the
effect of reviews on health outcomes. Second, the model makes explicit the identification
issue we need to overcome and will help in understanding the logic behind our identification
argument.


4.1     Model Specification
We study combination choice using a discrete choice demand model at the combo level.
Let Jt denote the choice set at time period t. To explain choices, we allow the utility of
an individual i, i = 1, . . . , nt , from consuming combination j ∈ Jt at time t to depend on
the drug characteristics — both observed and unobserved — as well as his demographic
characteristics, health status, and unobserved taste shocks.39 Let xjt be a K-dimensional
vector of observed product characteristics — including the doctor’s and activist’s reviews
— at time t and let ξjt denote the unobserved product characteristic.40 Also, let zit be
an R-dimensional vector of individual i’s characteristics at time t, including age, education
(dummies for whether the individual is a high school or college graduate), work status
  38
     Results available upon request.
  39
     The model we specify here is used to estimate the impact of reviews on demand. Following literature on
advertising, which uses a similar framework, our model treats reviews as an additional product characteristic
that drives demand by affecting the utility of a given product. Alternatively, a fully specified structural
demand model could treat individuals as not having preferences over reviews, but as relying on reviews
for additional information about drug characteristics over which they do have preferences, but do not fully
observe. If this is the case, in our current setup, we are recovering a reduced-form relationship between
reviews and demand. This limits the types of counterfactuals we can perform, a point we return to in
Section 5.3.
  40
     Note that we treat each combination j at time t as a separate product, so that AZT–3TC in 1997 is a
different product that AZT–3TC in 1998.


                                                     17
(dummy for full-time work), race (dummy for black), AIDS status, and whether or not the
individual was taking the same combination in the last period. We can then write the utility
i gets from consuming alternative j at time t as
                                           X
                                  uijt =       xjtk β̃ik + ξjt + ijt ,                     (4)
                                           k


with
                                                      X
                                     β̃ik = β̄k +             zirt βkr ,                    (5)
                                                          r

where β̃ik is individual i0 s taste for product characteristic k, which depends on his observed
individual-level characteristics zi , and ijt represents a shock to preferences which we assume
is distributed Type-I extreme value and independent across choices and individuals. Letting
                                               X
                                      δjt =          xjtk β̄k + ξjt                         (6)
                                               k


denote the mean utility level we can rewrite the utility as
                                               X
                                uijt = δjt +          xjtk zir βkr + ijt .                 (7)
                                               k,r


    Market-level aggregate consumer behavior is obtained by aggregating the choices implied
by the individual utility maximization over the population distribution of individual charac-
teristics. Let P(w) denote the distribution of w in the population, where w = (z, ) is the
vector of observed and unobserved individual characteristics. Then, conditional on product
characteristics, the fraction of individuals who choose combination j at time t is given by
integrating over the set of individual characteristics that imply a preference for combo j at
time t:                                           Z
                            sjt (δ, β; x, P(w)) =         P(w)dw.                         (8)
                                                          Ajt (δ,β;x)

where
                    Ajt (δ, β; x) = {w : maxp∈∅∪Jt [uipt (w; δ, β, x)] = uijt }.            (9)

Details about the estimation of the demand model are presented in Appendix D.


4.2     Identification
We know from Section 3.2 that doctors’ and activists’ reviews reflect observed combo char-
acteristics. An endogeneity problem might arise if reviews also reflect unobserved combo

                                                     18
quality. This problem is analogous to the price endogeneity issue that arises in traditional
demand estimation (see, e.g., BLP). In order to establish a causal relationship between re-
views and market share, we leverage the fact that the choice set is evolving over time, with
new drugs entering the market every period. If combo entry is exogenous and reviews are
relative, then the entry of new combos provides exogenous variation in reviews over the
combo’s lifecycle. Specifically, we use the average of (observable) qualities of rival combos
on the market as an instrument for reviews. The intuition is that the quality of rival drugs
should change the reviewer’s relative valuation of an incumbent drug’s quality, and will hence
affect the review for that drug. Table 7 shows how the doctor’s and activist’s reviews of a
combo relate to the average quality of rival combos on the market. As expected, results
show that (i) an increase in the objective qualities of a combo is positively correlated with
its reviews; and, more importantly, (ii) an improvement in the average probability of no
ailment or the average probability of non-decreasing CD4 count of rival combinations leads
to a decrease in the reviews for the combination. A joint test of the rivals’ objective quality
measures show that both the average probability of non-decreasing CD4 count of rival com-
binations and the average probability of no ailment of rival combinations significantly affect
doctors’ and activists’ ratings for a combination.
    Our key identifying assumption is that rival treatments enter the market exogenously and
affect reviews by experts but are uncorrelated with incumbent treatment unobserved charac-
teristics. That is, we require the observable characteristics of the entrants to be orthogonal
to the unobserved characteristics of the incumbent drugs.41 Note that the logic behind our
instruments is similar in spirit to the one in BLP. In BLP, prices are endogenous and need to
be instrumented. Prices are set in equilibrium by oligopolistic firms, and therefore prices not
only depend on a given product’s characteristics but also on the characteristics of its rivals.
Therefore, rivals’ characteristics are valid instruments under the assumption that product
characteristics — other than price — are exogenous. In contrast to the instruments in BLP,
we construct the treatment characteristics, and hence the instruments, from our patient-
level data as described in Section 3.1. To the extent that there is selection into treatments
based on patients’ characteristics, this could undermine the validity of our instruments. To
mitigate the effects of selection, we control for patient demographics and health when we
construct the objective drug characteristics and in our specification of the utility function.
  41
    While it is possible that pharmaceutical companies innovate and bring new drugs on the market in
response to existing drugs, the FDA approval process is time-consuming and the time at which drugs are
FDA approved and enter the market are arguably orthogonal to unobserved characteristics of existing com-
binations.




                                                  19
5      Findings
This section presents our main findings. We begin with estimates from a baseline model,
which relates demand to drug characteristics and reviews using the IV logit model presented
in the previous section. Results are qualitatively similar to the reduced-form estimates
we obtained previously. Higher activist reviews increase demand, whereas higher doctor
reviews lower demand, even after controlling for objective treatment characteristics. Next,
we estimate a set of models that explicitly distinguishes cases where the two reviews are in
agreement versus disagreement. We show that higher reviews increase demand when doctors
and activists agree. However, when they disagree, healthier consumers tend to follow the
activist’s review, while less healthy patients follow the doctor. The remainder of this section
provides evidence that these patterns reflect how consumers trade off their demand for long
run health and their distaste for treatment side effects.


5.1     Estimates of the Baseline Model and Robustness
We begin by estimating the parameters of the demand model given by equations (4) and (5),
treating reviews from both experts as additional treatment characteristics, instrumenting
for both using the average of the rivals’ objective qualities. Table 8 reports the IV logit
coefficients. Column (1) shows that a higher doctor’s review on its own raises demand.
A one-unit increase in the doctor’s review increases the likelihood the treatment is chosen
by 1.3 percentage points.42 This result also holds when we control for objective treatment
qualities (see column (2)). Similarly, columns (3) and (4) show that a higher activist’s review
for a combination increases consumption. A one-unit increase in the activist’s review for a
combination increases demand by 1.5 points.
    When we include both reviews together, we find that a positive review from the doctor
lowers demand, while a positive review from an activist raises demand (see columns (5) and
(6)). This finding is in line with our previous reduced-form estimates. Keeping objective
qualities and the activist’s review fixed, an increase in the doctor’s rating of one unit leads
to a 2.6 percentage point decrease in demand, while an increase in activist’s rating, keeping
the doctor’s review fixed, raises demand by 3.7 percentage points.43
  42
     The percentage change in the probability of choosing a combo alternative is calculated for each combo-
year dyad and then averaged across the entire sample.
  43
     Note that in our IV logit specifications, once we control and instrument for activist’s reviews, the
coefficient on probability of non-decreasing CD4 count is negative. This negative coefficient captures how
patients with different attributes (for example, those who are working full-time) may prefer combinations
with fewer side effects but lower efficacy. In fact, in our demand model with individual attributes, we show
that once we explicitly account for differences in patients’ attributes such as race, work status etc., both


                                                    20
    Next, we assess whether our results are robust to different ways of constructing combo-
level reviews. First, we generate reviews for combos by calculating the percentage of drugs
that have a rating of 3 in the combination. This relaxes the implicit cardinality assumption
arising from our use of averages. Demand estimates using this definition of reviews are
given in Panel (a) of Table 9. Notice that results are similar to our original specification. As
before, we find that doctor’s and activist’s reviews positively predict demand when including
them one at a time; however, when we control for both at the same time, we find that a
higher doctor’s review lowers demand. In Panel (b) of Table 9, we include a variable that
controls for the percentage of drugs in a combo that have a rating of 2. Results do not
change appreciably, though the negative effect of the doctor’s review becomes insignificant.
    Our second alternative specification includes the average review across all drugs in a
combination as well as the standard deviation of reviews within each combination. The
aim is to capture how patients value both the mean and the variance of individual product
attributes (drug-level reviews) in the bundles they consume (Farquhar and Rao (1976),
Bradlow and Rao (2000)).44 Results using this specification are shown in Panel (c) of Table
9. For the doctor’s review, after controlling for the average review, an increase in the
standard deviation is negatively related to demand. For the activist’s review, the standard
deviation of the reviews has a positive but insignificant relationship to demand once we
control for objective qualities of the combination. In columns (5) and (6), we again see
the reversal in sign for the average doctor’s review when we include both the activist and
doctor’s review, although our estimates are imprecisely estimated. Since we find no evidence
that the standard deviation of reviews affects demand significantly once we control for the
average reviews, we omit the standard deviations in our main specification.45


5.2     Disagreements and Demand
At face value, it seems puzzling that demand responds negatively to higher doctor’s reviews.
To explore this result, we consider how consumers respond to reviews when the doctor and
activist agree versus when they disagree. In fact, disagreements occur quite frequently: for
roughly 60% of combination-time dyads.
    To understand disagreements better, we first assess how they evolve over the age of the
objective qualities affect utility positively.
  44
     Farquhar and Rao (1976) and Bradlow and Rao (2000) describe individual choices among an assortment
of multi-attributed items in which the assortment could be made from a subset of all items available to
individuals. In their model, they allow a mean level of attributes for the assortment as well as the dispersion
of attributes to affect utility.
  45
     Additional robustness checks are presented in Appendix E.



                                                      21
combination. For this exercise, we define a dummy variable, which takes a value of one
if the activist’s review is not equal to the doctor’s review. Panel (a) of Figure 8 depicts
disagreements over drug age. Not surprisingly, most of the disagreements between the two
experts occur when the combination is ‘new’, i.e., the combination has only been on the
market and consumed by patients for three years or less. The experts disagree 75% of the
time when the combination is new, but over time, specifically, when the combination has
been part of the choice set for more than 6 years, the frequency of disagreements between the
two experts declines.46 We also consider the magnitude and direction of the disagreements.
Panel (b) of Figure 8 shows the distribution of the difference between the activist and doctor’s
review. When the two experts disagree, we are more likely to see a higher average review
for the combination from the doctor than the activist.
    Next, we explore the effect of disagreements on demand by interacting the doctor’s and
activist’s review with a dummy for disagreements, and interacting the doctor’s review with
a dummy for agreements.47 The coefficient on the interaction between agreements and the
doctor’s review captures the relationship between reviews and demand when the experts
agree, while the coefficients on the interactions between disagreement and the two expert
reviews capture which expert patients follow when experts disagree. The estimates are
shown in Table 10 (for comparison, column (1) reproduces the last column of Table 8). In
column (2), we see that, on average, if both experts agree and the combination gets a higher
review, then demand rises. This finding means that patient demand rises when both the
activist and the doctor ratings for a treatment are high. On average, a one unit increase
in experts’ rating when both experts agree leads to an increase in the probability of taking
a combination by approximately 1 percentage point.48 To put this in context, to achieve
the same increase in demand, the probability of non-decreasing CD4 count would have to
increase by 0.8 percentage points and the probability of not experiencing side effects when
taking the treatment would have to increase by 0.5 percentage points.49 Put another way,
an increase in reviews from neutral to positive has the same positive impact on demand as
a 0.09 standard deviation increase in the probability of non-decreasing CD4 count or a 0.04
  46
     An exception is a high proportion of disagreements occurring when combo age is 11. This is driven by a
set of combinations of old drugs (d4T, 3TC and Nevirapine). Removing these combinations does not affect
our results.
  47
     Note that when the experts agree, the activist’s and doctor’s reviews take the same value, so interacting
the dummy for agreement with the activist review is redundant.
  48
     We calculate the average marginal effect by first calculating the marginal effect for each combo-visit
dyad, and then averaging across all combo-year dyads. Similarly, the percentage change in the probability
of choosing a combo alternative is calculated for each combo-year dyad and then averaged across the entire
sample.
  49
     These figures are calculated by using the marginal effects for the two objective qualities reported in
Section 3.2.


                                                     22
standard deviation increase in the probability of no ailments.5051
     When the experts disagree, however, a higher activist’s review for a combination increases
demand, while a higher doctor’s review lowers demand. This result suggests that the negative
coefficient on the doctor’s review from our baseline model is driven by cases when the doctor’s
review is at odds with the activist’s. To explore this point a bit further, we also assess
potential asymmetries in how patients respond to conflicting expert reviews. We calculate
the difference between the activist’s and doctor’s review for each drug, generate a dummy for
whether this difference is positive (the activist gives a higher review compared to the doctor)
or negative (the activist’s review is lower than the doctor’s) and interact these dummies with
the two experts’ reviews. Results are shown in column (3) of Table 10. Estimates show that
when reviewers disagree, there is a significant effect on demand when the activist’s review
is lower than the doctor’s. In particular, an increase in the doctor’s (activist’s) review has a
negative (positive) effect on demand when the reviews differ and the activist’s review is lower
than the doctor’s review. When the activist’s review is higher than the doctor’s, the effect
of both reviews is not significant. This result provides further nuance to baseline estimates.
The negative reaction to the doctor’s review arises when doctors and activists disagree and,
moreover, when the activists downgrades a drug that the doctor does not.


5.3     Conflicting Reviews, Side Effects and Demand for Expertise
Having established the importance of disagreements in explaining how patients respond to
expert reviews, we now turn to understanding patient responses to disagreements.


5.3.1    Disagreements and Objective Qualities

We begin by exploring the relationship between experts’ ratings and objective qualities of
treatments (probability of no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count) in the
choice set to see if there are differences in how experts respond to these qualities when they
disagree. In Table 11, we regress doctors’ and activists’ ratings on the objective qualities
of own and rival combos for the sample of combos for which the two experts disagree. We
find that when the two experts disagree, the doctor’s review increases if the probability of
non-decreasing CD4 count of a combo increases, while the probability of no ailment has
  50
      According to Table 3, the minimum for probability of non-decreasing CD4 count is 23% and the maximum
is 93% and the standard deviation across drugs is 9. We obtain 0.09 by dividing 0.8 by 9. We perform a
similar calculation for probability of no ailments.
   51
      This comparison is similar to one made in Bertrand et al. (2010), who show how much non-standard
content (advertising) is worth versus standard determinants of demand — in their case, interest rates for
loans.


                                                   23
a negative but statistically insignificant effect on doctor’s rating. On the other hand, the
activist responds positively to both objective quality measures.


5.3.2    Expert Reviews and Health Outcomes

Next, we examine how reviews affect individuals’ health outcomes (through their effect on
combo choices). The way we quantify these effects is the following. We simulate how drug
choices would have changed in the absence of the reviews. We consider three cases: (i)
absence of activist reviews; (ii) absence of doctor reviews; and (iii) absence of both types
of reviews. We then construct measures of individual-level health outcomes based on the
counterfactual combo choices. We also simulate factual health outcomes including both
reviews, and compare the counterfactual health outcomes to the simulated factual ones.52
We focus on two key health outcomes: (i) the probability of having AIDS in the next period
and (ii) the probability of having no ailment in the next period, both conditional on the
individual’s current period health status.
    Our simulation results show that some people might get sicker by defying the doctor.
However, they suffer fewer side effects. Figure 9 shows the percent change in the probability
of having AIDS and having no ailments over the entire period of analysis compared to the
baseline case in which the two reviews are present.53 The dotted vertical lines on the figures
indicate the introduction of at least two new drugs in the months spanning that visit (see
Appendix F for details on how the state of the market evolves over our analysis time period).
Panel (a) shows the change in the probability of AIDS over time for the full sample. When
we shut down both reviews, there is a modest decrease in the probability of AIDS. When
we only allow activist reviews and shut down doctor’s reviews, the probability of AIDS in
all time periods goes down. Under the counterfactual exercise in which we only allow for
the doctors’ reviews, we find that the probability of AIDS increases, with a sharp increase
between October 2002 and April 2004, followed by a drop in October 2006. This suggests
that by opposing the doctor’s review (and after controlling for objective drug qualities),
patients are making choices that increase their probability of AIDS, especially so when good
quality drugs are introduced (the predicted probability of AIDS is highest between April
2002 and April 2004, when 3 new good quality drugs were introduced).54
  52
     The simulations are performed by taking a random sample of 10,000 patients with replacement in each
visit.
  53
     Notice that we are not estimating dynamic effects, but one-period-ahead simulations at different points
in time. While estimating the dynamic effects is certainly of interest to us it is beyond the scope of this
paper.
  54
     We present details on how the state of the market evolves over time in Appendix F. Table F1 shows
the date of entry for the new drugs and their initial market share, and Table F2 provides some summary


                                                    24
    At face value, the previous finding that patients are hurt when only doctors’ reviews
are available seems counterintuitive: they could be better off just by ignoring the doctors’
reviews instead of doing the opposite of what they say. Note, though, that patients also
care about the likelihood of experiencing side effects. To investigate the effects on the latter,
Panel (b) of Figure 9 shows that with only doctors’ reviews available, the probability of no
ailments goes up in all time periods. This shows that by not following doctors’ reviews in
informing treatment choice, patients are more likely to have AIDS but less likely to have side
effects. Therefore, it seems that patients understand the basic trade off they face and have
a greater preference for drugs which have lower side effects but are less effective. Another
interesting finding is that with only activists’ reviews available, there is an increase in the
probability of no ailment, suggesting that activists’ reviews push patients towards treatment
choices that are more effective and do not cause severe side effects.55


5.3.3    Individual Characteristics and Demand for Expertise

Results until now suggest that patient responses to conflicting reviews could reflect their
attempt to choose treatments with fewer side effects. Effective treatments with side effects
are downgraded by the activist, but not by the doctor. Consumers with a distaste for side
effects may understand this and utilize expertise accordingly. In particular, consumers may
turn to the activist — a fellow patient whose review responds to side effects — when choosing
treatments under uncertainty. A test for this explanation would consider the behavior of
patients who are not necessarily seeking drugs with fewer side effects, but instead aim to use
the most effective treatments possible.56 Presumably, such patients would be more likely to
follow the doctor’s review. In fact, using the same data set, Papageorge (2016) shows that
sicker patients are more willing to suffer side effects. The reason is that they face stronger
statistics of the qualities and reviews for the new entrants at the time of entry and the state of the market.
We can see that entrants are more effective compared to the market average (with the exception of the two
early entrants), while some have fewer side effects but not all. Also note that while the doctors’ reviews for
the entrants are always higher (except for Atripla) than the market average, activists’ reviews in some cases
are lower.
  55
     We also look at how the effects of reviews on health outcomes differ across individuals’ health status.
Our parameter estimates suggest that since individuals with AIDS follow the doctor’s advice, and doctors are
pushing drugs that are effective, we should expect to see a decrease in the probability of AIDS for this group.
Figure 10 presents the results for the sample of individuals who have AIDS in the current period. Figure
10 (a) shows that when we only have doctor’s reviews, even individuals with AIDS have a higher likelihood
of suffering from AIDS in the next period. However, we find that once we control for composition effects
(people with AIDS may differ in a systematic way in terms of their other sociodemographic characteristics),
there is at least a 1.6% drop in the probability of AIDS when we only have the doctor’s reviews, with a
larger drop after April 2004, when there is a structural change in the market and new and effective drugs
are introduced.
  56
     Appendix B presents a very simple theoretical model that formalizes the logic behind this falsification
test.

                                                      25
incentives to make costly health investments and use treatments despite their drawbacks. If
patient responses to reviews reflect a distaste for side effects, we might expect sicker patients
to respond more positively to doctors’ reviews in comparison to relatively healthy patients.
    To explore this possibility, we allow parameters on reviews to depend on patient char-
acteristics as formulated in equation (5). Results are presented in Table 12. Many results
are similar to baseline estimates. On average, individuals prefer combinations that have a
higher probability of increasing CD4 count in the next period as well as those that increase
the probability of suffering no ailments. The parameters on doctors’ and activists’ reviews
are both statistically significant, showing that reviews matter for treatment choice.57 As
in the baseline model, a higher activist’s review increases combo demand, while a higher
doctor’s review reduces demand.58
    Turning to individual characteristics, we find that different types of patients react differ-
ently to reviews. The most striking finding is that sicker patients — defined as those living
with AIDS — respond positively to both the doctor’s and activist’s reviews. In other words,
for patients with AIDS, we find a reversal in sign in how patients respond to the doctor’s
review. While healthier patients respond positively to the activist and negatively to the doc-
tor, sicker patients respond positively to both. This finding provides strong evidence of our
preferred explanation of patient responses to conflicting reviews. When doctors and activists
agree, their reviews lead to increases in demand for HIV treatments. When they disagree,
healthier patients use information from the reviewer who downgrades effective treatment
with harsh side effects. However, sicker patients who face strong incentives to invest in their
health despite harsh side effects do the opposite. They utilize expertise from the doctor, the
expert reviewer who recommends treatments based on their effectiveness and largely ignores
side effects.
    Interacting demand responses to expertise with individual characteristics provides several
more nuanced lessons about how individuals incorporate possibly conflicting expert reviews
into their decisions. We show that the coefficient on full-time work is negative and significant,
meaning that full-time workers are more likely to avoid medication altogether. This is
consistent with the idea that individuals may choose not to take life-saving treatments if
the side-effects interfere with daily functions. Moreover, full-time work predicts a relatively
large increase in demand due to a high activist’s versus a high doctor’s review. This suggests
  57
      For the base case of a white individual with no AIDS, working part-time, less than college education,
and who is taking the combination for the first time.
   58
      Note, though, that we are already controlling for combos’ objective characteristics. Therefore, when we
say that the patient’s preferences align with the activist’s or do not align with the doctor’s, this statement
is conditional on objective characteristics. In other words, patient’s preferences (do not) align with the
activist’s (doctor’s) above and beyond objective effectiveness and side effects measures.


                                                     26
that full-time workers are somewhat more likely to use information from the activist, which
makes sense if they aim to use treatments with fewer side effects.59
    We also find evidence of differences by race in how consumers respond to expert reviews.
In particular, our estimates suggest that black men are just as likely to follow the activist’s
review as are white men, but are less likely to follow the doctor. This is consistent with
distrust of the medical establishment among African Americans, which has been documented
in many studies (Alsan and Wanamaker, 2016). A similar pattern emerges for individuals
without a college degree: they place more weight on the activist’s review. In other words,
apart from health differences in how individuals respond to different sources of information,
there may also be socioeconomic gradients. One concern with the pattern we find is that
it suggests that lower-educated and non-white individuals may put their long-run health at
more risk compared to white men with higher educations. Patients may follow the activist’s
review in an effort to use medical treatments that make side effects less probable. However,
when they become ill, they turn to the doctor’s review in an effort to recover their health.
Indeed, following the activists review when in relatively good health makes most sense if
patients switch gears when in poor health. If less educated or non-white individuals are
less likely to switch to following the doctor’s review when in poor health, they may be less
likely to recover. If so, the expertise provided by the activist may be more harmful to blacks
as compared to whites. If so, patient advocates (in our case, encapsulated in the activist’s
review) may provide information that is more helpful to more highly educated individuals at
the expense of others. Future research could further explore how various information sources
affect demand and health outcomes for different socioeconomic groups.


6      Conclusion
We have demonstrated that expert reviews affect demand in a high-stakes context: the
market for HIV treatments. Much research on low-cost information and decision-making
overlooks the idea that consumers often have access to multiple information sources. Ex-
ploiting rich data that includes objective drug qualities, individual-level health outcomes
and multiple reviews, we show that consumer responses depend on their health along with
  59
     The estimated positive coefficient on the dummy variable ‘same combo last period - other’, even though
not significant, can be interpreted as capturing switching costs or, alternatively, as learning-by-doing (i.e.,
experience). That is, if a patient was taking a combo (other than the fringe) in the previous period, it is
more likely that the patient will continue taking that same combo in the current period. On the other hand,
if the patient was taking a combo from the fringe class in the previous period, it is more likely that the
patient will switch out of the fringe in the current period. This could be interpreted as a cost associated with
continuing experimenting with a rarely used treatment. The interactions also indicate that college-educated
individuals respond positively and significantly to doctors’ reviews, but not to activists’ reviews.


                                                      27
other observable factors. We argue that these responses provide evidence that consumers
demand information that is aligned to their preferences over health and side effects, which
can vary depending on their current health state. According to our results, patients are not
passive consumers of low-cost information sources, but actively incorporate information from
different experts to make more informed decisions.
    Future work could also compare consumer responses to conflicting reviews when reviews
are side-by-side, as in our case, versus when they are not. For example, how consumers
incorporate information into their choices could be different if acquiring additional infor-
mation from a possibly conflicting source is costly. Moreover, future research could further
explore heterogeneity in how individuals respond to various information sources when mak-
ing decisions under uncertainty. An experimental setting could be used to vary not only
the source of the information, but also its content. Moreover, though we have emphasized
health differences in responses to doctors’ versus activists’ reviews, future work could focus
on socioeconomic differences in how individuals respond to conflicting information sources.
Such work could allow for an assessment of how such differences in the incorporation of
information contribute to well-established health disparities.


References
Ackerberg, Daniel A, “Empirically Distinguishing Informative and Prestige Effects of Advertising,” The
  Rand Journal of Economics, 2001, pp. 316–333.

Alsan, Marcella and Marianne Wanamaker, “Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men,” NBER Working
  Paper 2016.

Anderson, Michael and Jeremy Magruder, “Learning from the Crowd: Regression Discontinuity Esti-
 mates of the Effects of an Online Review Database*,” The Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (563), 957–989.

Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, and Asim Ijaz Khwaja, “Report Cards: The Impact of Providing School
 and Child Test Scores on Educational Markets,” forthcoming at American Economic Review 2017.

Bandiera, Oriana and Imran Rasul, “Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern Mozam-
  bique*,” The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (514), 869–902.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992,
  pp. 797–817.

Barber, Brad M and Terrance Odean, “All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
  Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 21 (2),
  785–818.




                                                  28
Benabou, Roland and Guy Laroque, “Using Privileged Information to Manipulate Markets: Insiders,
  Gurus, and Credibility,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (3), 921–958.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
  Econometrica, July 1995, 63 (4), 841–890.

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman,
  “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 263–306.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
  Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, pp. 992–1026.

Bradlow, Eric T and Vithala R Rao, “A Hierarchical Bayes Model for Assortment Choice,” Journal of
  Marketing Research, 2000, 37 (2), 259–268.

Brown, Alexander L, Colin F Camerer, and Dan Lovallo, “To Review or Not to Review? Limited
  Strategic Thinking at the Movie Box Office,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4 (2),
  1–26.

  ,    , and   , “Estimating Structural Models of Equilibrium and Cognitive Hierarchy Thinking in the
  Field: The Case of Withheld Movie Critic Reviews,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (3), 733–747.

Cabral, Luis and Ali Hortacsu, “The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Evidence from ebay*,” The Journal
  of Industrial Economics, 2010, 58 (1), 54–78.

Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer, “Multiple Ratings and Credit Standards: Differences of Opinion in
  the Credit Rating Industry,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, 1996.

   and   , “Differences of Opinion and Selection Bias in the Credit Rating Industry,” Journal of Banking
  & Finance, 1997, 21 (10), 1395–1417.

Chernew, Michael, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Dennis P Scanlon, “Learning and the Value of
  Information: Evidence from Health Plan Report Cards,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 144 (1), 156–174.

Chevalier, Judith A and Dina Mayzlin, “The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book Reviews,”
  Journal of Marketing Research, 2006, 43 (3), 345–354.

Ching, Andrew and Masakazu Ishihara, “The Effects of Detailing on Prescribing Decisions under
  Quality Uncertainty,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2010, 8 (2), 123–165.

Ching, Andrew T and Masakazu Ishihara, “Measuring the Informative and Persuasive Roles of De-
  tailing on Prescribing Decisions,” Management Science, 2012, 58 (7), 1374–1387.

  , Robert Clark, Ignatius Horstmann, and Hyunwoo Lim, “The Effects of Publicity on Demand:
  The Case of Anti-Cholesterol Drugs,” Marketing Science, 2015, 35 (1), 158–181.

Coffman, Lucas C, Clayton R Featherstone, and Judd B Kessler, “Can Social Information Affect
  What Job You Choose and Keep?,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 96–117.

                                                  29
Conley, Timothy G and Christopher R Udry, “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in
  Ghana,” American Economic Review, 2010, pp. 35–69.

Coscelli, Andrea and Matthew Shum, “An Empirical Model of Learning and Patient Spillovers in New
  Drug Entry,” Journal of Econometrics, 2004, 122 (2), 213–246.

Crawford, Gregory S and Matthew Shum, “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical Demand,”
  Econometrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1137–1173.

Dafny, Leemore and David Dranove, “Do Report Cards Tell Consumers Anything they Don’t Already
  Know? The Case of Medicare HMOs,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (3), 790–821.

Dickstein, Michael J, “Efficient Provision of Experience Goods: Evidence from Antidepressant Choice,”
  Working Paper 2014.

Dranove, David and Andrew Sfekas, “Start Spreading the News: A Structural Estimate of the Effects
  of New York Hospital Report Cards,” Journal of Health Economics, 2008, 27 (5), 1201–1207.

  and Ginger Zhe Jin, “Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and Practice,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2010, 48 (4), 935–963.

  , Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite, “Is More Information Better? The
  Effects of “Report Cards” on Health Care Providers,” Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (3), 555–
  588.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
 Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003,
 118 (3), 815–842.

Eliaz, Kfir and Andrew Schotter, “Paying for Confidence: An Experimental Study of the Demand for
  Non-instrumental Information,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2010, 70 (2), 304–324.

Farquhar, Peter H and Vithala R Rao, “A Balance Model for Evaluating Subsets of Multiattributed
  Items,” Management Science, 1976, 22 (5), 528–539.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s Publicly
  Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 703–745.

Figlio, David N and Maurice E Lucas, “What’s in a Grade? School Report Cards and the Housing
  Market,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (3), 591–604.

Fong, Christina M and Felix Oberholzer-Gee, “Truth in Giving: Experimental Evidence on the Welfare
  Effects of Informed Giving to the Poor,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (5), 436–444.

Ganguly, Ananda and Joshua Tasoff, “Fantasy and Dread: The Demand for Information and the
 Consumption Utility of the Future,” Management Science, 2016.

Ginsburgh, Victor A and Jan C Van Ours, “Expert Opinion and Compensation: Evidence from a
  Musical Competition,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 289–296.

                                                  30
Gordon, Brett R and Wesley R Hartmann, “Advertising Effects in Presidential Elections,” Marketing
 Science, 2013, 32 (1), 19–35.

Hastings, Justine S and Jeffrey M Weinstein, “Information, School Choice, and Academic Achieve-
 ment: Evidence from Two Experiments,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1373–1414.

Hoffman, Mitchell, “How is Information Valued? Evidence from Framed Field Experiments,” The Eco-
 nomic Journal, 2016, 126 (595), 1884–1911.

Jin, Ginger Zhe and Phillip Leslie, “The Effect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from
  Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 409–451.

Liu, Hongju, Qiang Liu, and Pradeep K Chintagunta, “Promotion Spillovers: Drug Detailing in
  Combination Therapy,” forthcoming at Management Science 2014.

Liu, Yong, “Word of Mouth for Movies: Its Dynamics and Impact on Box Office Revenue,” Journal of
  Marketing, 2006, 70 (3), 74–89.

Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier, “Promotional Reviews: An Empirical Investiga-
 tion of Online Review Manipulation,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (8), 2421–55.

Moretti, Enrico, “Social Learning and Peer Effects in Consumption: Evidence from Movie Sales,” The
 Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (1), 356–393.

Munshi, Kaivan, “Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Technology Diffusion in the Indian
 Green Revolution,” Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 73 (1), 185–213.

Oster, Emily and Rebecca Thornton, “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Peer Effects in Menstrual
  Cup Take-up,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (6), 1263–1293.

Papageorge, Nicholas W., “Why Medical Innovation is Valuable: Health, Human Capital, and the Labor
  Market,” Quantitative Economics, 2016, 7 (3), 671–725.

Pope, Devin G, “Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from America’s Best Hospitals,” Journal of Health
  Economics, 2009, 28 (6), 1154–1165.

Reiter, Sara A and David A Ziebart, “Bond Yields, Ratings, and Financial Information: Evidence from
  Public Utility Issues,” Financial Review, 1991, 26 (1), 45–73.

Schotter, Andrew, “Decision Making with Naive Advice,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (2),
  196–201.

Shapiro, Bradley, “Positive Spillovers and Free-riding in Advertising of Prescription Pharmaceuticals: The
  Case of Antidepressants,” Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy 2016.

Sinkinson, Michael and Amanda Starc, “Ask Your Doctor? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Phar-
  maceuticals,” NBER working paper, 2015.




                                                   31
Sorensen, Alan T, “Social Learning and Health Plan Choice,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 2006, 37
  (4), 929–945.

Ubel, P.A., A.M. Angott, and B.J. Zikmund-Fisher, “Physicians Recommend Different Treatments
 for Patients Than They Would Choose for Themselves,” Archives of Internal Medicine, 2011, 171 (7),
 630–634.

Wang, Justin, Jason Hockenberry, Shin-Yi Chou, and Muzhe Yang, “Do Bad Report Cards have
 Consequences? Impacts of Publicly Reported Provider Quality Information on the CABG Market in
 Pennsylvania,” Journal of Health Economics, 2011, 30 (2), 392–407.




                                                32
Tables and Figures

   Table 1: Summary Statistics: MACS Dataset (Individual Level Variables)

                                         Mean       Std. Dev.   Min    Max
                CD4 Count                536.4        283.9      5     3819
                Non-decreasing CD4        0.54        0.50       0      1
                No Ailment                0.63        0.48       0       1
                AIDS                      0.20        0.40       0       1
                Age                      47.15         8.21     19.5    80
                Work Full-time           0.54         0.50       0      1
                White                     0.54        0.50       0       1
                High School               0.19         0.39      0       1
                College                   0.50        0.50       0       1
                Obs                     13,472
              Notes: Summary statistics for the Multi-center AIDS Cohort Study
             (MACS) variables, which consists of 13,472 patient-visit observa-
             tions. We restrict our sample to the years 1997-2008.


      Table 2: Summary Statistics: Positively Aware Drug Guides Data

                                             Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max
          Annual Cost                        6690       4180        875    28007
          No. of Side Effects                13.16       6.10        1      33
          No. of Drug Interactions           14.26      10.34        0      43
          Food Restrictions                   0.34       0.48        0       1
          Pill Burden (per take)             2.15        1.86        1       8
          Dosage Frequency (per day)          1.94       0.65        1       3
          DHHS Preferred                      0.27       0.25        0       1
          Publicly Traded Manuf.              0.90       0.28        0       1
          Doctor’s Rating                     2.02       0.74        1       3
          Activist’s Rating                   1.89       0.77        1       3
          Disagreement                        0.39       0.49        0       1
          Obs                                 197
          Notes: Summary statistics for drug-level variables constructed using the
         Positively Aware annual drug guide, which consists of 197 drug-year obser-
         vations. We restrict our sample to the years 1997-2008, and to drugs that
         have been FDA approved and can be matched to treatments observed in the
         MACS dataset. Doctor and activists’ rating can take values 1, 2 or 3.




                                            33
              Table 3: Summary Statistics: Combo Level

                                             Mean     Std. Dev.     Min     Max

 (a) Reviews
 Doctor Average                               2.18       0.57         0       3
 Activist Average                             2.07       0.56         0       3
 Doctor Std. Dev.                             0.51       0.38         0     1.41
 Activist Std. Dev.                           0.60       0.36         0     1.41
 % of 3’s - Doctor                            0.37       0.34         0      1
 % of 3’s - Activist                          0.32       0.30         0       1
 % of 2’s - Doctor                            0.47       0.34         0      1
 % of 2’s - Activist                          0.45       0.31         0       1
 % of 1’s - Doctor                            0.14       0.23         0      1
 % of 1’s - Activist                          0.21       0.26         0       1
 Disagreement                                 0.62       0.49         0       1

 (b) Objective Qualities
 Probability of Non-decreasing CD4            0.57       0.09       0.23    0.93
 Probability of No Ailment                    0.60       0.13       0.14    0.88

 (c) Market Shares
 Combos                                       0.01       0.02        0      0.18
 Fringe                                       0.32       0.05       0.23    0.42
 Outside Option (No Drug)                     0.19       0.04       0.12    0.27
 Obs                                         1086
 Notes: Panel (a) reports summary statistics for combo-level variables constructed
using the Positively Aware annual drug guide. Panels (b) and (c) report combo-level
variables constructed using the MACS dataset. The probability of non-decreasing
CD4 count and probability of no ailment are constructed by averaging data across
all individuals for each combo in every visit. Combos in the ‘Fringe’ category at a
particular visit are taken by fewer than 25 individuals in that visit.




                                        34
                         Table 4: Qualities and Combo Demand

                                       (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
Prob of No Ailment                   1.80∗∗∗           1.79∗∗∗      1.50∗∗∗                   1.46∗∗∗
                                     (0.29)            (0.29)       (0.27)                     (0.27)
Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                       0.09   0.01                        1.02∗∗     0.87∗∗
                                                (0.42) (0.41)                      (0.40)      (0.39)
No. of Side Effects                                                 -0.09∗∗∗      -0.09∗∗∗    -0.09∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)
No. of Drug Interactions                                               0.00          0.00        0.01
                                                                     (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)
Pill Burden                                                           -0.02        -0.03∗∗      -0.02∗
                                                                     (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)
Food Restrictions                                                    -0.43∗∗      -0.49∗∗∗     -0.43∗∗
                                                                     (0.17)        (0.17)      (0.17)
Dosage                                                               -0.18∗∗      -0.29∗∗∗    -0.23∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.08)        (0.08)      (0.08)
Combo-visit dyads                     1086      1086      1086        1086         1086        1086
Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given
in parentheses. Combo-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The table reports the logit coefficients.
Probability of no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count are combo characteristics
constructed using the MACS dataset, while all other combo-characteristics are constructed using
the Positively Aware annual drug guide by averaging across all drugs in a combo.




                              Table 5: Qualities and Reviews

                                               Doctor                              Activist
                                       (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                                             ∗∗
 Prob of No Ailment                   0.08                 0.04        0.29                   0.26∗∗
                                     (0.13)               (0.13)       (0.12)                 (0.12)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                    0.75∗∗∗    0.75∗∗∗                  0.77∗∗∗    0.74∗∗∗
                                               (0.18)     (0.19)                   (0.17)     (0.17)
 PA characteristics                    Y         Y          Y            Y           Y          Y
 Combo-visit dyads                    1086      1086       1086         1086        1086       1086
 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given in
parentheses. Combo-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The left-hand-side variable is either Doctor’s
or Activist’s review (taking values between 0 and 3, where expert review = 0 for the outside option).




                                                 35
             Table 6: Reviews and Combo Demand with PA Characteristics

                                          (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)
  Doctor’s Review                        0.16∗∗       0.14∗∗                                         -0.16∗              -0.14
                                         (0.06)       (0.06)                                         (0.09)             (0.09)
  Activist’s Review                                                  0.36∗∗∗           0.32∗∗∗       0.48∗∗∗           0.43∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.07)             (0.07)       (0.10)             (0.10)
  Prob of No Ailment                                 1.45∗∗∗                           1.37∗∗∗                         1.35∗∗∗
                                                      (0.27)                            (0.27)                          (0.27)
  Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                           0.77∗                             0.63                           0.66∗
                                                      (0.39)                            (0.39)                          (0.39)
  No. of Side Effects                   -0.09∗∗∗     -0.09∗∗∗        -0.09∗∗∗          -0.09∗∗∗     -0.09∗∗∗           -0.09∗∗∗
                                         (0.01)       (0.01)          (0.01)            (0.01)       (0.01)             (0.01)
  No. of Drug Interactions                0.00          0.01           0.01              0.01         0.01               0.01
                                         (0.01)       (0.01)          (0.01)            (0.01)       (0.01)             (0.01)
  Pill Burden                            -0.03∗∗       -0.03∗         -0.02∗             -0.02        -0.02              -0.02
                                         (0.01)       (0.01)          (0.01)            (0.01)       (0.01)             (0.01)
  Food Restrictions                     -0.49∗∗∗      -0.43∗∗        -0.59∗∗∗          -0.53∗∗∗     -0.63∗∗∗           -0.56∗∗∗
                                         (0.17)       (0.17)          (0.17)            (0.17)       (0.17)             (0.17)
  Dosage                                -0.28∗∗∗     -0.25∗∗∗        -0.43∗∗∗          -0.38∗∗∗     -0.45∗∗∗           -0.41∗∗∗
                                         (0.08)       (0.08)          (0.09)            (0.09)       (0.09)             (0.09)
  Nobs.                                  1086          1086              1086            1086           1086            1086
  Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. The table reports logit coefficients.
 Standard errors are given in parentheses. Combo-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. Both experts’ reviews
 are constructed by averaging over drug reviews in each combo.




                 Table 7: Reviews and Own and Rival Objective Qualities

                                                           Doctor                                                  Activist
                                         (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)
                                           ∗∗∗                       ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
 Prob of No Ailment                    1.19                      0.69        0.66               1.23                      0.71       0.70∗∗∗
                                        (0.10)                    (0.11)      (0.10)             (0.10)                    (0.10)     (0.10)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                        1.95∗∗∗       1.58∗∗∗     1.57∗∗∗                        2.02∗∗∗       1.64∗∗∗    1.63∗∗∗
                                                    (0.13)        (0.14)      (0.13)                         (0.12)        (0.13)     (0.13)
 Avg Rivals’ Prob of Noailment                                               -7.31∗∗∗                                                -7.49∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.89)                                                  (0.86)
 Avg Rivals’ Prob of Non-dec CD4                                             -3.10∗∗∗                                                  -1.33
                                                                              (1.04)                                                  (1.01)
 Nobs.                                  1086        1086          1086           1086            1086           1086       1086       1086
Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Combo-
visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The left-hand-side variable is either Doctor’s or Activist’s review for a combo.



                                                       36
              Table 8: Main Results — Baseline IV Logit Specification

                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗                             ∗∗∗
 Doctor’s Review                     1.24       1.13                             -4.17      -2.59∗∗∗
                                     (0.34)     (0.33)                            (1.12)     (0.83)
 Activist’s Review                                          1.50∗∗∗   1.44∗∗∗    5.38∗∗∗    3.68∗∗∗
                                                            (0.34)     (0.34)     (1.21)     (0.83)
 Prob of No Ailment                             1.99∗∗∗               1.83∗∗∗               1.44∗∗∗
                                                (0.33)                 (0.33)                (0.43)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                     -1.23∗∗               -1.91∗∗∗              -2.07∗∗∗
                                                (0.58)                 (0.65)                (0.79)
 No. of Individuals                  13,472     13,472      13,472    13,472     13,472     13,472
 Combo-time dyads                     1086       1086        1086      1086       1086       1086
 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given
in parentheses. The table reports the logit coefficients. Doctor’s and Activist’s reviews have been
instrumented using the average probability of no ailment and average probability of non-decreasing
CD4 count of rival combos. Combo-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The total number of combo-visit
observations used for the estimation is 1,086, which are constructed using data on 13,472 individuals.




                                                 37
  Table 9: Main Results — Baseline Model Robustness Checks

                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)

 (a) Percentage of High Reviews
 % of 3’s - Doctor                1.72∗∗∗    1.57∗∗∗                        -3.20∗∗∗   -2.41∗∗∗
                                   (0.44)     (0.43)                         (0.85)     (0.75)
 % of 3’s - Activist                                    2.66∗∗∗   2.59∗∗∗   5.58∗∗∗    4.69∗∗∗
                                                         (0.46)    (0.46)    (0.94)     (0.81)
 Prob of No Ailment                          1.78∗∗∗              1.62∗∗∗              1.51∗∗∗
                                              (0.29)               (0.30)               (0.37)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                    -0.36                -0.62                -0.57
                                              (0.44)               (0.44)               (0.54)

 (b) Percentage of High and Medium Reviews
 % of 3’s - Doctor                1.98∗∗∗    3.01∗∗∗                        -2.38∗∗      -1.93
                                   (0.63)     (0.71)                         (1.19)     (1.19)
 % of 2’s - Doctor                1.53∗∗     2.50∗∗∗                          -1.31      -1.05
                                   (0.68)     (0.75)                         (1.32)     (1.29)
 % of 3’s - Activist                                    2.28∗∗∗   2.66∗∗∗   3.26∗∗∗    3.32∗∗∗
                                                         (0.53)    (0.53)    (0.98)     (0.93)
 % of 2’s - Activist                                    -1.43∗∗     -0.89     -1.50      -1.16
                                                         (0.67)    (0.67)    (1.14)     (1.07)
 Prob of No Ailment                          1.97∗∗∗              1.58∗∗∗              1.46∗∗∗
                                              (0.33)               (0.32)               (0.36)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                  -1.31∗∗                -0.23                0.45
                                              (0.58)               (0.62)               (0.70)

 (c) Review Average and Standard Deviation
 Doctor’s Review                    -0.29      -0.58                          -2.32      -1.93
                                   (0.43)     (0.53)                         (1.93)     (1.26)
 Doctor’s Review SD               -5.86∗∗∗   -5.68∗∗∗                         -4.43      -4.57
                                   (1.55)     (1.75)                         (3.65)     (3.57)
 Activist’s Review                                      1.18∗∗∗   1.15∗∗∗      2.88       2.44
                                                         (0.35)    (0.38)    (2.13)     (1.77)
 Activist’s Review SD                                    -3.36∗     0.63      -5.43      -4.64
                                                         (2.00)    (2.25)    (4.80)     (5.98)
 Prob of No Ailment                           0.86                1.90∗∗∗                 0.32
                                             (0.63)                (0.41)               (1.28)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                  2.73∗∗               -1.50∗∗                 0.39
                                             (1.35)                (0.72)               (2.66)
 No. of Individuals               13,472     13,472     13,472    13,472    13,472     13,472
 Combo-time dyads                  1086       1086       1086      1086      1086       1086

 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard
errors are given in parentheses. The table reports the logit coefficients. In Panel (a),
we use the percentage of drugs that receive a rating of 3 in a combo as a measure
of ‘high’ reviews. In Panel (b), we add the percentage of drugs that receive a rating
of 2 in a combo as a measure of ‘medium’ reviews. In Panel (c), our measure of
reviews for the two experts includes the average across all drugs in a combo, as
well as the standard deviation of reviews across drugs in a combo. In all cases,
we use the average objective qualities (probability of no ailment and probability of
non-decreasing CD4 count) of rival combos as instruments for reviews. Combo-visit
dyad is the unit of analysis. The total number of combo-visit observations used for
the estimation is 1,086, which are constructed using data on 13,472 individuals.




                                               38
 Table 10: Main Results — Disagreements and Demand

                                             (1)         (2)          (3)
 Doctor’s Review                          -2.59∗∗∗
                                           (0.83)
 Activist’s Review                        3.68∗∗∗
                                           (0.83)
 Agree × Doctor’s Comment                              0.87∗∗       1.11∗∗
                                                       (0.42)       (0.44)
 Disagree × Activist’s Review                          2.80∗∗∗
                                                       (0.61)
 Disagree × Doctor’s Review                            -1.96∗∗
                                                       (0.94)
 Agree                                                  -0.39        4.28∗
                                                       (2.00)       (2.29)
 Positive Difference × Doctor                                        0.74
                                                                    (1.72)
 Negative Difference × Doctor                                       -2.93∗
                                                                    (1.57)
 Positive Difference × Activist                                      2.15
                                                                    (1.78)
 Negative Difference × Activist                                     7.14∗∗
                                                                    (2.80)
 Prob of No Ailment                        1.44∗∗∗     1.59∗∗∗     1.31∗∗∗
                                           (0.43)       (0.39)      (0.48)
 Prob of Non-decreasing CD4               -2.07∗∗∗     -1.77∗∗∗    -2.23∗∗∗
                                           (0.79)       (0.68)      (0.79)
 No. of Individuals                        13,472      13,472      13,472
 Combo-time dyads                           1086        1086        1086
 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively.
Standard errors are given in parentheses. The table reports the logit
coefficients. Doctor’s and Activist’s review have been instrumented us-
ing the average probability of no ailment and average probability of non-
decreasing CD4 count of rival combos. The variable ‘Agree’ is a dummy
which is 1 if both experts give the same rating to a combo. The variable
‘Disagree’ is a dummy which is 1 if each expert gives a different rating to
a combo. Finally, the variable ‘Positive Difference’ is a dummy which is 1
if the doctor’s review is lower than the activist’s review, while the variable
‘Negative Difference’ is a dummy which is 1 if the doctor’s review is higher
than the activist’s review. Combo-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The
total number of combo-visit observations used for the estimation is 1,086,
which are constructed using data on 13,472 individuals.




                                     39
Table 11: Reviews and Objective Qualities when Experts Disagree

                                                   Doctor      Activist
        Prob of No Ailment                           -0.10      0.23∗∗
                                                    (0.11)      (0.11)
        Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                  0.44∗∗∗     0.40∗∗
                                                    (0.17)      (0.17)
        Avg Rivals’ Prob of Noailment              -8.04∗∗∗    -4.97∗∗∗
                                                    (1.19)      (1.20)
        Avg Rivals’ Prob of Non-dec CD4            -3.74∗∗∗    -5.45∗∗∗
                                                    (1.34)      (1.35)
        Nobs.                                         671        671
        PA Characteristics                             Y          Y
        Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respec-
       tively. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Combo-visit dyad
       is the unit of analysis. The sample is restricted to cases in which
       the two experts’ ratings are different from each other. The left-
       hand-side variable is either Doctor or Activist’s review.




                                       40
                    Table 12: Demand Model with Individual Attributes

 Demand Side Parameters                      Variable                                 Estimates    Std. Errors
 Means (β)                                   Doctor’s Review                            -5.86          0.00
                                             Activist’s Review                          3.15           0.04
                                             Constant                                   5.94           0.13
                                             Prob of No Ailment                          0.70          0.00
                                             Prob of Non-decreasing CD4                 0.40           0.01

 Individual Attributes                       AIDS                                       0.06           0.05
                                             Age                                        0.20           0.13
                                             Full-time work                             -1.59          0.67
                                             Black                                      -0.17          0.18
                                             College                                    0.50           0.03
                                             Same Combo Last Period - Fringe            -0.32          0.19
                                             Same Combo Last Period - Other             2.00           1.90

 Interactions with Individual Attributes     Doctor’s Review × AIDS                      9.50          2.38
                                             Doctor’s Review × Age                       0.26          0.01
                                             Doctor’s Review × Full-time work           -1.32          0.99
                                             Doctor’s Review × Black                    -2.05          2.02
                                             Doctor’s Review × College                   3.41          1.25
                                             Doctor’s Review × SC - Fringe              -3.72          0.49
                                             Doctor’s Review × SC - Other                3.32          1.43
                                             Activist’s Review × AIDS                   1.48           1.25
                                             Activist’s Review × Age                     0.38          0.31
                                             Activist’s Review × Full-time work          0.55          0.22
                                             Activist’s Review × Black                  -0.06          0.05
                                             Activist’s Review × College                -0.30          0.28
                                             Activist’s Review × SC - Fringe            -5.47          0.84
                                             Activist’s Review × SC - Other              4.33          1.76
 Notes: The table reports coefficients for the IV-logit demand model with individual characteristics. Combo-
visit dyad is the unit of analysis. Doctor’s review, activist’s review, probability of no ailment and probability
of non-decreasing CD4 count vary only over combo and visit. The variable ‘Same Combo Last Period -
Fringe’ is a dummy for whether the individual taking a fringe combo was also taking a combo from the
fringe group (combinations taken by less than 25 individuals in a visit) in the last visit, and ‘Same Combo
Last Period - Other’ is a dummy which is 1 if the individual was taking the same combo (including the
outside option) last visit that he is taking in the current period. The model is estimated using Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM).




                                                        41
                                                                   NUCLEOSIDE REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITOR
                                                  C LA SS : nucleoside analog (also called nucleoside reverse           of consciousness, extreme tiredness, or blood clots in hemo-
                                                   transcriptase
                                                   tran            inhibitor, NRTI or nuke)                             dialysis vascular access ports. Do not take with Combivir or
                                                  S TA N DA RD D OSE: One 300 mg tablet twice-a-day (12 hours           Trizivir, since zidovudine is already in these medications.
                                                   apart);
                                                   apar two 100 mg capsules three times a day also available,          TIPS : In combination with Epivir, zidovudine is recommended
                                                   no food
                                                       f     restrictions (may be taken with or without food).          as a preferred NRTI agent in U.S. HIV treatment guidelines
                                                   Clear,
                                                   Clea strawberry-flavored liquid available for pediatric use.         in people on HIV therapy for the first time. The not-so-good
                                                   Take
                                                   Tak missed dose as soon as possible, but do not double up on         news for people adding zidovudine: the fatigue and the po-
                                                   your next dose. Generic Retrovir (zidovudine) is available.          tential anemia. You can start taking erythropoietin (Procrit
                                                  A WP: $432.88 (generic $315) / month                                  or Epogen) for some anemias, but that’s adding an expensive
                                                  M A N U FA CTU RER CON TA CT : GlaxoSmithKline,                       weekly injectable. Some doctors would prefer switching out
                                                   www.treathiv.com, 1 (888) 825–5249                                   the zidovudine for another drug. Also, some clinicians avoid
                                                  A ID SI N FO :                                                        the “T” drugs, or thymidine analogs (zidovudine and Zerit)
                                                   1 (800) HIV–0440 (448–0440), www.aidsinfo.nih.gov                    because of implication in lipoatrophy. Zidovudine has for
                                                  P OTEN TIA L SID E EFFECTS A N D TOX ICIT Y : Most common side        years been associated with “AZT butt,” a disheartening flat-
                                                   effects include headaches, fever, chills, muscle soreness, fa-       ness that happens gradually. Taking with food may minimize
                                                   tigue, nausea, and fingernail discloration. Zidovudine (AZT)         upset stomach. Please see package insert for more complete
                                                   has been associated with alteration of various cells in the blood    potential side effects and interactions.
                                                   through bone marrow suppression resulting in anemia (low
                                                   red blood cells) and/or neutropenia (low white blood counts),       Doctor
                                                   particularly in people with advanced HIV during the first three
                                                   months. Potential for severe anemia requiring blood transfu-            Retrovir, more commonly called AZT, was the first drug
                                                   sion, erythropoietin injections, or hospitalization when used       approved for the treatment of HIV infection, and it prolonged
                                                   on its own or in combination with hydroxyurea. Prolonged use        many lives back in the late ’80’s and early ’90’s. It got a new
BRA N D N A M E:
                     Retrovir




                                                   of high doses of zidovudine has been associated with symp-          life in the form of Combivir after 3TC became available, expe-
                                                   tomatic myopathy (muscle damage). Rare but potentially fatal        rienced another resurrection as part of Trizivir, a once popu-
                                                   toxicity with all NRTIs is pancreatitis (inflammation of the        lar “triple-nuke” combination, and has been a cornerstone of
                                                   pancreas), hepatomegaly (enlarged liver) with steatosis (fat)       therapy in the HAART era. However, AZT’s time has fi nally
                                                   and lactic acidosis (accumulation of lactate in the blood and       passed. Compared to the nukes we’re using now (namely teno-
                                                   abnormal acid-base balance). Lactic acidosis has been seen in       fovir and abacavir), it’s weaker, is dosed twice a day, is harder
                                                   patients taking NRTIs but is more common and more severe in         on the stomach, is more prone to resistance, and causes anemia
                                                   women, people who are obese, and people who have been tak-          and mitochondrial toxicity, including lipoatrophy. I still have
                                                   ing nukes for a long time; and more common in people with           a few patients still taking AZT because of resistance to other
                                                   liver disease, but can occur in people without a history of liver   drugs (it becomes stronger if you have mutations that cause
                                                   damage. People with lactic acidosis may experience persistent       resistance to 3TC, FTC, abacavir, or tenofovir), but that may
                                                   fatigue, abdominal pain or distension, nausea/vomiting, and         change as newer, safer agents become available. So long, AZT,
                                                   difficulty breathing or shortness of breath; and enlarged, fatty    and congratulations on a good, long run!—Joel Gallant, M.D.
                                                   liver. Pancreatitis can be life-threatening and may cause pain
                                                   in the stomach and back, along with nausea, vomiting and            Activist
                                                   blood in the urine. Risks for pancreatitis include: higher than
                                                   recommended doses of NRTIs, advanced HIV, and alcohol                   Retrovir/AZT was the first drug developed for the treatment
                                                   use. The risk for pancreatitis with zidovudine is low compared      of HIV. In subsequent years, activists fought many battles to
                                                   to ddI.                                                             speed up the drug development process, but the history of AZT
                                                  P OTEN TIA L D RU G IN TERA CTION S : Biaxin, Mycobutin, and ri-     demonstrates that the mechanisms and ability to quickly test
                                                   fampin (under various brand names) may decrease zidovudine          and approve drugs were present all along. What was lacking,
                                                   blood levels. Benemid (probenecid), Dilantin (phenytoin), and       except in the case of AZT, was the will to do it. AZT certainly
                     zidovudine (ZDV) or AZT




                                                   Depakote (valproic acid) may increase zidovudine blood levels       has served a useful place in the history of treatment for HIV, but
                                                   and decrease zidovudine clearance, but no dosing adjustments        it has always come at a price. There is almost a cultural memory
                                                   are recommended. Zidovudine and Zerit should not be used            of the early and often severe side effects, but people don’t al-
                                                   together due to evidence that one limits the other’s effective-     ways remember that this was primarily the result of overdos-
                                                   ness. Also, bone marrow supression should be monitored              ing. When dosed properly, AZT can still have side effects but
                                                   with use of Cytovene (ganciclovir), Valcyte, amphotericin B,        they are seldom severe. Still, many people today believe it is
                                                   pentamidine, dapsone, flucytosine, sulfadiazine, interferon-        time to reconsider the whole class of drugs that AZT comes
                                                   alpha, ribavirin (Rebetol), and with cancer treatments such as      from. Most of them have potentially significant side effects that
                                                   hydroxyurea and doxorubicin. Ribavirin and zidovudine may           derive from the very nature of what they are doing. It is diffi-
                                                   cancel each other out, so this combination should be moni-          cult to conceive of a drug of this type that would be completely
C OM M ON N A M E:




                                                   tored closely. New Procrit or Epogen warning: if hemoglobin         free of side effects. With so many new and relatively non-toxic
                                                   target is above manufacturer’s recommendation (12 g/dL), the        drugs becoming available in recent years, it may be time to ask
                                                   risk for serious and life-threatening cardiovascular complica-      whether we can build fully effective regimens that don’t rely on
                                                   tions significantly increases. For zidovudine patients, measure     the old paradigm of “two nukes and a protease inhibitor” or
                                                   hemoglobin once a week after starting the anemia drugs until        “two nukes and a non-nuke.” When this paradigm first became
                                                   hemoglobin has stabilized. Notify healthcare provider if expe-      standard in 1996, it wasn’t chosen because this was inherently
                                                   riencing pain and/or swelling in the legs, worsening in short-      the right or best way to treat HIV. Rather, it was simply the only
                                                   ness of breath, increases in blood pressure, dizziness or loss      kind of combination available at the time.—Martin Delaney




                                         24                                                                        PA • January / February 2008 • tpan.com • positivelyaware.com

                                                                                                                  Positively Aware
                                               Figure 1: Sample Page from the 2008 Positively Aware Drug Guide


                                                                                                               42
              .5
              .4 .3
          Fraction
              .2
              .1
              0




                          1                  2                   3

                                  Activist          Doctor



Figure 2: Comparison of Doctor and Activist Ratings: The Figure plots the
fraction of 1’s, 2’s and 3’s given to individual drugs, by expert.
              .4
              .3
          Fraction
            .2.1
              0




                      1       2          3                   4       5+
                                  Number of Drugs


Figure 3: Distribution of Number of Drugs Taken Together: The Figure plots
the distribution of drugs taken together in a combo.




                                      43
                      60     50
            Number of Combos
                   40 30
                      20




                                  Oct 1997 Oct 1998 Oct 1999 Oct 2000 Oct 2001 Oct 2002 Oct 2003 Oct 2004 Oct 2005 Oct 2006 Oct 2007 Oct 2008
                                                                                  Year


Figure 4: Total Number of Combos over Time: The Figure shows how the total
number of combos (including ‘Fringe’) observed in the data evolves over the period of
analysis.
                      .3
                      .25
            Market Share
                 .2   .15
                      .1




                                  Oct 1997 Oct 1998 Oct 1999 Oct 2000 Oct 2001 Oct 2002 Oct 2003 Oct 2004 Oct 2005 Oct 2006 Oct 2007 Oct 2008
                                                                                  Year


Figure 5: Outside Option Market Share: The Figure plots how the market share of
the outside option, defined as taking no HIV treatment, evolves over the period of analysis.



                                                                              44
       2.5




                                                                                                                        .65   .6
                                                                                                                 Combo Qualities
 Combo Reviews
1.5          2




                                                                                                                .55     .5
       1




                 0     2     4          6            8                                   10        12                              0                2                4          6            8            10         12
                              Age of Combo (in years)                                                                                                                 Age of Combo (in years)

                            Doctor's Rating                          Activist's Rating                                                                     Prob of No Ailment           Prob of Non-decreasing CD4




                     (a) Ratings over Combo Age                                                                                    (b) Combo Qualities over Combo Age
                                                      .5     0
                                               Residual Rating
                                              -.5     -1




                                                                 0                                       5                                                      10
                                                                                                 Age of Combo (in years)

                                                                                              Doctor's Rating                          Activist's Rating




                                                                 (c) Residual Ratings over Combo Age

         Figure 6: Combo Reviews and Qualities over the Life Cycle: Figure 6 (a)
         shows how the average combo ratings of the two experts evolves over the age of the
         combo. Figure 6 (b) plots the evolution of objective qualities of combos, probability of
         no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count, over combo age. Lastly, Figure
         6 (c) plots residual ratings for combo over combo age, where the residual ratings are the
         residual of an OLS regression of combo ratings on two objective qualities, probability of
         no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count.




                                                                                                   45
                                     t-1                                          t                                                          t+1

 Jan                       Apr             Sept              Jan       Apr                Sept                    Jan             Apr               Sept

                                 before (t-1)           during (t-1)         after (t)                      after (t+1)

                                                               Reviews
                                                              published
                                                             in period t

                     Figure 7: Timeline of Events: The Figure shows the timeline of events studied in
                     the paper. Market share data is available for two six month windows, spanning from
                     April to September and October to March. PA annual drug guides are published in
                     January/February of every year, which coincides with the October-March window from
                     the MACS data.
         .8




                                                                                          2
                                                                                          1.5
% of Disagreements
               .6




                                                                                       Density
                                                                                         1
 .4




                                                                                          .5
                                                                                          0
         .2




                                                                                                  -1.5              -1             -.5          0          .5   1
                     0       2         4          6            8       10    12                                          Activist Comment - Doctor Comment
                                        Age of Combo (in years)                                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0750



                         (a) Disagreement over Combo Age                                                 (b) Distribution of Differences

                     Figure 8: Disagreements: Figure 8 (a) plots the percentage of disagreements between
                     the doctor and activist about the rating of the combo over the age of the combo, where the
                     variable disagreement is a dummy which is 1 if the activist and the doctor have a different
                     rating for the combo. Figure 8 (b) plots the distribution of the difference in combo ratings
                     between the activist and the doctor.




                                                                                  46
                                                                                                                                     .8
               10




                                                                                                                   % Difference in Prob of No Ailment
% Difference in Prob of Aids




                                                                                                                                              .6
                   5




                                                                                                                                     .4
      0




                                                                                                                  0        .2
               -5




                      Apr 1997     Oct 1998       Oct 2000    Oct 2002      Oct 2004    Oct 2006       Oct 2008                               Apr 1997   Oct 1998       Oct 2000    Oct 2002      Oct 2004    Oct 2006       Oct 2008
                                                                    visit                                                                                                                 visit

                                              No Reviews                       Only Activist Reviews                                                                No Reviews                       Only Activist Reviews
                                              Only Doctor Reviews                                                                                                   Only Doctor Reviews



                                          (a) Probability of Aids                                                                                        (b) Probability of No Ailment

                               Figure 9: Average Difference in Health Outcomes - Full Sample: Figure 9 (a)
                               plots the percentage difference in the probability of having AIDS in the next period from
                               the baseline. The baseline is the scenario in which individuals have access to both reviews.
                               Figure 9 (b) plots the percentage difference in the probability of having no ailments in the
                               next period from the baseline. The counterfactual scenarios considered are (1) having no
                               reviews, (2) having only the activists’ reviews, and (3) having only the doctors’ reviews.
                               The dotted vertical lines denote the introduction of new drugs onto the market.
               .6




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                                  % Difference in Prob of No Ailment
% Difference in Prob of Aids




                                                                                                                                            .05
             .2         .4




                                                                                                                      -.05         0
  0            -.2




                                                                                                                                     -.1




                      Apr 1997     Oct 1998       Oct 2000    Oct 2002      Oct 2004    Oct 2006       Oct 2008                               Apr 1997   Oct 1998       Oct 2000    Oct 2002      Oct 2004    Oct 2006       Oct 2008
                                                                    visit                                                                                                                 visit

                                              No Reviews                       Only Activist Reviews                                                                No Reviews                       Only Activist Reviews
                                              Only Doctor Reviews                                                                                                   Only Doctor Reviews



                                          (a) Probability of Aids                                                                                        (b) Probability of No Ailment

                               Figure 10: Average Difference in Health Outcomes - AIDS: Figure 10 (a) plots
                               the percentage difference in the probability of having AIDS in the next period for individ-
                               uals who have AIDS in the current period from the baseline. The baseline is the scenario
                               in which individuals have access to both reviews. Figure 10 (b) plots the percentage dif-
                               ference in the probability of having no ailments in the next period for individuals with
                               AIDS in the current period from the baseline. The counterfactual scenarios considered
                               are (1) having no reviews, (2) having only the activists’ reviews, and (3) having only the
                               doctors’ reviews. The dotted vertical lines denote the introduction of new drugs onto the
                               market.


                                                                                                            47
Appendix A                 Drug Reviews, Drug Characteristics and
                           Consumption
Though our main analysis focuses on the impact of reviews on the consumption of combi-
nations of drugs, since the expert reviews are at the drug level here we show key patterns
emerging when we examine individual drug reviews and consumption. First, we show that
higher expert reviews are associated with better objective drug qualities recorded in Posi-
tively Aware. Second, we show that higher reviews predict higher drug consumption. Third,
we examine how reviews evolve over a drug’s lifecycle, showing that reviews seem to decline
over time and that the decline is partly explained by the introduction of new and better
drugs into the market.

Reviews and Drug Characteristics. We first investigate how objective drug qualities as
reported in the annual drug guide relate to expert reviews. Table A1 presents results for the
relationship between doctor and activist ratings and objective qualities in the magazine. As
a first pass, in columns (1) and (2) we regress doctor’s and activist’s reviews, respectively, on
drug characteristics by OLS. We find that, on average, better drugs receive better reviews, as
expected. The higher the number of reported side effects and number of drug interactions of
a drug, the lower both experts’ ratings (though the effects are statistically insignificant). As
dosage frequency increases, indicating difficulty in following the drug regimen and increasing
the chance of missed doses, both expert ratings decrease. Given that reviews are categorical
variables, in columns (3) and (4) we estimate the same relationships using an ordered probit
model. We obtain qualitatively similar results.

Reviews and Consumption. To relate reviews to consumption at the drug level, we use
individual-level data from MACS to construct drug-level pseudo market shares, defined as
the fraction of people taking a particular drug out of the total number of HIV+ men in the
sample.60 Table A2 presents the results of the linear regression of drug-level market shares
on reviews. Columns (1) and (2) show that both the doctor’s and activist’s reviews are
positively correlated with demand. Column (3) shows that when we control for both ratings
together along with drug characteristics, both reviews still predict higher demand. Next,
we show that average doctor reviews of other drugs in a combo predict lower demand. In
Column (4), we add the average of reviews of all other drugs taken by the individual at the
same time. While we continue to find that higher reviews by the doctor and the activist
  60
    Note that these are not market shares since patients often take more than one drug at the same time.
Hence, our pseudo market shares do not add to 1. These variables just measure the number of people that
take a given drug normalized by the total number of potential consumers at any given point in time.



                                                  48
predict higher demand for the drug, higher doctor reviews for other drugs in the combination
predict lower demand. In other words, when consumers combine drugs, for some drugs in
their bundle, higher doctor reviews predict lower demand.61 This finding is consistent with
our main results at to combo level.

Reviews over Drug Lifecycle. In our data, drugs are reviewed every year by two experts
and reviews might differ not only across experts but also over time. Here, we look at how
reviews for the same drug vary over the lifecycle of the drug. In general, there seems to be a
downward trend in reviews from both experts over time, as illustrated in Figure A1, which
plots average reviews by drug age.62




  61
      On the other hand, higher activist reviews for other drugs in the combination predict higher demand for
the drug.
   62
      Age of the drug is measured as the number of years the drug has been on the market since introduction
i.e. drug age = current year − year of introduction.


                                                     49
                  Table A1: Relating Reviews with PA Characteristics

                                                      OLS                    Ordered Probit
                                              Doctor      Activist         Doctor       Activist
             No. of Side Effects                -0.01      -0.00             -0.00        -0.00
                                               (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.00)      (0.00)
             No. of Drug Interactions           -0.01      -0.01             -0.01       -0.01∗
                                               (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.00)      (0.00)
             Food Restrictions                  -0.01       0.17             -0.00        0.09
                                               (0.12)     (0.13)            (0.01)      (0.06)
             Pill Burden                       0.10∗∗∗     -0.00           0.05∗∗∗        -0.00
                                               (0.03)     (0.04)            (0.02)      (0.02)
             Dosage Frequency                 -0.33∗∗∗    -0.21∗∗          -0.18∗∗∗     -0.10∗∗
                                               (0.08)     (0.09)            (0.05)      (0.04)
             Publicly Traded                     0.01      -0.24             -0.00        -0.12
                                               (0.18)     (0.18)            (0.10)      (0.10)
             Nobs.                              197         197              197          197
            Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard
           errors are given in parentheses. Drug-visit dyad is the unit of analysis. The left-
           hand-side variable is either Doctor’s or Activist’s review (taking values 1, 2, or 3).
           Columns (3) and (4) report marginal effects for the ordered probit.


        Table A2: Relationship between Reviews and Demand - Drug Level

                                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                       ∗∗∗                      ∗∗∗
Doctor’s Review                                                   0.02                    0.01        0.01∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.00)                  (0.00)       (0.00)
Activist’s Review                                                             0.03∗∗∗     0.02∗∗∗     0.02∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)
Average Doctor Reviews of Other Drugs in Combo                                                        -0.01∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.00)
Average Activist Reviews of Other Drugs in Combo                                                      0.01∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.00)
PA Characteristics                                                  Y           Y           Y           Y
Nobs.                                                             33,608      33,608      33,608      33,608
Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given in
parentheses. Individual-drug-visit is the unit of analysis. The left-hand-side variable is drug-level market
shares, defined as the fraction of people taking a particular drug out of the total number of HIV+ men
in the sample.




                                                    50
                    2.4   2.2
           Average Rating
                 2  1.8
                    1.6




                                0               5                              10
                                                Drug Age

                                    Doctor's Rating        Activist's Rating




Figure A1: Ratings over Drug Life Cycle: The figure plots the average ratings of
drugs over drug age, by expert.




                                               51
Appendix B                   Theoretical Model
Let drug d0 s unobserved quality θ ∈ IR2 have two dimensions: drug effectiveness h ∈ IR and
how well it represses side effects s ∈ IR. The utility an individual gets from consuming drug
d, conditional on all observed objective qualities X is given by:6364

                                  ud (h, s|X) = αh + βs + γ(AIDS · h),                                     (10)

where AIDS is a dummy for whether the individual is suffering from AIDS and α > 0, β >
0, γ > 0.65 We assume that the individual does not observe θ, and uses reviews from doctors
and activists as signals of the true unobserved quality. Let us assume that h and s can
take one of two values, h ∈ {hH , hL } and s ∈ {sH , sL }, where H denotes high quality and
L denotes low quality, and doctor and activist comments can either be high or low, i.e.,
D, A ∈ {0, 1} where 0 denotes low comment and 1 denotes high comment. Then, we can
define probabilities for observing quality t ∈ {H, L}, conditional on doctor and activist
comments as:
                                  Pd (h = hH |R = r) = prR ,                            (11)

                                         Pd (s = sH |R = r) = qRr ,                                        (12)

R ∈ {D, A}, r ∈ {0, 1}. Moreover, we assume that conditional on both observed and un-
observed drug characteristics doctor’s and activist’s comments are independent. Given this
setup, we can now derive theoretical predictions that can be tested empirically.

Proposition 1. When the doctor and activist agree, individuals choose the drug that gets a
high comment, provided that comments are informative.

Proof. Individuals will choose the drug that gives them the highest expected utility. Suppose
drug k gets high comments from both experts, while drug j gets low comments from both
experts. An individual, regardless of his AIDS status, will choose drug k iver j when

                               E[uk (h, s|X, D, A)] > E[uj (h, s|X, D, A)]                                 (13)
  63
     We write our theoretical model after conditioning on all observed characteristics of the drug to understand
how drug demand relates to unobserved qualities of the drug and expert comments. We categorize the
drug’s unobserved qualities into two dimensions, effectiveness and side effects, which may be correlated
with observed measures of drug effectiveness (probability of non-decreasing CD4 count) and side effects
(probability of no ailment).
  64
     We have suppressed the individual subscript i to simplify notation.
  65
     This restriction on preference parameters assumes that individuals prefer drugs that are more effective
and have less side effects, and that these are state-dependent preferences for effectiveness, in that individuals
with AIDS prefer more effective drugs more (Papageorge, 2016).


                                                       52
            ⇔ (α + γAIDS)hH (p1D − p0D + p1A − p0A ) + βsH (qD
                                                             1    0
                                                               − qD + qA1 − qA0 ) >               (14)
                  (α + γAIDS)hL (p1D − p0D + p1A − p0A ) + βsL (qD
                                                                 1    0
                                                                   − qD + qA1 − qA0 ).

The last inequality is always true when p1D > p0D , p1A > p0A , qD
                                                                 1
                                                                    > qD0
                                                                          and qA1 > qA0 . In
words, both experts are more likely to give a higher rating to drugs that are better on both
dimensions.

Proposition 2. When the doctor and activist disagree, we will observe differences in re-
sponses to conflicts depending on health status if and only if

   1. individuals without AIDS value low side effects more than high effectiveness (β > α),

   2. individuals with AIDS value high effectiveness more than low side effects (β < (α +γ)),
                                                                      0    1
   3. the activist puts more weight on side effects than the doctor (qD > qD and qA1 > qA0 ),

   4. the relative probability that the activist gives a high rating to a drug that has high h is
      lower than the relative probability of the doctor doing the same ((p1A −p0A ) < (p1D −p0D )).

Proof. Suppose the doctor gives a low comment to drug k and a high comment to drug j,
while the activist gives a high comment to drug k and a low comment to drug j. Then, an
individual without AIDS will choose drug k when

                  =⇒ αhH (p0D − p1D + p1A − p0A ) + βsH (qD
                                                          0    1
                                                            − qD + qA1 − qA0 ) >                  (15)
                           αhL (p0D − p1D + p1A − p0A ) + βsL (qD
                                                                0    1
                                                                  − qD + qA1 − qA0 )

Given that hH > hL and sH > sL , under these assumptions, equation (15) will be satisfied
if (p1A − p0A ) > (p1D − p0D ). If (p1A − p0A ) < (p1D − p0D ), then for equation (15) to be satisfied,
β > α, so that the expected marginal utility from higher s is greater than the expected
marginal utility from higher h.
   An individual with AIDS = 1 will choose drug j over drug k if

                 (α + γ)hH (p0D − p1D + p1A − p0A ) + βsH (qD
                                                            0    1
                                                              − qD + qA1 − qA0 ) <                (16)
                     (α + γ)hL (p0D − p1D + p1A − p0A ) + βsL (qD
                                                                0    1
                                                                  − qD + qA1 − qA0 )

It is easy to see that equation (16) will be satisfied when (p1A − p0A ) < (p1D − p0D ), α, β, γ > 0,
and β < (α + γ), so that the expected marginal utility from higher s is lower than the
expected marginal utility from higher h.



                                                  53
   Now lets suppose (p1A − p0A ) < (p1D − p0D ), qD
                                                  0    1
                                                    > qD , qA1 > qA0 and that for people without
AIDS β > α while for people with AIDS β < (α + γ).
    An individual without AIDS will choose drug k (for which the activist’s comment is higher
than the doctor’s) when equation (15) is satisfied. Given our assumption that hH > hL and
sH > sL and the above conditions, we can see that since β > α, the LHS of the equation (15)
is greater than the RHS. Individuals with AIDS, however, will choose drug j (for which the
doctor’s comment is higher than the activist’s) when equation (16) is satisfied. Given that
we assume that α, β, γ > 0, and following the above conditions, we can see that equation
(16) is satisfied.




                                              54
Appendix C              Data Collection

C.1     Positively Aware Data Dictionary
In this section, we present a data dictionary for the constructed dataset from the Positively
Aware magazines. Below is a list of variables that we derived from the magazines, along
with a description of what that variable measures.

   • Common Name - This codes the generic name of the drug.

   • Brand Name - This variable codes the brand name under which the drug is sold.

   • Class - Class of drugs that the drug belongs to.

   • Manufacturer - Name of the manufacturer.

   • Public - A binary variable, indicating whether the drug company is publicly traded.

   • Year - Year the magazine was published.

   • No. of Side Effects - Number of side effects for the drug listed in the drug guide.

   • No. of Drug Interactions - Number of drug interactions with other drugs listed in the
     drug guide.

   • Pill Burden - Number of tablets that need to be taken together.

   • Dosage Frequency - Number of times a day the drug dose needs to be taken.

   • Food Restrictions - A binary variable indicating whether drug intake has any food
     restrictions.

   • Annual Cost - Average Wholesale Price of drugs, as specified by the manufacturer

   • DHHS Preferred - A binary variable, indicating whether the drug has been approved
     as first-line therapy by the Department of Health and Human Services.

   • Doctor’s Rating - A categorical variable that encapsulates a doctor’s rating of the drug
     on a scale of 1 to 3.

       1. Doctor mainly uses negative words or phrases to describe the drug.
       2. Doctor says positive things, with some qualifications.
       3. Doctor says mostly positive things.

                                             55
   • Activist’s Rating - A categorical variable that encapsulates the activist’s rating of the
     drug on a scale of 1 to 3.

        1. Activist mainly uses negative words or phrases to describe the drug.
        2. Activist says positive things, with some qualifications.
        3. Activist says mostly positive things.

   • Doctor - The variable codes the name of the doctor who has reviewed for the current
     issue of the drug guide.

   • Activist - The variable codes the name of the activist who has reviewed for the current
     issue of the drug guide.

   Table C1 presents a summary of all the drugs in the dataset, along with their manufac-
turer details and year of entry and exit.


Doctor and Activist Reviews
In order to create a ranking system for the reviews, we use the following set of criteria:

   • Assign a rating of 1 if mostly negative words or phrases have been used to describe the
     drug. For example, comments such as “There is not much to say about ddC any-
     more.” . . . “hard to get excited about it, and these days it’s often not prescribed.”
     . . . “The role for delavirdine remains unclear.”, or an activist’s comments such as
     “ddC has never lived up to its initial promise” . . . “overall, not a very useful
     drug ” . . . “Invirase was extraordinarily weak . . . not much reason to take it.
     ” would be assigned a rank of 1.

   • Assign a rating of 2 if the doctor or advocate points out the positive as well as the
     negative aspects of the drug, but does not give an absolute recommendation of whether
     the drug is good or bad. For example, comments of the form “The new soft-gel formu-
     lation achieves much better drug levels . . . but if you are going to use Fortovase as
     a sole PI, you will have to take a lot of pills.”, and “It may not be the best bet
     to include in first-line treatment . . . but it remains a solid antiviral.”

   • Assign a rank of 3 to drugs with reviews that mostly use positive words to describe the
     drug. For example, “3TC is a potent, convenient and well-tolerated drug” or,
     “3TC, with its minimal side effects, easy dosing schedule and high potency,
     may be the most useful of the nucleosides ” would receive a rank of 3.


                                              56
                           Table C1: Drug Information

              Manufacturer                Year of Introduction   Year of Discontinuation
 (a) NRTI
 Retrovir     GlaxoSmithKline                     1987                      -
 Videx        Bristol-Myers Squibb                1997                      -
 Hivid        Hoffman-LaRoche                     1997                    2006
 Zerit        Bristol-Myers Squibb                1997                      -
 Epivir       GlaxoSmithKline                     1997                      -
 Combivir     GlaxoSmithKline                     1998                      -
 Ziagen       GlaxoSmithKline                     1999                      -
 Viread       Gilead Sciences                     2000                      -
 Trizivir     GlaxoSmithKline                     2001                      -
 Emtriva      Gilead Sciences                     2004                      -
 Epzicom      GlaxoSmithKline                     2004                      -
 Truvada      Gilead Sciences                     2004                      -
 (b) NNRTI
 Viramune     Boehringer Ingelheim                1997                      -
 Rescriptor   Agouron Pharmaceuticals             1997                      -
 Sustiva      Bristol-Myers Squibb                1998
 (c) PI
 Norvir       Abbott Laboratories                 1997                      -
 Crixivan     Merck & Company                     1997                      -
 Viracept     Agouron Pharmaceuticals             1997                      -
 Saquinavir   Hoffman-LaRoche                     1997                      -
 Agenerase    GlaxoSmithKline                     1999                      -
 Kaletra      Abbott Laboratories                 2000                      -
 Aptivus      Boehringer Ingelheim                2001                      -
 Reyataz      Bristol-Myers Squibb                2002                      -
 Lexiva       GlaxoSmithKline                     2004                      -
 Prezista     Tibotec Therapeutics                2004                      -
Notes: The table lists details about all drugs in the sample, grouped by drug type. HIV
drugs belong to three drug types: Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor (NRTI), Non-
nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor (NNRTI) and Protease Inhibitor (PI). During our
period of analysis, only one drug was discontinued.




                                           57
Appendix D                  Demand Estimation
We estimate the demand model by GMM, matching the moments predicted by the model
to the sample moments. We match two sets of moments to their sample analogue: (1)
the market shares for all combinations, and (2) the covariance of the observed product
characteristics, x, with the observed individual-level characteristics, z.
    For computational ease, we assume that the ijt ’s have an independently and identically
distributed extreme value distribution, which leads to the familiar closed-form for the model’s
choice probabilities conditional on z:
                                                          P
                                                exp (δjt + kr xjtk zir βkr )
                       Prt (y = j|x, z, θ) =    P            P                                          (17)
                                             1 + q exp (δqt + kr xqtk zir βkr )

    In order to compute our moments, we first find the value of δ that makes the market
shares from the data, sN
                       jt , equal to the market shares predicted by the model,
                                                                                66
                                                                                   sjt (δ, β; .),
for each guess at (β). We then substitute that δ(β, sjt ; .) for δ into the model’s prediction
for the micro moments, making them a function of (β, δ(β, sjt ; , )). Lastly, we search over
(β) to minimize the distance between model’s predictions for the micro moments and the
data.
    Recall that we also need to address the endogeneity problem of the reviews, since we
expect reviews and ξjt to be correlated. The instruments we use are the average combo
characteristics of rival drugs on the market. Let Z = [Z1 , Z2 ] be the set of instruments,
where Z1 is the average probability of no ailments for the rival drugs on the market, and Z2
is the average probability of non-decreasing CD4 count for the rival drugs on the market.
       We now describe our estimation algorithm in detail:

   1. Let zd , for d = 1, . . . , ns, be the individual-level characteristics for the ns individuals
      in visit t from the individual level data from MACS. We then define δ ns,n (β) as the
      value of δ for a given value of β that sets
                                                         ns
                                                    1 X
                           g1ns,N (θ)   =   sN
                                             jt   −        Prt (y = j|x, zd , β, δ ns,n (β))            (18)
                                                    ns d=1

         equal to 0.

   2. Calculate the model’s prediction for the covariances between the characteristics of the
      chosen combination and individual-level attributes. In particular, to form the sample
  66
    For the logit specification, that is simply equal to the log market share of combo c minus the log of the
share of the outside option (taking no drugs).

                                                          58
   moment, we interact the average attributes of the individuals that chose combination
   j at time t with the characteristics of the combination at time t, and then average over
   all available combinations in that time period. Formally, the second moment is defined
   as:                                   ( Pnj                                   )
                              1 X                 zi
                                             ij =1 j
                 g2n,ns (θ) ≈     nj xkj             − E [z|y = j, β, δ ns,n (β)]      (19)
                              n j              nj

   where

                                             (ns)−1           zd Prt (y = j|x, zd , vd , β, δ ns,n (β))
                                                      P
                             ns,n                         d
           E[z|y = j, β, δ          (β)] =                                                              ,     (20)
                                                                         snjt

                                                                                     nj and Prt (y = j|x, zd , vd , β, δ ns,N (β))
                                                                              P
   nj is the number of individuals taking combination j, n =                     j
   is given by equation (17).

3. Calculate β¯k using the IV GMM formula, and then, using δ ns,n (β) from step 1, calculate
   the error term as
                                                      X
                               ωjt (θ) = δ ns,n (β) −   xjtk β̄,                        (21)
                                                                    k

   to calculate the third moment, which is given by:

                                             g3 = E[Zω(θ)] = 0                                                (22)


4. Find the generalized method of moments estimator of (θGM M ) = (βGM M , β̄GM M )
   from stacking g2 and g3 into a single vector f . In particular, we use a two-step estima-
   tion procedure with

                                                             n
                                                                     !T                   n
                                                                                                    !
                                                          1X                          1X
               (βGM M , β̄GM M ) = argmin                       f (θ)   Ŵ                  f (θ)             (23)
                                                          n i=1                       n i=1

   where W = E[f (θ)f (θ)0 ]. With the optimal weight matrix, the variance-covariance of
   the parameters θGM M is given by:

                                        V̂ (θGM M ) = (ĜT Ŵ Ĝ)−1                                           (24)




                                                  59
Appendix E              Additional Robustness Checks
For additional robustness checks, we begin by pooling the doctor and activist reviews. Table
E1 presents the results of the logit with instruments for two ways of pooling the reviews:
adding the two reviews for each combination, and taking the maximum of the two reviews for
each drug. For both measures, we find that even after controlling for objective qualities, an
increase in reviews leads to an increase in the likelihood of choosing the drug combination.
    In Table E2, we report results for the specification in which we control for individual
and time fixed effects when predicting the probabilities of non-decreasing CD4 count and no
ailment for each individual. As before, doctors’ and activists’ reviews positively predict de-
mand independently; however, in the specification in which we control for both the activists’
and doctors’ reviews together and control for the combination’s objective qualities, we find
that a higher review from the doctor decreases the probability of choosing that combination
while a higher review by the activist for a combination leads to an increase in the probability
of that combination being demanded. The disagreement results are the same, yet in this
specification the interaction between the doctors’ review and disagreement is not significant.
    Lastly, we also check if our mechanism for explaining the negative coefficient on doctor’s
review is robust to how we define the reviews. Therefore, we use the definition for reviews in
which we calculate the percentage of drugs in a combination that have a rating of 3 as our
measure of combo-level reviews and run the specification with agreements and disagreements
between the two experts. Table E3, column (1) replicates the results for this definition of
reviews with which we find that after we control for the activist’s review and the objective
qualities, the doctor’s review negatively affects demand. In column (2), we find that if the
experts agree about a combination, then a higher review increases the likelihood of taking
that combination. However, in the case of a disagreement, a higher activist’s review leads
to an increase in the likelihood of taking the combination while a higher doctor’s review
decreases the likelihood of taking that combination (though the effect is not significant). In
column (3), we explore the non-linearities in disagreements and find that if the activist gives
a lower review to the combination than the doctor (i.e. a smaller percentage of drugs in the
combo receive a rating of 3 from the activist), and the activist’s review increases, then the
probability of consuming that combination increases.




                                              60
                     Table E1: IV Logit Estimates - Pooling Reviews

                                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                   ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                   Total                   0.42           0.55
                                           (0.14)         (0.15)
                   Max                                                  0.62∗∗∗     0.81∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.21)      (0.22)
                   Objective Qualities        N              Y             N              Y
                   No. of Individuals      13,472         13,472         13,472      13,472
                   Combo-time dyads         1,086         1,086           1,086      1,086
                 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respec-
                tively. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Doctor’s review
                and Activist’s review have been pooled together and instrumented
                using the average probability of no ailment and average probability
                of non-decreasing CD4 count of rival combos. Columns (1) and (2)
                show results for the specification in which the two experts’ reviews
                have been pooled by adding up the reviews, while columns (3) and
                (4) show results for the specification in which the maximum of the
                two experts’ reviews is used as the measure of combo review. The to-
                tal number of observations used for the estimation is 1,086, which are
                constructed using data on 13,472 individuals. Objective qualities in-
                clude the probability of no ailment and probability of non-decreasing
                CD4 count of the combo.

    Table E2: Objective Qualities with Individual and Time Fixed Effects

                                   (1)       (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)
 Doctor’s Review                 1.64∗∗∗   1.49∗∗∗                                  -0.79       -2.60∗∗∗
                                 (0.38)     (0.34)                                 (0.77)        (1.00)
 Activist’s Review                                       2.01∗∗∗       1.08∗∗∗    2.63∗∗∗       4.26∗∗∗
                                                         (0.36)         (0.21)     (0.71)        (0.93)
 Agree × Review                                                                                            1.60∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (0.46)
 Disagree × Activist’s Review                                                                              3.00∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (0.56)
 Disagree × Doctor’s Review                                                                                 -1.10
                                                                                                           (1.01)
 Agree                                                                                                      0.49
                                                                                                           (2.47)
 Objective Qualities               N         Y             N             Y          N             Y          Y
 N                                1086      1086          1086          1086       1086          1086       1086
 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Standard errors are given in
parentheses. Objective qualities include the probability of no ailment and the probability of non-
decreasing CD4 count of the combo, which are constructed by controlling for individual and time
fixed effects when predicting the probabilities using individual-level data from MACS. Doctor’s and
Activist’s review have been instrumented using the average probability of no ailment and average
probability of non-decreasing CD4 count of rival combos. The variable ‘Agree’ is a dummy which is
1 if both experts give the same rating to a combo. The variable ‘Disagree’ is a dummy which is 1 if
each expert gives a different rating to a combo.


                                                   61
                    Table E3: Disagreements

                                             (1)         (2)        (3)
                                                  ∗∗∗
 Doctor’s Review                          -2.41
                                           (0.75)
 Activist’s Review                        4.69∗∗∗
                                           (0.81)
 Agree × Review                                         2.07∗∗∗   2.05∗∗∗
                                                        (0.56)    (0.61)
 Disagree × Activist’s Review                           2.08∗∗∗
                                                        (0.63)
 Disagree × Doctor’s Review                              -0.40
                                                        (1.08)
 Agree (% High)                                          -0.18     -1.09
                                                        (0.47)    (0.70)
 Positive Difference × Doctor                                      2.61
                                                                  (1.94)
 Negative Difference × Doctor                                     -3.41∗
                                                                  (1.92)
 Positive Difference × Activist                                    -0.99
                                                                  (1.50)
 Negative Difference × Activist                                   8.28∗∗∗
                                                                  (3.14)
 Objective Qualities                          Y           Y          Y
 No. of Individuals                        13,472       13,472    13,472
 Combo-time dyads                           1086         1086      1086
 Notes: *, **, *** denote p-value < 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively.
Standard errors are given in parentheses. Doctor’s and Activist’s review
have been instrumented using the average probability of no ailment and
average probability of non-decreasing CD4 count of rival combos. The
total number of observations used for the estimation is 1,086, which are
constructed using data on 13,472 individuals. The variable ‘Agree’ is a
dummy which is 1 if both experts give the same rating to a combo. The
variable ‘Disagree’ is a dummy which is 1 if each expert gives a different
rating to a combo. Finally, the variable ‘Positive Difference’ is a dummy
which is 1 if the doctor’s review is lower than the activist’s review, while
the variable ‘Negative Difference’ is a dummy which is 1 if the doctor’s
review is higher than the doctor’s review. Objective qualities include the
probability of no ailment and probability of non-decreasing CD4 count
of the combo.




                                    62
Appendix F   State of the Market

                        Table F1: New Drugs

                                              Market Share
               Date of Entry       Name      at time of entry
               April, 1997         Videx           4.40%
               April, 1999       Efavirenz         5.84%
               April, 1999        Ziagen           0.76%
               October, 2000      Kaletra          0.28%
               October, 2001      Viread           0.62%
               April, 2002        Trizivir         1.67%
               October, 2003     Reyataz           0.71%
               October, 2003     Emtriva           0.71%
               April, 2005        Lexiva           0.56%
               April, 2005       Truvada           6.60%
               April, 2005       Epzicom           1.88%
               October, 2006     Prezista          0.37%
               April, 2008        Atripla          19.0%
               Notes: The table lists all new drugs that enter
              the HIV drug market during our period of anal-
              ysis (1997-2008), along with the market share of
              those drugs at the time of entry. Market share
              is calculated at the combo level; i.e. for each of
              the drugs listed, the market share for drug i is
              the combined market share of all combinations
              that include drug i.




                                     63
Table F2: Objective Qualities and Reviews of New Entrants and Rivals at
Time of Entry

                   Reviews
                                   Doctor             Activist
                               Own     Rival        Own Rival
                   Videx       2.42    2.37         2.50   2.42
                   Efavirenz   2.78    2.28         2.16   2.15
                   Ziagen      2.92    2.32         2.00   2.16
                   Kaletra     2.33    1.97         2.67   2.41
                   Viread      2.83    2.52         2.33   2.38
                   Trizivir    3.00    2.26         2.17   2.09
                   Reyataz     2.20    2.36         2.00   2.11
                   Emtriva     2.17    2.36         2.17   2.11
                   Lexiva      2.33    2.20         2.33   1.91
                   Truvada     2.70    2.16         2.63   1.85
                   Epzicom     2.71    2.17         2.12   1.90
                   Prezista    2.33    1.91         2.33   1.80
                   Atripla     2.00    2.04         3.00   2.07
                   Objective Qualities
                               Non-Dec. CD4         No Ailment
                               Own    Rival         Own Rival
                   Videx       0.54    0.57         0.56  0.63
                   Efavirenz   0.55    0.56         0.65  0.55
                   Ziagen      0.61    0.56         0.61  0.56
                   Kaletra     0.55    0.49         0.73  0.55
                   Viread      0.54    0.54         0.53  0.59
                   Trizivir    0.54    0.53         0.56  0.61
                   Reyataz     0.69    0.55         0.71  0.61
                   Emtriva     0.52    0.56         0.86  0.60
                   Lexiva      0.76    0.55         0.74  0.63
                   Truvada     0.62    0.55         0.70  0.62
                   Epzicom     0.64    0.55         0.61  0.63
                   Prezista    0.93    0.56         0.90  0.63
                   Atripla     0.61    0.60         0.81  0.60
                   Notes: The table reports the average reviews
                  for each expert and objective qualities (proba-
                  bility of non-decreasing CD4 count and proba-
                  bility of no ailment) for the new entrants and
                  their rivals at the time of entry. For any new
                  entrant drug i, the columns labeled ‘Own’ re-
                  port the average reviews (or objective quality
                  measure) for all combinations that contain drug
                  i. The columns labeled ‘Rival’ report the aver-
                  age review (or objective quality measure) for all
                  combos other than the combos that contain drug
                  i.




                                         64
