NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OF MICE AND MERCHANTS:
TRADE AND GROWTH IN THE IRON AGE
Jan David Bakker
Stephan Maurer
Jörn-Steffen Pischke
Ferdinand Rauch
Working Paper 24825
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24825

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

We thank Juan Pradera for excellent research assistance, Tom Elliott for help with and advice on
the Pleiades database, and David Abulafia, Neeraj Baruah, Tim Besley, Andrew Bevan,
Francesco Caselli, Jeremiah Dittmar, Hannah Friedman, Avner Greif, Vasiliki Kassianidou,
Damian Kozbur, Carl Knappett, Andrea Matranga, Guy Michaels, Dennis Novy, Luigi Pascali,
Dominic Rathbone, Tanner Regan, Corinna Riva, Susan Sherratt, Pedro CL Souza, Peter Temin,
John van Reenen, Ruth Whitehouse, David Yanagizawa-Drott and participants at various
seminars and conferences for their helpful comments and suggestions. This research has been
supported by a grant from the Economic and Social Research Council [ESRC ES/M010341/1] to
the Centre for Economic Performance at the LSE. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jan David Bakker, Stephan Maurer, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Ferdinand Rauch. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Of Mice and Merchants: Trade and Growth in the Iron Age
Jan David Bakker, Stephan Maurer, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Ferdinand Rauch
NBER Working Paper No. 24825
July 2018
JEL No. F14,N7,O47
ABSTRACT
We study the causal connection between trade and development using one of the earliest massive
trade expansions: the first systematic crossing of open seas in the Mediterranean during the time
of the Phoenicians. We construct a measure of connectedness along the shores of the sea. This
connectivity varies with the shape of the coast, the location of islands, and the distance to the
opposing shore. We relate connectedness to local growth, which we measure using the presence
of archaeological sites in an area. We find an association between better connected locations and
archaeological sites during the Iron Age, at a time when sailors began to cross open water very
routinely and on a big scale. We corroborate these findings at the level of the world.

Jan David Bakker
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford, OX13UQ
jan.bakker@economics.ox.ac.uk
Stephan Maurer
University of Konstanz
Department of Economics
Box D124
D-78457 Konstanz
Germany
stephan.maurer@uni-konstanz.de

Jörn-Steffen Pischke
CEP
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and IZA
and also NBER
s.pischke@lse.ac.uk
Ferdinand Rauch
Department of Economics,
University of Oxford
Manor Road
Oxford, OX1 3UQ.
United Kingdom
ferdinand.rauch@economics.ox.ac.uk

1

Introduction

We investigate to what degree trading opportunities affected economic development at an
early juncture of human history. In addition to factor accumulation and technical change,
Smithian growth due to exchange and specialization is one of the fundamental sources of
growth. An emerging literature on the topic is beginning to provide compelling empirical
evidence for a causal link from trade to growth. We contribute to this literature and focus
on one of the earliest massive expansions in maritime trade: the systematic crossing of
open seas in the Mediterranean at the time of the Phoenicians from about 900 BC. We
relate trading opportunities, which we capture through the connectedness of points along
the coast, to early development as measured by the presence of archaeological sites. We
find that locational advantages for sea trade matter for the presence of Iron Age cities and
settlements, and thus helped shape the development of the Mediterranean region, and the
world.
A location with more potential trading partners should have an advantage if trade is
important for development. The particular shape of a coast has little influence over how
many neighboring points can be reached from a starting location within a certain distance
as long as ships sail mainly close to the coast. However, once sailors begin to cross open
seas, coastal geography becomes more important: Some coastal points are in the reach of
many neighbors while others can reach only few. The general shape of the coast and the
location of islands matters for this. We capture these geographic differences by dividing
the Mediterranean coast into grid cells, and calculating how many other cells can be
reached within a certain distance. Parts of the Mediterranean are highly advantaged by
their geography, e.g. the island-dotted Aegean and the “waist of the Mediterranean” at
southern Italy, Sicily, and modern Tunisia. Other areas are less well connected, like most
of the straight North African coast, parts of Iberia and southern France, and the Levantine
coast.
2

We relate our measure of connectivity to the number of archaeological sites found near
any particular coastal grid point. This is our proxy for economic development. It is based
on the assumption that more human economic activity leads to more settlements and
particularly towns and cities. When these expand and multiply there are more traces
in the archaeological record. We find a pronounced relationship between connectivity
and development in our dataset for the Iron Age around 750 BC, when the Phoenicians
began to systematically traverse the open sea. We have less evidence whether there
was any relationship between connectivity and sites for earlier periods when the data
on sites are poorer. Connectivity might already have mattered during the Bronze Age
when voyages occurred at some frequency, maybe at more intermediate distances. Our
interpretation of the results suggests that the relationship between coastal geography and
settlement density, once established in the Iron Age, persists through the classical period.
This is consistent with a large literature in economic geography on the persistence of
city locations. While our main results pertain to the Mediterranean, where we have good
information on archaeological sites, we also corroborate our findings at a world scale using
population data for 1 AD from McEvedy and Jones (1978) as outcome.
Humans have obtained goods from far away locations for many millennia. While some
of the early trade involved materials useful for tools (like the obsidian trade studied by
Dixon, Cann, and Renfrew 1968), as soon as societies became more differentiated a large
part of this early trade involved luxury goods doubtlessly consumed by the elites. Such
trade might have raised the utility of the beneficiaries but it is much less clear whether
it affected productivity as well. Although we are unable to measure trade directly, our
work sheds some light on this question. Since trade seems to have affected the growth of
settlements even at an early juncture this suggests that it was productivity enhancing. The
view that trade played an important role in early development has recently been gaining
ground among both economic historians and archaeologists; see e.g. Temin (2006) for the
Iron Age Mediterranean, Algaze (2008) for Mesopotamia, Barjamovic et al. (2017) for
3

Assyria, and Temin (2013) for Ancient Rome.
Our approach avoids issues of reverse causality and many confounders by using a geography based instrument for trade. In fact, we do not observe trade itself but effectively
estimate a reduced form relationship, relating opportunities for trade directly to economic
development. This means that we do not necessarily isolate the effect of the exchange of
goods per se. Our results could be driven by migration or the spread of ideas as well, and
when we talk about “trade” we interpret it in this broad sense. We do believe that coastal
connectivity captures effects due to maritime connections. It is difficult to imagine any
other channel why geography would matter in this particular manner, and we show that
our results are not driven by a variety of other geographic conditions.
Since we do not use any trade data we avoid many of the measurement issues related
to trade. We measure trading opportunities and development at a fine geographic scale,
hence avoiding issues of aggregation to a coarse country level. Both our measure of
connectedness and our outcome variable are doubtlessly crude proxies of both trading
opportunities and of economic development. This will likely bias us against finding any
relationship and hence makes our results only more remarkable.
The periods we study, the Bronze and Iron Ages, were characterized by the rise and decline of many cultures and local concentrations of economic activity. Many settlements
and cities rose during this period, only to often disappear again. This means that there
were ample opportunities for new locations to rise to prominence while path dependence
and hysteresis may have played a lesser role compared to later ages. The political organization of the Mediterranean world prior to the Romans was mostly local. The Egyptian
Kingdoms are the main exception to this rule but Egypt was mostly focused on the Nile
and less engaged in the Mediterranean. As a result, institutional factors were less important during the period we study.
There is a large literature on trade and growth. Canonical studies are the investigations by
4

Frankel and Romer (1999) and Redding and Venables (2004). These papers use distance
from markets and connectivity as measured by gravity relationships to capture the ease
with which potential trading partners can be reached. However, these measures do not
rely purely on geography but conflate economic outcomes like population and output,
which are themselves affected by the development process.
The more recent literature has circumvented this by analyzing exogenous events related to
changes in trade. Most similar to our study are a series of papers which also exploit new
trade relationships arising from discoveries, the opening of new trade routes, and technological change. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) link Atlantic trade starting
around 1,500 AD to the ensuing shift in the focus of economic activity in Europe from the
south and center of the continent to the Atlantic periphery. Redding and Sturm (2008)
focus on the natural experiment created by the division and reunification in Germany,
which changed the access to other markets sharply for some locations but not others.
Various papers exploit the availability of new transport technologies; Feyrer (2009) uses
air transport, Donaldson (2018) and Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) use railroads, and
Pascali (2017) steam ships. These papers generally find that regions whose trading opportunities improved disproportionately saw larger income growth. That we find similar
results for a much earlier trade expansion suggests that the productivity benefits of trade
have been pervasive throughout history.
Our paper also relates to a literature on how changes in locational fundamentals shape the
location of cities (Davis and Weinstein 2002, Bleakley and Lin 2012, Bosker and Buringh
2017, Hanlon 2017, Michaels and Rauch 2018). Our contribution to this literature is to
give evidence on one of the most important locational fundamentals, market access. In
a world with multiple modes of transport for the transportation of different goods, it is
typically hard to measure market access and changes of market access of a city. Our
measure relates to a world where much long distance trade took place on boats, which

5

makes it easier to isolate a measure of market access.
Also closely related is the paper by Ashraf and Galor (2011a). They relate population
density in various periods to the relative geographic isolation of a particular area. Their
interest is in the impact of cultural diversity on the development process, and they view
geographic isolation effectively as an instrument for cultural homogeneity. Similar to our
measure, their geographic isolation measure is a measure of connectivity of various points
around the world. They find that better connected (i.e. less isolated) countries have lower
population densities for every period from 1 to 1,500 AD, which is the opposite of our
result. Our approach differs from Ashraf and Galor (2011a) in that we only look at locations near the coast and not inland locations. They control for distance to waterways in
their regressions, a variable that is strongly positively correlated with population density.
Hence, our results are not in conflict with theirs.
Our paper is also related to a number of studies on prehistoric Mediterranean connectivity
and seafaring. McEvedy (1967) creates a measure of “littoral zones” using coastal shapes.
He produces a map which closely resembles the one we obtain from our connectivity
measure but does not relate geography directly to seafaring. This is done by Broodbank
(2006), who overlays the connectivity map with archaeological evidence of the earliest
sea-crossings up to the end of the last Ice Age. He interprets the connections as nursery
conditions for the early development of nautical skills, rather than as market access, as
we do for the later Bronze and Iron Ages.
Also related is a literature in archaeology using network models connecting archaeological
sites; Knappett, Evans, and Rivers (2008) is an example for the Bronze Age Aegean.
Barjamovic et al. (2017) conduct a similar exercise for Assyria based on a gravity model.
None of these papers relate to the changes arising from open sea-crossings, which is the
focus of our analysis. Temin (2006) discusses the Iron Age Mediterranean through the
lens of comparative advantage trade but offers no quantitative evidence as we do.

6

2

Brief history of ancient seafaring in the Mediterranean

The Mediterranean is a unique geographic space. The large inland sea is protected from
the open oceans by the Strait of Gibraltar. The tectonics of the area, the African plate
descending under the Eurasian one, have created a rugged northern coast in Europe
and a much straighter one in North Africa. Volcanic activity and the more than 3,000
islands also tend to be concentrated towards the north. The climatic conditions in the
Mediterranean are generally relatively favorable to agriculture, particularly in the north.
The Mediterranean is the only large inland sea with such a climate (Broodbank 2013).
Its east-west orientation facilitated the spread of agriculture from the Levant (Diamond
1997). Despite these common features, the size of the Mediterranean and an uneven
distribution of natural resources also implies great diversity. Horden and Purcell (2000)
stress that the area consists of many micro-regions. Geography and climate make the
Mediterranean prone to risks such as forest fires, earthquakes, plagues of locusts, droughts,
floods, and landslides. As a consequence, trade networks that allow to moderate shocks
are of great mutual interest in the region, and trade has played a central role since its
early history.1
Clear evidence of the first maritime activity of humans in the Mediterranean is elusive.
Crossings to islands close to the mainland were apparently undertaken as far back as
30,000 BC (Fontana Nuova in Sicily). In a careful review of the evidence, Broodbank
(2006) dates more active seafaring to around 10,000 BC based on the distribution of
obsidian (a volcanic rock) at sites separated by water (see Dixon, Cann, and Renfrew
1965, 1968). This points to the existence of active sea-faring of hunter-gatherer societies,
and suggests that boats must have traveled distances of 20-35 kilometers around that
1

The following discussion mainly draws on Abulafia (2011) and Broodbank (2013).

7

time. We have no evidence on the first boats but they were likely made from skin and
frame or dugout canoes.
Agriculture around the Mediterranean began in the Levant some time between 9,500
BC and 8,000 BC. From there it spread initially to Anatolia and the Aegean. Signs
of a fairly uniform Neolithic package of crops and domesticated animals can be found
throughout the Mediterranean. The distribution of the earliest evidence of agriculture,
which includes islands before reaching more peripheral parts of the mainland, suggests a
maritime transmission channel.
The Neolithic revolution did not reach Iberia until around 5,500 BC. By that time, many
islands in the Aegean had been settled, there is evidence for grain storage, and metal
working began in the Balkans. Because of the uneven distribution of ores, metals soon
became part of long range transport. Uncertainty must also have been a reason for the
formation of networks. Trade networks facilitated both comparative advantage based
exchange and insurance. The first archaeological evidence of a boat also stems from this
period: a dugout canoe, about 10 m long, at La Marmotta north of Rome. A replica
proved seaworthy and allowed travel of 20 - 25 km per day in a laden boat.
The Levant, which was home to the first cities, remained a technological leader in the
region, yet there is little evidence of sea-faring even during the Copper Age. This changed
with the rise of large scale societies in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Inequality in these first
states led to rich elites, who soon wished to trade with each other. Being at the cross-roads
between these two societies, the Levant quickly became a key intermediary.
Two important new transport technologies arrived in the Mediterranean around 3,000
BC: the donkey and the sail. The donkey was uniquely suited to the climatic conditions
and rugged terrain around the Mediterranean (better than camels or horses). Donkeys are
comparable in speed to canoes. Sailboats of that period could be around 5-10 times faster
in favorable conditions, ushering in a cost advantage of water transport that would remain
8

intact for many millennia to come. The land route out of Egypt to the Levant (“The
Way of Horus”) was soon superseded by sea routes leading up the Levantine coast to new
settlements like Byblos, with Levantine traders facilitating much of Egypt’s Mediterranean
trade. Coastal communities began to emerge all the way from the Levant via Anatolia to
the Aegean and Greece.
There is no evidence of the sail spreading west of Greece at this time. Canoes, though
likely improved into high performance water craft, remained inferior to sail boats but
kept facilitating maritime transport in the central and western Mediterranean. The major
islands there were all settled by the early Bronze Age. While not rivaling the maritime
activity in the eastern Mediterranean, regional trade networks arose also in the west. One
example is the Beaker network of the 3rd Millennium BC; most intense from southern
France to Iberia, with fewer beakers found in the western Maghreb, northern Italy, and
Sardinia but also stretching all the way into central Europe, the Baltic, and Britain. Land
routes probably dominated but sea trade must have played a role. The Cetina culture of
the late 3rd Millennium BC in the Adriatic is another example. Occasional sea-crossings
up to 250 km were undertaken during this period.
A drying spell around 2,200 BC and decline in Egypt disrupted the active maritime
network in the eastern Mediterranean and the population it supported. The oldest known
shipwreck in the Mediterranean at the island of Dokos in southern Greece dates from this
period. The 15 meters long boat could carry a maximum weight of 20 tons. The wreck
contained largely pottery, which was likely the cargo rather than carrying liquids, and
also carried lead ingots. The ship probably was engaged in local trade.
Decline in the eastern Mediterranean soon gave rise to new societies during the 2nd
millennium BC: palace cultures sprang up all over the eastern Mediterranean. Minoan
Crete and Mycenae in Greece were notable examples but similar cities existed along the
Anatolian coast and in the Levant. The palaces did not simply hold political power, but

9

were centers of religious, ceremonial, and economic activity. At least initially, craftsmen
and traders most likely worked for the palace rather than as independent agents. Sail
boats still constituted an advanced technology, and only the concentration of resources
in the hands of a rich elite made their construction and operation possible. The political
reach of the palaces at coastal sites was local; larger polities remained confined to inland
areas as in the case of Egypt, Babylon, or the Hittite Empire.
An active trade network arose again in the eastern Mediterranean stretching from Egypt
to Greece during the Palace period. The Anatolian land route was replaced by sea trade.
Some areas began to specialize in cash crops like olives and wine. A typical ship was still
the 15 m, 20 ton, one masted vessel as evidenced by the Uluburn wreck found at Kas
in Turkey, dating from 1,450 BC. Such vessels carried diverse cargoes including people
(migrants, messengers, and slaves), though the main goods were likely metals, textiles,
wine, and olive oil. Evidence for some of these was found on the Uluburun wreck; other
evidence comes from archives and inscriptions akin to bills of lading. Broodbank (2013)
suggests that the value of cargo of the Uluburun ship was such that it was sufficient
to feed a city the size of Ugarit for a year. Ugarit was the largest trading city in the
Levant at the time with a population of about 6,000 - 8,000. This highlights that sea
trade still largely consisted of high value luxury goods. The Ugarit archives also reveal
that merchants operating on their own account had become commonplace by the mid 2nd
millennium. Levantine rulers relied more on taxation than central planning of economic
activities. Trade was both risky and profitable; the most successful traders became among
the richest members of their societies.
Around the same time, the Mycenaeans traded as far as Italy. Sicily and the Tyrrhenian
got drawn into the network. While 60 - 70 km crossings to Cyprus or Crete and across the
Otranto Strait (from Greece to the heel of Italy) were commonplace, coast hugging still
prevailed among sailors during the 2nd millennium BC. After crossing the Otranto Strait,

10

Greek sailors would continue along the coast of the Bay of Taranto, the instep of Italy’s
boot, as is suggested by the distribution of Greek pottery at coastal sites. Indigenous seafarers from the central Mediterranean now joined these routes, and the sail finally entered
the central Mediterranean around 1,200 BC. While there were no big breakthroughs,
naval technology also improved in the late 2nd millennium. Better caulking and keels
added to sea-worthiness (Abulafia 2011), while brail rigging and double prows improved
maneuverability. Most notably, latitude sailing was developed and allowed sailors to steer
a straight east-westerly course. “This was a leap in the scope of connections, a permanent
shift in Mediterranean history and a crucial stage in tying together the basin’s inhabitants
across the soon-to-be shrinking sea,” observes Broodbank (2013, p. 431) before warning
that “we should not exaggerate, nor anticipate, the importance of such connections at this
early juncture. Not until the Iron Age did relations become close enough to fundamentally
reshape the culture and economies of outlying regions.” (p. 441)
A new period of decline around 1,200 BC reduced the power of Egypt, wiped out cities
like Ugarit, and ended the reign of the last palace societies in the eastern Mediterranean.
In the more integrated world that the eastern Mediterranean had become, troubles spread
quickly from one site to others. The Bronze Age came to an end with iron coming on
the scene. Rather than being technologically all that much superior to bronze, iron ore
was far more abundant and widespread than copper and hence much more difficult to
monopolize. As was the case many times before, decline and change opened up spaces for
smaller players and more peripheral regions. Cyprus flourished. Many Levantine cities
recovered quickly. Traders from the central Mediterranean also expanded. Traditionally,
decline during the Bronze Age collapse was often blamed on the anonymous “Sea Peoples.”
Modern scholarship seems to challenge whether these foreigners were simply just raiders
and pirates, as the Egyptians surely saw them, rather than also entrepreneurial traders
who saw opportunities for themselves to fill the void left by the disappearance of imperial
connections and networks. Some of these new interlopers settled in the Levant (Broodbank
11

2013).
While there is much academic debate about the origin of the Phoenicians, there is little
doubt that the Levantine city states which had taken in these migrants were the origin
of a newly emerging trade network. Starting to connect the old Bronze Age triangle
formed by the Levantine coast and Cyprus, they began to expand throughout the entire
Mediterranean after 900 BC. The Phoenician city states were much more governed by
economic logic than was the case for royal Egypt. One aspect of their expansion was the
formation of enclaves, often at nodes of the network. Carthage and Gadir (Cadiz) are
prime examples but many others existed. At least initially these were not colonies; the
Phoenicians did not try to dominate local populations. Instead, locals and other settlers
were invited to pursue their own enterprise and contribute to the trading network. The
core of the network consisted of the traditional sea-faring regions, the Aegean and the
Tyrrhenian. The expanding trade network of the early 1st millennium BC did not start
from scratch but encompassed various regional populations. Tyrrhenian metal workers
and Sardinian sailors had opened up connections with Iberia at the close of the 2nd
millennium. But the newly expanding network not only stitched these routes together, it
also created its own, new, long-haul routes.
These new routes began to take Phoenician and other sailors over long stretches of open
sea. While this had long been conjectured by earlier writers like Braudel (2001, writing in
the late 1960s) and Sherratt and Sherrat (1993), contemporary scholars are more confident.
Cunliffe (2008) writes about the course of a Phoenician sailor: “Beyond Cyprus, for
a ship’s master to make rapid headway west there was much to be said for open-sea
sailing. From ... the western end of Cyprus he could have sailed along the latitude to
the south coast of Crete ... where excavation has exposed a shrine built in Phoenician
fashion. Traveling the same distance again ..., once more following the latitude, would
have brought him to Malta” (p. 275-276), a route which became known as the “Route of

12

the Isles.” Abulafia (2011) describes their seafaring similarly: “The best way to trace the
trading empire of the early Phoenicians is to take a tour of the Mediterranean sometime
around 800 BC. ... Their jump across the Ionian Sea took them out of the sight of land, as
did their trajectory from Sardinia to the Balearics; the Mycenaeans had tended to crawl
round the edges of the Ionian Sea past Ithaka to the heel of Italy, leaving pottery behind
as clues, but the lack of Levantine pottery in southern Italy provides silent evidence of
the confidence of Phoenician navigators.” (p. 71).
This involved crossing 300 - 500 km of open sea. One piece of evidence for sailing away
from the coast are two deep sea wrecks found 65 km off the coast of Ashkelon (Ballard
et al. 2002). Of Phoenician origin and dating from about 750 BC, the ships were 14
meters long, and each carried about 400 amphorae filled with fine wine. These amphorae
were highly standardized in size and shape. This highlights the change in the scale and
organization of trade compared to the Uluburun wreck with its diverse cargo. It also
suggests an early form of industrial production supporting this trade.
An unlikely traveler offers a unique lens on the expansion of trade and the density of
connections which were forged during this period. The house mouse populated a small
area in the Levant until the Neolithic revolution. By 6,000 BC, it had spread into southern
Anatolia before populating parts of north eastern Africa and the Aegean in the ensuing
millennia (there were some travelers on the Uluburun ship). There were no house mice
west of Greece by 1,000 BC. Then, within a few centuries, the little creature turned up on
islands and on the mainland throughout the central and western Mediterranean (Cucchi,
Vigne, and Auffray 2005).
The Phoenicians might have been at the forefront of spreading mice, ideas, technology,
and goods all over the Mediterranean but others were part of these activities. At the eve of
Classical Antiquity, the Mediterranean was constantly criss-crossed by Greek, Etruscan,
and Phoenician vessels as well as smaller ethnic groups. Our question here is whether this

13

massive expansion in scale led to locational advantages for certain points along the coast
compared to others, and whether these advantages translated into the human activity
which is preserved in the archaeological record. A brief, rough time line for the period we
investigate is given in figure 1.

3

Data and key variables

For our Mediterranean dataset we compute a regular grid of 10 × 10 kilometers that spans
the area of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea based on a coastline map of the earth
from Bjorn Sandvik’s public domain map on world borders.2 We use a Lambert Azimuthal
Equal Area projection, with the coordinates 39N, 18.5E as reference point, which is close
to the center of the part of the map we study. No projection avoids distortions completely
but this one works well for the study of a limited geographical area. The distances of the
edges of our 10×10 km grid are close to the true distances: Even at points furthest from
the reference points, such as Gibraltar in the west and Sinai in the east, measurement
error of both vertical and horizontal lines remains within less than 2 percent of true
distances.
We define a grid-cell as coastal if its centroid is within 5 km of a coastline. Grid-cells whose
centroid is more than 5 km away from a landmass are classified as sea, the remaining cells
are classified as land. Our estimation dataset consists of land cells within 50 km of a coast
cell, and each cell is an observation. There are 11,999 cells in this dataset of which 3,352
are coastal.
We compute the distance between coastal point i and coastal point j moving only over
water dij using the cost distance command in ArcGIS. Our key variable in this study,
called cdi , measures the number of other coastal cells which can be reached within shipping
2

We use version 3, available from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php.

14

distance d from cell i. Destinations may include islands but we exclude islands which are
smaller than 20km2 . We also create separate measures, one capturing only connectedness
to islands, and a second measuring connectedness to other points on the mainland coast.
While we use straight line or shortest distances, we realize that these would have rarely
corresponded to actual shipping routes. Sailors exploited wind patterns and currents, and
often used circular routes on their travels (Arnaud 2007). Our measure is not supposed
to mimic sailing routes directly but simply capture opportunities.3
Figure 2 displays the measure c500 for a distance of 500 km; darker points indicate better
connected locations. Measures for other distances are strongly positively correlated and
maps look roughly similar. The highest connectedness appears around Greece and Turkey
partly due to the islands, but also western Sicily and the area around Tunis. The figure
also highlights substantial variation of the connectedness measure within countries. The
grid of our analysis allows for spatial variation at a fine scale. Figure 3 shows a histogram
of the log connectedness measure for a distance of 500 km. The modes in the rightmost
part of the histogram are associated with points in the Aegean.
We interpret the measure cd as capturing connectivity. Of course, coastal shape could
proxy for other amenities. For example, a convex coastal shape forms a bay, which may
serve as a natural harbor. Notice that our 10 × 10 km grid is coarse enough to smooth
out many local geographic details. We will capture bays 50 km across but not those 5
km across. It is these more local features which are likely more relevant for locational
advantages like natural harbors. Our grid size also smooths out other local geographic
features, like changes in the coastline which have taken place over the past millennia, due,
for example, to sedimentation. The broader coastal shapes we capture have been roughly
3
We do not attempt to use wind patterns to calculate sailing times. Leidwanger (2013), combining
modern data on wind speeds and prevailing directions with the sailing logs from sea trials with the replica
of a 3rd century BC wreck on a Piraeus to Cyprus route, is an attempt to do this for a small area a
few hundred kilometers across off the Turkish coast. He discusses shortcomings and problems with this
approach. His work illustrates how far away we still are from being able to extend an exercise like this
to an area like the entire Mediterranean.

15

constant for the period since 3,000 BC, which we study (Agouridis 1997).
Another issue with our measure of connectivity is whether it only captures better potential
for trade or also more exposure to external threats like military raids. Overall, it was
probably easier to defend against coastal attacks than land-based ones (e.g. Cunliffe,
2008, p. 447) so this may not be a huge concern. But at some level it is obvious that
openness involves opportunities as well as risks. In this respect we measure the net effect
of better connectivity.
We also compute a global dataset based on a global grid, using a Cylindrical Equal Area
projection. We increase the cell size to 50 × 50 kilometers. This is for computational
convenience, but also our outcome variable at the global level varies only at the country
level and thus spatial precision is less relevant than in the Mediterranean dataset. While
we define our global connectedness measure for the whole world, our analysis focuses on
the part of the world between -60 degrees and 60 degrees latitude, as units outside that
range are unlikely candidates for early urbanization for climatic reasons. In the Southern
Hemisphere there is no landmass apart from the Antarctic below 60 degrees, while in
the Northern Hemisphere 60 degrees is close to Helsinki, Aberdeen, and Anchorage, well
north of climatic conditions particularly favorable to early settlement. We again compute
the distance from each coastal grid point to each other coastal grid point by moving only
over water. Figure 4 shows the global connectedness measure c500 . The most connected
coastal points are located again near Greece, but also in Southeast Asia, Chile, Britain,
and Northern Canada, while Western Africa and Eastern South America have few well
connected coastal points.4
We measure economic development by counting archaeological sites of settlements. Historians and archaeologists have long debated to what extent the material evidence that
has been discovered is representative of actual historical conditions. On one end of the
4

We only show the connectedness measure for countries where we also have outcome data, hence some
countries have missing cells in figure 4.

16

spectrum are warnings like that of Manning (2018, p. 64) that “archaeological evidence,
especially for settlement history, is extremely uneven for the first millennium BCE.” The
idea of a “positivist fallacy” of “making archaeological prominence and historical importance into almost interchangeable terms: in equating what is observable with what is
significant” goes back to at least Snodgrass (1987, p. 38). At the other end are optimists
such as Broodbank (2013), who concludes that “only a single imbalance is so devastating
that it threatens to undermine the integrity of the overall study of the Mediterranean.
This is the dearth of information on the early societies of the Mediterranean North Africa”
(p. 37). We deal with the North African exceptionalism by showing results excluding the
North African coast. But Broodbank concludes that “the low archaeological profile of
much of Mediterranean North Africa may not entirely be due to a lack of prospection ...
In the coming chapters we shall encounter several indications that this was indeed the
case” (2013, p. 39).
Whether the archaeological record is representative of history is one issue, another is
to obtain a quantitatively useful snapshot of the archaeological record. Our data on
settlements for our period of investigation come from the Pleiades Project, an electronic
database (Bagnall et al. 2014) at the University of North Carolina, the Stoa Consortium,
and the Institute for the Study of the Ancient World at New York University maintained
jointly by the Ancient World Mapping Center.5 The Pleiades dataset is a gazetteer for
ancient history. It draws on multiple sources to provide a comprehensive summary of the
current knowledge on geography in the ancient world. The starting point for the database
is the Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World (Talbert 2000); but it is an open
source project and material from multiple other scholarly sources has been added.6
The Pleiades data consists of three different databases of which we use the “pleiades5

Available at pleiades.stoa.org. We use a version of the dataset downloaded in September 2017.
Various historians have assured us that the Barrington Atlas is probably the most representative
source for the period we are studying.
6

17

places” dataset. It offers a categorization as well as an estimate of the start and end date
for each place. We only keep units that have a defined start and end date, and limit the
dataset to units that have a start date before 500 AD. We use two versions of these data,
one more restricted (which we refer to as “narrow”) and the other more inclusive (“wide”).
In the narrow one we only keep units that contain the word “urban” or “settlement”
in the categorization. These words can appear alongside other categorizations of minor
constructions, such as bridge, cemetery, lighthouse, temple, villa, and many others. In the
“wide” measure, we include any man-made structure, excluding only natural landmarks
(e.g. rivers) and administrative units.7
Some of the entries in the Pleiades dataset are located more precisely than others. The
dataset offers a confidence assessment consisting of the classifications precise, rough, and
unlocated. We only keep units with a precisely measured location.8 For both datasets,
as we merge the Pleiades data onto our grid we round locations to the nearest 10 × 10
kilometers and are thus robust to some minor noise.
Since the Pleiades data is originally based on the Barrington Atlas it covers sites from
the classical Greek and Roman period well and adequate coverage seems to extend back
to about 750 BC. Coverage of older sites seems much more limited as the number of
sites with earlier start dates drops precipitously. For example, our wide dataset has 1,565
sites in 750 BC and 5,707 in 1 AD but only 142 in 1,500 BC. While economic activity
and populations were surely lower in the Bronze Age, there are likely many earlier sites
missing in the data. As a consequence, our estimation results with the Pleiades data for
earlier periods may be less reliable.9
7
The raw Pleiades dataset contains some sites that are duplicates and/or have been moved to the
errata section of Pleiades. We drop those sites from our analysis.
8
An exception to this are roads and canals, which typically cannot be interpreted as a single point,
and where we therefore also include rough locations.
9
In Appendix A we present some alternative estimates based on the much earlier Archaeological Atlas
of the World (Whitehouse and Whitehouse 1975), which is more focused on the pre-Classical era but has
problems of its own.

18

Our measure of urbanization for a given cell is the number of sites that exist at time t
and fall into that cell. We prefer a count of sites over an indicator given that it is scale
invariant with respect to the grid size. The maximum number of sites in a cell for the
narrow Pleiades measure is 5 but for 98.5% of the cells the value is either 0 or 1.
For our global results, we have only a single early outcome measure: population in 1 AD
from McEvedy and Jones (1978). This is the same data as used by Ashraf and Galor
(2011b) for a similar purpose. Population density is measured at the level of modern
countries, and our sample includes 123 countries.

4

Specification and results

We run regressions of the following type:

uit = cdi βdt + Xi γt + eit ,

(1)

where uit is the urbanization measure for grid point i, cdi is the log of the connectivity
measure for distance d, and Xi are grid point control variables. For coastal cells, connectivity is simply the connectivity of the respective coastal cells. For inland cells, we
assign the connectivity level of the closest coastal cell. We only measure connectivity of a
location, not actual trade. Hence, when we refer to trade this may refer to the exchange
of goods but could also encompass migration and the spread of ideas. uit measures the
number of archaeological sites in each cell and year, which we view as proxy for the GDP
of an area. Growth manifests itself both in terms of larger populations as well as richer
elites in a Malthusian world. We would expect that the archaeological record captures
exactly these two dimensions.
We start by using only linear variables for latitude and longitude as control variables.
19

Latitude captures climatic variation due to the north-south gradient of the region. Climatic conditions also vary in the east-west orientation since proximity to the Atlantic
moderates weather variability (Manning 2018, p. 85), and the longitude variable controls
for this. Since some of our cells are up to 50 km inland, we also consider distance to
the coast as an additional control variable, as well as distance to the Fertile Crescent.
This may be important because agriculture spread from the Fertile Crescent throughout
the Mediterranean Basin, and various authors have linked the timing of the Neolithic
Revolution to later development (Diamond 1997; Hibbs and Olsson 2004; Comin, Easterly, and Gong 2010). We explore dropping the Aegean, to address concerns that our
results may be driven exclusively by developments around the Greek islands, by far the
best connected area in the Mediterranean. We also show results dropping North Africa
to address concerns that there may be fewer archaeological sites in North Africa due to a
relative lack of exploration. This may spuriously correlate with the fact that the coast is
comparatively straight. We cluster standard errors at the level of a grid of 200×200 km
following Bester, Conley and Hanson (2011). Using a 400×400 km grid as cluster variable
results in very similar standard errors.
Our measure of connectedness depends only on coastal and maritime geography and therefore is plausibly exogenous. However, it might be spuriously correlated with other factors
that affect early growth, such as agricultural productivity, topographic conditions, or
rivers, which provide inland connections. Those factors are hard to measure precisely.
Hence, instead of including them on the right-hand side of our regression equation as
control variables, we follow the suggestion of Pei, Pischke and Schwandt (2017) and show
that they are not systematically related to our measure of coastal connectivity.
The results of these balancing regressions are shown in table 1. In the first row, we relate
connectedness to agricultural productivity, which we construct using data from the FAOGAEZ database and following the methodology of Galor and Özak (2016): We convert

20

agroclimatic yields of 48 crops in 50 × 50 cells under rain-fed irrigation and low levels of
input into caloric yields and assign the maximal caloric yield of the closest 50 × 50 to our
grid cells. In the second row, we use Nunn and Puga’s (2012) measure of ruggedness,
averaged over our 10 × 10 km cells. Both ruggedness and agroclimatic conditions are
standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The third row looks at distance
to the nearest river. For this, we used Wikipedia to create a list of all rivers longer than
200 km and geocoded their paths from FAO Aquamaps, dropping tributaries. We then
calculate the distance from each cell to the nearest river, capping it at 50 km. To make
the interpretation easier, we then take the negative of this measure, so that a positive
coefficient on connectedness would mean that well-connected cells are closer to rivers. We
use distance to the nearest mine, using data from the OXREP Mines Database (2017),
coding distance in the same way as for rivers. For wind, we use the AMI Wind on ERS-1
Level 4 Monthly Gridded Mean Wind Fields provided by the Centre de Recherche et
d’Exploitation Satellitaire (CERSAT), at IFREMER, Plouzané (France). This dataset
contains monthly average wind speeds over oceans on a 1x1 degree grid. We average wind
speed over the sailing period from March to October, using the data for 1993. Each coast
cell is then assigned the value of the closest wind grid cell.
Column (1) in table 1 starts by showing the results of balancing regressions just controlling
for latitude and longitude. Column (2) also adds a control for distance to the Fertile
Crescent and the distance to the coast. Neither agricultural productivity, ruggedness,
nor distance to rivers or mines seem to have a large association with our measure of
connectedness once we control for the distance to the coast and the Fertile Crescent. The
exception is wind speed, which correlates positively with connectedness.
Columns (3) and (4) show that dropping the Aegean from the sample sometimes leads to
bigger associations but also impairs precision. When we control for distance to the coast
and Fertile Crescent in the sample without the Aegean, associations between the balancing

21

variables and connectedness tend to be small and insignificant, including for wind speed.
The only exception is distance to rivers but this relationship is very imprecise. Outside
of North Africa, a slight negative association between connectedness and agricultural
productivity arises with controls. We are comforted by the fact that our measure of
connectedness does not appear to be related to the five variables examined in the table in
a systematic way across subsamples. This is especially true once we control for distance to
the coast and the Fertile Crescent. As a result, we will use all of latitude, longitude, and
distance to the coast and Fertile Crescent as controls in the analyses that follow.

4.1

Basic results

In table 2, we start by showing results for connections within 500 km and the settlement
counts in 750 BC from our two datasets. At this time, we expect sailors to make extensive
use of direct sea connections, and hence the coefficients βdt from equation (1) should be
positive. This is indeed the case for a wide variety of specifications. We find stronger
results in the wide Pleiades data, and the association is highly significant. The magnitude
of these estimates is large. Increasing the connectedness of a cell by one percent increases
the number of archaeological sites by around 0.002. Table 2 reports the means of the
dependent variables. A hundred percent increase in connectedness more than doubles the
site count in the wide Pleiades data, suggesting an elasticity above one. The coefficient
is slightly lower for the narrow site definition. Coefficients decrease in magnitude when
we drop the Aegean in column (2), but they remain positive and substantial, indicating
that the Aegean alone was not driving the results in column (1). Dropping North Africa
in column (3) makes little difference compared to the original results.
A potential concern with our results might be that we are not capturing growth and
urbanization, but simply the location of harbors. To address this, table 3 repeats the
analysis of table 2, but omitting coastal cells themselves from the calculation of settlement
22

density. Here we are investigating whether a better connected coast gives rise to more
settlements further inland. The results are similar to those from the previous table,
indicating that the effects we observe are not driven by coastal locations but also manifest
themselves in the immediate hinterland of the coast. This bolsters the case that we are
seeing real growth effects of better connections. The same is true when we exclude short
connections within 100 km from the connectedness variable in table 4. This is important
as we are primarily interested in the longer range connections which opened up with open
sea crossing.
The connectedness variable measures how many coastal points a ship can reach from a
given starting destination. Coastal points are only a proxy for market access. A more
direct measure would be to measure how many settlements a ship can reach, rather than
how many coastal points. In table 5 we use such a more direct measure of market access
by counting the number of sites within distance d. To account for the endogenous location
of settlements we instrument this market access with the connectedness variable, both in
logs. The first stage F-tests we report show that connectedness is strongly correlated with
market access. The magnitude of the 2SLS effect is similar for all these specifications to
the one seen in the connectedness estimation. A one percent increase in market access
increases the number of sites by around 0.002.10 This effect is large compared with existing
estimates of the impact of market access. For example, it is about twice as large as the
estimate for the land value elasticity in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). This may reflect
the unusual importance of connections in the Iron Age Mediterranean, where trade served
both comparative advantage and insurance functions, as well as facilitating migrations and
the spread of ideas. It may also show that in a less technologically advanced economy,
market access mattered more relative to other fundamentals.
Table 6 shows some further robustness checks of our results for different subsamples. Col10

Table 7 in Appendix A contrasts these estimates with an OLS estimator. Magnitudes are similar
when we exclude the Aegean. Otherwise the 2SLS estimates are larger.

23

umn (1) repeats our baseline results from table 2. Columns (2) to (4) use only continental
cells as starting points, dropping island locations. In column (2), we keep both continent
and island locations as potential destinations. Results are similar. Columns (3) and (4)
explore whether it is coastal shape or the locations of islands which drive our results.
Here, we calculate connectedness using either only island cells as destinations (in column
4) or only continental cells (in column 3). Both matter, but islands are more important
for our story. These results suggest that the relationships we find are not driven only by
a particular subsample or connection measure.11
Our previous results are for connections within a 500 km radius. Figure 5 displays coefficients for connectivities at different distances, using the basic specification with the
narrow Pleiades set of sites in the year 750 BC. It demonstrates that coefficients are fairly
similar when we calculate our connectivity measure for other distances. This is likely
due to the fact that these measures correlate pretty closely across the various distances.
There is a small hump with a peak after 500 km, probably distances which were important
during the Iron Age when sailors started to make direct connections between Cyprus and
Crete or Crete and Sicily. But we don’t want to make too much of this.
Figure 6 shows results from the narrow Pleiades data over time using the 500 km connectedness measure. The total number of sites differs by year. To enable comparison over time
we divide the left hand side by the total number of sites in each year, turning the estimates
effectively into elasticities. The figure has various features. Coefficients are positive and
sizable but mostly insignificant until 1,000 BC but increase in 750 BC, consistent with the
Iron Age expansion of open sea routes. From 500 BC, the effects of connectivity decline
and no correlation between sites and connectivity is left by the end of the Roman Empire.
In table 2, we have demonstrated that the large association between connectedness and
11

We find very similar results using a measure of eigenvector centrality instead of our connectedness
variable, which adds weighting to connecting cells, but it is very highly correlated to the original connections measure.

24

the presence of sites is replicated across various datasets and specifications for the year
750 BC, so we are fairly confident in that result. Figure 6 therefore raises two questions:
Is the upturn in coefficients between 1,000 BC and 750 BC real or an artefact of the data?
And does the association between sites and connectedness vanish during the course of the
Roman Empire? On both counts there are reasons to be suspicious of the Pleiades data.
Coverage of sites from before 750 BC is poor in the data while coverage during the Roman
period may be too extensive. We explore this last issue in the following subsection.

4.2

Persistence

Once geographical conditions have played a role in a site location, do we expect this relationship to be stable into the future? There are two reasons why the answer would be
affirmative. Connections should have continued to play a role during the period of the Roman Empire when trade in the Mediterranean reached yet a more substantial level. Even
if the relative role of maritime connectivity declined—maybe because sailors got better
and distance played less of a role, or other modes of transport, e.g. on Roman roads, also
became cheaper—human agglomerations created during the Phoenician period may have
persisted. A large literature in urban economics and economic geography has addressed
this question and largely found substantial persistence of city locations, sometimes across
periods of major historical disruption (Davis and Weinstein 2002, Bleakley and Lin 2012,
Bosker and Buringh 2017, Michaels and Rauch 2018, among others). Either explanation
is at odds with the declining coefficients over time in figure 6 after 750 BC.
We suspect that the declining coefficients in the Pleiades data stems from the fact that
the site density is becoming too high during the Roman period. In 750 BC there are
1,565 sites in the wide dataset and this number increases to 5,707 in 1 AD at the height
of the Roman Empire.12 There are only 11,999 cells in our dataset. As a result, our grid
12

See table 8 in the appendix for more details on the numbers of sites in each dataset and time period.

25

is quickly becoming saturated with sites after the start of the Iron Age. We suspect that
this simply eliminates a lot of useful variation within our dataset: By the height of the
Roman Empire many grid points will be the location of archaeological sites. Moreover,
existing sites may be concentrated in well-connected locations already and maybe these
sites grow further but our data don’t provide an extensive margin of settlement size. New
settlements after 750 BC, on the other hand, might arise in unoccupied locations, which
are actually less well connected.
In order to investigate this, we split the sites in the Pleiades data into those which existed
already in 750 BC but remained in the data in subsequent periods and those which first
entered at some date after 750 BC. Figure 7 shows results for the period 500 BC to
500 AD. As in figure 6, we show coefficients divided by the mean number of sites in the
period. The blue, solid line shows the original coefficients for all sites. The black, broken
line shows coefficients for sites present in 750 BC which remained in the data while the
red, dashed line refers to sites that have newly entered since 750 BC. The coefficients
for remaining sites are more stable (and only fall because site density rises), while the
relationship between connectedness and the location of entering sites becomes weaker and
even turns negative towards the end of the period. Because the new entrants make up an
increasing share of the total over time, the total coefficients (solid line) are being dragged
down by selective site entry towards the end of the Roman era. This is consistent with the
results of Bosker and Buringh (2017) for a later period, who find that having a previously
existing city close by decreases a location’s chance of becoming a city seed itself.

4.3

Results for a world scale

Finally, we corroborate our findings for the Mediterranean at a world scale, using population in 1 AD from McEvedy and Jones (1978) as outcome variable. Population density is
measured at the level of modern countries, and the sample includes 123 countries. Recall
26

that we compute connectivity for coastal cells based on a grid of 50 x 50 km cells for this
exercise.
We aggregate the world data to the level of countries, which is the unit at which the
dependent variable is measured anyway. Figure 8 is a scatter plot of c500 against log
population density at the country level. The weights in this figure correspond to the
number of coastal grid points in each country. The line in the figure comes from a
standard bivariate regression and has a slope of 1.24 (0.99). This estimate very similar
to the implied elasticity for the Mediterranean in table 2, although the nature of the
dependent variable is different. Note that many Mediterranean countries can be found
in the upper right quadrant of this plot, highlighting how connectivity in the basin may
have contributed to the early development of this region.
Additionally, we regress log population density in 1 AD on log 500km connectedness,
controlling for absolute values of latitude and again weighting by the number of coastal
grid points in each country.13 This results in a point estimate for connectivity of 1.67 with
a standard error of 0.85.

5

Conclusion

We argue that connectedness matters for human development. Some geographic locations
are advantaged because it is easier to reach a larger number of neighbors. We exploit
this idea to study the relationship between connectedness and early development around
the Mediterranean. We argue that this association should emerge most potently when
sailors first started crossing open seas systematically. This happened during the time when
Phoenician, Greek, and Etruscan sailors and settlers expanded throughout the Mediter13

Neither east-west orientation nor distance from the Fertile Crescent seems to make as much sense on
a world scale. Unlike for the Mediterranean, there were various centers of early development around the
world.

27

ranean between 800 and 500 BC. Barry Cunliffe (2008) calls this period at the eve of
Classical Antiquity “The Three Hundred Years That Changed the World” (p. 270).
This is not to say that sea trade and maritime networks were unimportant earlier. While
we find clear evidence of a significant association between connectedness and the presence
of archaeological sites for 750 BC our results are more mixed as to whether this relationship
began to emerge at that period because the data on earlier sites are more shaky. On the
other hand, we find that once these locational advantages emerged the favored locations
retain their urban developments over the ensuing centuries. This is in line with a large
literature on urban persistence.

28

References
[1] Abulafia, David. 2011. The Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean. London: Penguin; New York: Oxford University Press.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2005. The Rise of Europe:
Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth. American Economic
Review 95: 546-579.
[3] Agouridis, Christos. 1997. Sea Routes and Navigation in the Third Millennium Aegean.
Oxford Journal of Archaeology 16: 1-24.
[4] Algaze, Guillermo. 2008. Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization. The Evolution of an Urban Landscape. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
[5] Arnaud, Pascal. 2007. Diocletian’s Prices Edict: The Prices of Seaborne Transport and
the Average Duration of Maritime Travel. Journal of Roman Archaeology 20: 321-336.
[6] Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2011a. Cultural Diversity, Geographical Isolation,
and the Origin of the Wealth of Nations. NBER Working Paper 17640.
[7] Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2011b. Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian
Epoch. American Economic Review 101: 2003-2041.
[8] Bagnall, Roger et al. (eds.) 2014. Pleiades: A Gazetteer of Past Places, http://
pleiades.stoa.org
[9] Ballard, Robert D. Lawrence E. Stager, Daniel Master, Dana Yoerger, David Mindell,
Louis L. Whitcomb, Hanumant Singh, and Dennis Piechota. 2002. Iron Age Shipwrecks
in Deep Water off Ashkelon, Israel. American Journal of Archaeology 106: 151-168.
[10] Barjamovic, Gojko, Thomas Chaney, Kerem A. Coşar, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2017. Trade,
Mechants, and the Lost Cities of the Bronze Age. NBER Working Paper 23992.

29

[11] Bester, C. Alan, Timothy G. Conley, and Christian B. Hansen. 2011. Inference with
Dependent Data Using Cluster Covariance Estimators. Journal of Econometrics 165:
137-151.
[12] Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. Portage and Path Dependence. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127: 587-644.
[13] Bosker, Maarten, and Eltjo Buringh. 2017. City Seeds: Geography and the Origins
of the European City System. Journal of Urban Economics 98:139-157.
[14] Braudel, Fernand. 2001. The Mediterranean in the Ancient World. London: Penguin
Books.
[15] Broodbank, Cyprian. 2006. The Origins and Early Development of Mediterranean
Maritime Activity. Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 19.2: 199-230.
[16] Broodbank, Cyprian. 2013. Making of the Middle Sea. London: Thames and Hudson
Limited.
[17] Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong. 2010. Was the Wealth of Nations
Determined in 1000 BC? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2: 65-97.
[18] Cucchi, Thomas, Jean Denis Vigne, and Jean Christophe Auffray. 2005. First Occurrence of the House Mouse (Mus musculus domesticus Schwarz & Schwarz, 1943)
in the Western Mediterranean: a Zooarchaeological Revision of Subfossil Occurrences.
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 84.3: 429-445.
[19] Cunliffe, Barry. 2008. Europe Between the Oceans. 9000 BC - AD 1000. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
[20] Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein. 2002. Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
Geography of Economic Activity. American Economic Review 92: 1269-1289.

30

[21] Diamond, Jared M. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies .
New York: W. W. Norton.
[22] Dixon, John, Johnston R. Cann, and Colin Renfrew. 1965. Obsidian in the Aegean.
The Annual of the British School at Athens 60: 225-247.
[23] Dixon, J. E., J. R. Cann, and Colin Renfrew. 1968. Obsidian and the Origins of
Trade. Scientific American 218.3: 38-46.
[24] Donaldson, Dave. 2018. Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure. American Economic Review. 108(4-5): 899-934.
[25] Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. Railroads and American Economic
Growth: a “Market Access” Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131: 799-858.
[26] FAO/IIASA, 2010. Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). FAO, Rome, Italy
and IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria
[27] Feyrer, James. 2009. Trade and Income–Exploiting Time Series in Geography. NBER
Working Paper 14910.
[28] Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer. 1999. Does Trade Cause Growth? American
Economic Review 89: 379-399.
[29] Galor, Oded, and Ömer Özak. 2016. The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference.
American Economic Review 106: 3064-3103.
[30] Hanlon, W. Walker. 2017. Temporary Shocks and Persistent Effects in Urban
Economies: Evidence from British Cities after the U.S. Civil War. Review of Economics and Statistics 99: 67-79.
[31] Hibbs, Douglas A. and Ola Olsson. 2004. Geography, Biogeography, and Why Some
Countries Are Rich and Others Are Poor. Prodeedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 101: 3715-3720.
31

[32] Horden, Peregrine, and Nicholas Purcell. 2000. The Corrupting Sea: a Study of
Mediterranean History. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
[33] Knappett, Carl, Tim Evans, and Ray Rivers. 2008. Modelling Maritime Interaction
in the Aegean Bronze Age. Antiquity 82: 1009-1024.
[34] Leidwanger, Justin. 2013. Modeling Distance with Time in Ancient Mediterranean
Seafaring: a GIS Application for the Interpretation of Maritime Connectivity. Journal
of Archaeological Science 40: 3302-3308.
[35] Manning, J.G. 2018. The Open Sea. The Economic Life of the Mediterranean World
from the Iron Age to the Rise of Rome. Princeton, Oxford: Princeton University Press.
[36] McEvedy, Colin 1967. The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. Hamondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd.
[37] McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. Hamondsworth: Penguin Books Ltd.
[38] Michaels, Guy, and Ferdinand Rauch. 2018. Resetting the Urban Network: 117-2012.
Economic Journal 128: 378-412.
[39] Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga. 2012. Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography
in Africa. Review of Economics and Statistics 94: 20-36.
[40] OXREP Mines Database. 2017. The Oxford Roman Economy Project, downloaded
from http:oxrep.classics.ox.ac.ukdatabasesmines database in December (2017).
[41] Pascali, Luigi. 2017. The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade and Economic Development. American Economic Review 107: 2821-2854.
[42] Pei, Zhuan, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Hannes Schwandt. 2017. Poorly Measured
Confounders Are More Useful on the Left than the Right. NBER Working Paper
23232.
32

[43] Redding, Stephen J., and Daniel M. Sturm. 2008. The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence
from German Division and Reunification. American Economic Review 98: 1766-97.
[44] Redding, Stephen, and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. Economic Geography and International Inequality. Journal of International Economics 62: 53-82.
[45] Sherratt, Susan, and Andrew Sherratt. 1993. The Growth of the Mediterranean Economy in the Early First Millennium BC. World Achaeology 24: 361-378.
[46] Snodgrass, Anthony M. 1987. An Archaeology of Greece: The Present State and
Future Scope of a Discipline. Berkeley: University of California Press.
[47] Talbert, Richard JA, ed. 2000. Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World:
Map-by-map Directory. Princeton, Oxford: Princeton University Press.
[48] Temin, Peter. 2006. Mediterranean Trade in Biblical Times. In Ronald Findlay et
al., eds. Eli Heckscher, International Trade, and Economic History. Cambridge: MIT
Press, 141-156.
[49] Temin, Peter. 2013. The Roman Market Economy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
[50] Whitehouse, David, and Ruth Whitehouse. 1975. Archaeological Atlas of the World.
London: Thames and Hudson.

33

Figure 1: Timeline

Figure 2: Connectedness in the Mediterranean for a 500 km distance

34

Figure 3: Distribution of log connectedness at 500 km distance

Figure 4: Connectedness in the world for a 500 km distance

35

Figure 5: Coefficients for narrow Pleiades sites by distance, 750BC

36

Figure 6: Scaled coefficients for narrow Pleiades sites over time, 500 km connectedness
measure

37

Figure 7: Scaled coefficients for wide Pleiades sites: Entry, existing, total

38

Figure 8: Connectedness and population density around 1AD at the world scale

Weights reflect length of coasts of countries. For graphical reasons, the figure omits Bermuda, which
is an outlier in terms of connectedness. This is inconsequential for our estimates. The weighted slope
(standard error) with Bermuda is 1.24 (0.99), as opposed to 1.26 (1.01) without it. When we include a
control variable for the absolute latitude the slope becomes 1.67 (0.85) with Bermuda and 1.70 (0.86)
without it.

39

Table 1: Balancing checks
Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Agricultural productivity
(following Galor and Özak (2016))

0.46
(0.08)

0.00
(0.10)

0.53
(0.14)

0.07
(0.16)

0.16
(0.11)

-0.17
(0.09)

Ruggedness
(following Nunn and Puga (2012))

0.19
(0.14)

0.15
(0.19)

0.06
(0.29)

-0.05
(0.28)

-0.29
(0.16)

-0.13
(0.16)

River proximity

-3.02
(1.73)

-2.86
(2.14)

-4.40
(2.96)

-3.83
(3.33)

-2.46
(2.09)

-2.94
(2.19)

Mines proximity

-0.36
(0.37)

0.11
(0.74)

-0.12
(1.21)

0.42
(1.47)

-1.95
(0.74)

-0.03
(0.67)

Wind

0.32
(0.16)

1.05
(0.23)

-0.52
(0.30)

0.24
(0.34)

0.68
(0.17)

1.20
(0.22)

Observations

11999

11999

10049

10049

9448

9448

X

X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X

Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

Coefficients from regressions of various dependent variables on 500 km log connectedness.
Standard errors clustered at the level of 200×200 km cells, in parentheses.

Table 2: Basic results
Dependent variable

Dep. var. mean

(1)

(2)

(3)

Pleiades wide 750BC

0.130

0.207
(0.056)

0.102
(0.043)

0.203
(0.056)

Pleiades narrow 750BC

0.103

0.156
(0.048)

0.074
(0.035)

0.155
(0.048)

11999

10049

9448

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Observations
Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

Coefficients from regressions on 500 km log connectedness. Standard errors clustered at
the level of 200×200 km cells, in parentheses.

40

Table 3: Results excluding coastal cells from outcome definition
Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

Pleiades wide 750BC

0.174
(0.064)

0.093
(0.047)

0.182
(0.063)

Pleiades narrow 750BC

0.130
(0.053)

0.072
(0.041)

0.139
(0.053)

8647

7552

6631

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Observations
Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

Coefficients from regressions on 500 km log connectedness. Standard
errors clustered at the level of 200×200 km cells, in parentheses.
Coastal cells and their sites are omitted from the sample.

Table 4: Results excluding short connections
Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

Pleiades wide 750BC

0.200
(0.052)

0.101
(0.042)

0.196
(0.053)

Pleiades narrow 750BC

0.151
(0.045)

0.075
(0.034)

0.151
(0.045)

Observations

11999

10049

9448

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

Coefficients from regressions on 100 km - 500 km log connectedness.
Standard errors clustered at the level of 200x200 km cells, in parentheses.

41

Table 5: 2SLS regressions for market instrumenting with connectedness
Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.225
(0.056)
32

0.099
(0.038)
17

0.250
(0.065)
37

First-stage F statistic

0.178
(0.050)
30

0.073
(0.031)
16

0.213
(0.060)
32

Observations

11999

10049

9448

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Pleiades wide 750BC
First-stage F statistic
Pleiades narrow 750BC

Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

Coefficients from a 2SLS regression of various dependent variables
on log market access for 500 km. In the first stage market access
is instrumented using 500 km log connectedness. Standard errors
clustered at the level of 200x200 km cells, in parentheses.

Table 6: Results for different connections
(1)

Standard 500 km connectedness
(2)
(3)
(4)

Pleiades wide 750BC

0.207
(0.056)

0.170
(0.076)

0.065
(0.071)

0.078
(0.026)

Pleiades narrow 750BC

0.156
(0.048)

0.141
(0.062)

0.062
(0.057)

0.062
(0.021)

Observations

11999

10400

10400

8937

All
All

Continent
All

Continent
Continent

Continent
Island

From
To

Coefficients from a regression on 500 km log connectedness for different
subsamples. Robust standard errors, clustered at the level of 200×200 km
cells, in parentheses. All regressions control for longitude, latitude, and
distance to the coast and the Fertile Crescent.

42

6
6.1

Appendix A: Additional specifications
OLS vs 2SLS

Table 7 provides the 2SLS market access results from table 5, and contrasts them with
their corresponding OLS coefficients.

6.2

Alternative data sources

The results in the body of this paper rely on the Pleiades dataset. We repeat part of
the exercise using two alternative data sources. First we created an additional dataset of
sites from the Archaeological Atlas of the World (Whitehouse and Whitehouse 1975). The
advantage of the Whitehouse Atlas is that it focuses heavily on the pre-historic period, and
therefore complements the Pleiades data well. We therefore hoped it would help resolve
the issue of whether the association between sites and connectedness changed between the
Bronze and Iron Ages.
One possible disadvantage of the Whitehouse data is that it is 40 years old. Although
there has been much additional excavation in the intervening period, there is little reason
to believe that it is unrepresentative for the broad coverage of sites and locations. The
interpretation of the archaeological evidence may well have changed but this is of little
consequence for our exercise. Another drawback of the Whitehouse Atlas is that the
maps are much smaller than in the Barrington Atlas. As a result, there may have been
a tendency by the authors to choose the number of sites so as to fill each map without
overcrowding it. This, however, is offset by the tendency to include maps for smaller areas
in locations with many sites. For example, there are separate maps for each of Malta,
Crete, and Cyprus but only three maps for all of Iberia. Nevertheless, the particular
choice of maps may have influenced which sites are recorded in different parts of the

43

Mediterranean.
The number of sites each period is very different in the Pleiades, Whitehouse, and Barrington data (which we discuss below). Table 8 displays the number of sites we have
in each dataset. We repeat the exercise with the Pleiades data from figure 5 using the
Whitehouse data in figure 9, showing coefficients scaled by the average number of sites
per cell for comparability again. We find positive associations between the connectedness
measure and sites in the Whitehouse Atlas, both for the Bronze and Iron Age. As in the
Pleiades data, the association is strongest for the measure around 500km. To account
for the possibly artificial difference in site density across space in the Whitehouse Atlas,
we include map fixed effects, where each fixed effect corresponds to sites visible on one
of the Whitehouse maps (a site can be shown on more than one map). Figure 10 shows
that results change a bit and become noisier, which reflects the fact that the maps absorb
some geographic variation and the relatively small number of sites in the Whitehouse
data. Given the confidence intervals, no clear pattern emerges from 10.
As a second alternative, we record sites directly from the Barrington Atlas (Talbert et al
2000). This atlas provides a unified source of towns and cities in the Greek and Roman
period. One advantage of the Barrington maps is that they display the sizes of sites in
three broad size classes but these are not recorded in the Barrington gazetteer, on which
the Pleiades data are based. We digitize the location of cites on the main overview map
of this atlas to have one unified source of cities, and record the size of cities visible on
that map. The three different size classes are indicated by different font sizes on the
map. Instead of an indicator for a site, we code the dependent variable with weights of
1, 2, and 3 corresponding to small, medium and large cities. We believe that this coding
corresponds roughly to log size. The largest cities during this period had populations in
the 100,000s (e.g. Rome, Carthage), while the smallest ones would have had populations
in the 1,000s. This weighting by size allows us to add an intensive margin to the analysis.

44

We merge the sites from the Barrington map with the Pleiades dataset, which records
other attributes of the cities, like the time when the site was active. Our dependent
variable is either the size class of the city in a cell or the sum of the size classes if multiple
cities are present in a cell. We scale the dependent variable by dividing by its mean in
the period again to facilitate comparisons over time.
Figure 11 displays the scaled regression coefficients over the period 750 BC to 500 AD. It
shows a similar downward trend of coefficients as we found in the Pleiades dataset in figure
6. Whether we weight cities by their size or not has very little influence on the results.
This suggests that connectedness did not lead sites in better connected places to grow;
rather the effects we find must be explained by entry. We should note that the Barrington
size classification is not ideal as we only have one single size indicator. Presumably the
Barrington Atlas records the peak size of the city but it does not provide any information
of size over time. We also note that the Barrington results are very noisy, which reflects
the relatively small number of sites on the map we coded.

45

Table 7: Market access regressions: 2SLS & OLS
2SLS
Dependent variable

OLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.225
(0.056)
32

0.099
(0.038)
17

0.250
(0.065)
37

0.124
(0.023)

0.091
(0.021)

0.147
(0.031)

0.073
(0.031)
16

0.213
(0.060)
32

0.091
(0.018)

0.065
(0.016)

0.121
(0.026)

First-stage F statistic

0.178
(0.050)
30

Observations

11999

10049

9448

11999

10049

9448

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Pleiades wide 750BC
First-stage F statistic
Pleiades narrow 750BC

Controls:
Longitude and latitude
Distance to coast and Fertile Crescent
Dropping Aegean
Dropping North Africa

X

X

Coefficients from 2SLS and OLS regressions using 500km market access. Standard errors clustered
at the level of 200x200 km cells, in parentheses.

Table 8: Number of sites in the different datasets
Time
period

Pleiades
narrow

Pleiades
wide

-3000
-2000
-1500
-1000
-750
-500
0
500

28
85
105
100
1,235
2,126
3,617
2,265

37
119
142
116
1,565
2,772
5,707
3,667

Whitehouse

Barrington

243
322

46

75
97
120
107

Figure 9: Scaled Whitehouse results by distance, different periods

Figure 10: Scaled Whitehouse results by distance, different periods with map fixed effects

47

Figure 11: Scaled Barrington results over time, 500km connectedness measure

48

7

Appendix B: Coding of Whitehouse sites

To create the Whitehouse dataset, we geo-referenced all entries within 50km of the coasts
on 28 maps covering the Mediterranean and Black Sea in the Whitehouse Atlas ourselves.
Using the information in the map titles and accompanying text, we classified each map
as belonging to one of three periods: the Neolithic, the Bronze Age, or the Iron Age and
later. Some maps contain sites from multiple periods but give a classification of sites,
which we use. Other maps straddle periods without more detailed timing information. In
this case, we classified sites into the three broad periods ourselves using resources on the
internet. In a few cases, it is not possible to classify sites clearly as either Neolithic or
Bronze Age in which case we classified them as both (see below for details).
Table 9 provides details of our classification of the maps. The maps on pages 72, 76, 90,
and 96 straddle both the Neolithic and Bronze Age period, while the map on page 102
could refer to either the Bronze or Iron Age. For these maps, we narrowed down the
dating of sites based on resources we could find on the Internet about the respective site.
Table 10 provides details of our dating.

49

Table 9: Classification of maps in the Whitehouse Atlas
Pages
72f.
74f.
76f.
90f.
92f.
94f.
96f.
98f.
100f.
102f.
104f.
106f.
108f.
110f.
112f.
114f.
116f.
118f.
120f.
122
123ff.
126ff.
129ff.
140f.
164f.
172f.
174f.
176f.

Map title/details
Neolithic to Bronze Age sites in Anatolia
Hittites and their successors
Late prehistoric and proto-historic sites in Near East
Neolithic to Bronze Age sites in Western Anatolia and the Cyclades
Neolithic sites in Greece
Cyprus
Crete
Mycenaean and other Bronze Age sites in Greece
The Mycenaeans abroad
The Phoenicians at home
The Phoenicians abroad
Archaic and Classical Greece
The Greeks overseas
Neolithic sites in the central Mediterranean
Copper and Bronze Age sites in Italy
Copper and Bronze Age sites in Sicily and the Aeolian Islands
Copper and Bronze Age sites in Corsica and Sardinia
Early Iron Age sites in the central Mediterranean
The central Mediterranean: Carthaginians, Greeks and Etruscans
Malta
Neolithic sites in Iberia
Copper and Bronze Age sites in Iberia
Early Iron Age sites in Iberia
Neolithic and Copper age sites in France and Switzerland
Bronze Age sites in France and Belgium
The spread of Urnfield Cultures in Europe
The Hallstatt and La Tene Iron Ages
Iron Age sites in Europe

50

Time period
Bronze Age or earlier
Bronze Age
Bronze Age or earlier
Bronze Age or earlier
Neolithic
various
Bronze Age or earlier
Bronze Age
Bronze Age
Bronze Age or Iron Age
Iron Age or later
Iron Age or later
Iron Age or later
Neolithic
Bronze Age
Bronze Age
Bronze Age
Iron Age or later
Iron Age or later
Bronze Age or earlier
Neolithic
Bronze Age
Iron Age or later
Neolithic
Bronze Age
Iron Age or later
Iron Age or later
Iron Age or later

Table 10: Classification of specific sites in the Whitehouse Atlas
Map page
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
76
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
90

Site name
Dundartepe
Fikirtepe
Gedikli
Karatas
Kayislar
Kizilkaya
Kumtepe
Maltepe
Mentese
Mersin
Silifke
Tarsus
Tilmen Huyuk
Troy
Amrit/Marathus
Amuq
Aradus
Atchana/Alalakh
Beisamoun
Byblos
Gaza
Gezer
Hazorea
Kadesh
Megiddo
Mersin
Samaria
Sidon
Tainat
Tell Beit Mirsim
Tyre
Ugarit/Ras Shamra
Akrotiraki
Chalandriani
Dhaskalio
Dokathismata
Emborio
Fikirtepe
Glykoperama
Grotta
Heraion
Kephala
Kumtepe
Mavrispilia
Paroikia
Pelos
Phylakopi
Poliochni
Protesilaos
Pyrgos

Neolithic
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1

Bronze Age
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

51

Iron Age
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Source
see notes
Whitehouse
TAY Project
Wikipedia
TAY Project
Wikipedia (Kizilkaya/Burdur)
Wikipedia
TAY Project
TAY Project
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
TAY Project
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Wikipedia (Arwad)
Wikipedia
see notes
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Wikipedia (Kadesh (Syria))
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
New World Encyclopedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
see notes
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
see notes
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia (see notes)
see notes
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
see notes
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
Wikipedia (see notes)
Whitehouse
Whitehouse

Table 10: Classification of specific sites in the Whitehouse Atlas, continued
Map page
90
90
90
90
90
90
90
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94

Site name
Saliagos
Spedos
Thermi
Tigani
Troy
Vathy
Vryokastro
Alambra
Amathous
Anoyira
Arpera
Athienou/Golgoi
Ayia Irini
Ayios Iakovos
Ayios Sozomenos
Dhenia
Enkomi
Erimi
Idalion
Kalavassos
Kalopsidha
Karmi
Karpasia
Kato Paphos
Khirokitia
Kition
Kouklia/ Old Paphos
Kourion
Krini
Ktima
Kyrenia
Kythrea
Lapithos
Myrtou
Nikosia
Nitovikla
Palaiokastro
Palaioskoutella
Petra tou Limniti
Philia
Pyla-Kokkinokremmos
Salamis
Sinda
Soli/Ambelikou
Sotira
Troulli
Vasilia
Vouni
Vounous

Neolithic
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0

Bronze Age
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1

52

Iron Age
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Source
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia (Lesbos)
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
see notes
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse

Table 10: Classification of specific sites in the Whitehouse Atlas, continued
Map page
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96

Site name
Amnisos
Apesokari
Apodhoulou
Arkhanes
Armenoi
Ayia Triadha
Diktaean Cave
Erganos
Fournou Korifi
Gournes
Gournia
Idaean Cave
Kamares Cave
Karfi
Katsamba
Khania
Knossos
Krasi
Mallia
Mirsini
Mirtos
Mitropolis
Mochlos
Monastiraki
Mouliana
Palaikastro
Petras
Phaistos
Pirgos (Nirou Khani)
Platanos
Plati
Praisos
Pseira
Rousses
Sklavokampos
Stavromenos
Tylissos
Vasiliki
Vathypetro
Zakro
Zou

Neolithic
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

Bronze Age
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

53

Iron Age
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Source
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
Minoan Crete
Wikipedia (Hagia Triadna)
Wikipedia (Psychro Cave)
Whitehouse
Minoan Crete
Whitehouse
Minoan Crete
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
see notes
Wikipedia (Malia, Crete)
see notes
Whitehouse
Minoan Crete
Whitehouse
Minoan Crete
Wikipedia
see notes
Minoan Crete
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Wikipedia
see notes
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Minoan Crete
Wikipedia
Minoan Crete

Table 10: Classification of specific sites in the Whitehouse Atlas, continued
Map page
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
102
122
122
122
122
122

Site name
Adana (Ataniya)
Al Mina
Amrit/Marathus
Antioch
Aradus
Askalon
Atchana/Alalakh
Atlit
Beersheba
Berytus
Byblos
Enkomi
Gaza
Hazor
Jaffa
Kadesh
Kourion
Megiddo
Minet el-Beida
Nikosia
Salamis
Samaria
Sarepta
Shechem
Sidon
Simyra
Tarsus
Tripolis
Tyre
Ugarit/Ras Shamra
Bahrija
Borg in Nadur
Ghar Dalam
Skorba
Tarxien

Neolithic
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1

Bronze Age
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1

54

Iron Age
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

Source
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
see notes
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
New World Encyclopedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse
Whitehouse

Sources and notes for site classification
Dundartepe: The Cambridge Ancient History, 3rd ed. Vol. 1, Part 2, Early History of
the Middle East, eds. I. E. S. Edwards, C. J. Gadd, N. G. L. Hammond, 1971, p. 400 and
Ancient West and East, Vol 1, Number 2, 2002, ed. Gocha R. Tsetskhladze, p.245
TAY Project: http://www.tayproject.org/veritabeng.html under the site name
Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org under the site name
Beisamoun: Israel Antiquities Authority, Beisamoun (Mallaha), http://www.hadashot-esi.
org.il/report_detail_eng.aspx?id=809
New World Encyclopedia: http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org under the site name
Tell Beit Mirsim: Biblewalks, http://www.biblewalks.com/Sites/BeitMirsim.html
Akrotiraki: http://www.aegeanislands.gr/discover-aigaio/archaeology-aigiao/
archaeology-aigaio.html
Dokathismata: Entry under Amnorgos, end date unclear but clearly settled during the
Classical period
Emborio: www.archaeology.wiki/blog/2016/03/07
/history-chios-seen-exhibits-archaeological-museum/
Grotta: http://www.naxos.gr/en/naxos/sights-and-sightseeing/archaeological-sites/
article/?aid=19
Poliochni: End date is unclear
Vryokastro: http://www.tinosecret.gr/tour/museums/512-vryokastro.htm
Minoan Crete: http://www.minoancrete.comusingpull-downmenus
Knossos: Wikipedia lists Knossos as abandoned around 1100 BC but the Whitehouse
Atlas has it appear again on Iron Age map 106
55

Mallia: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/artifact?name=Mallia&object=Site
Mouliana: https://moulianaproject.org
Stavromenos:
https://greece.terrabook.com/rethymno/page/archaelogical-site-of-stavromenos
Minet el-Beida: Wikipedia. No independent dating info for Minet el-Beida. It is routinely
referred to as the harbor of Ugarit. Hence dating the same as Ugarit

56

