                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DOES WHEN YOU DIE DEPEND ON WHERE YOU LIVE? EVIDENCE FROM
                           HURRICANE KATRINA

                                          Tatyana Deryugina
                                            David Molitor

                                         Working Paper 24822
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24822


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                July 2018
We thank Amy Finkelstein, Don Fullerton, Matthew Gentzkow, Osea Giuntella, Nathaniel Hendren,
Robert Kaestner, Jonathan Ketcham, Matthew Notowidigdo, Julian Reif, Nicholas Sanders, David
Slusky, and seminar participants at the ASSA Annual Meeting, the AERE Summer Conference, the
Annual Health Econometrics Workshop, Arizona State University, the BFI Health Economics Initiative
Annual Conference, Cornell University, East Carolina University, Georgia State University, the Heartland
Environmental and Resource Economics Workshop, the Illinois pERE seminar, Indiana University,
the Junior Health Economics Summit, the London School of Economics, MHEC-X, the National University
of Singapore, the CEPRA/NBER Workshop on Ageing and Health, the NBER EEE Spring Meeting,
the NBER Summer Institute, SIEPR, the Symposium on Natural Resource Governance for Young
Scholars, the University of British Columbia, the University of California at Santa Barbara, the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst, the University of South Carolina, and the University of Virginia for
helpful comments. Isabel Musse, Prakrati Thakur, Fan Wu, and Zhu Yang provided excellent research
assistance. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging
of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers R21AG050795 and R01AG053350. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institutes of Health. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Tatyana Deryugina and David Molitor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does When You Die Depend on Where You Live? Evidence from Hurricane Katrina
Tatyana Deryugina and David Molitor
NBER Working Paper No. 24822
July 2018
JEL No. H51,I10,Q54,R23

                                              ABSTRACT

We follow Medicare cohorts to estimate Hurricane Katrina's long-run mortality effects on victims
initially living in New Orleans. Including the initial shock, the hurricane improved eight-year survival
by 2.07 percentage points. Migration to lower-mortality regions explains most of this survival increase.
Those migrating to low- versus high-mortality regions look similar at baseline, but their subsequent
mortality is 0.83–1.01 percentage points lower per percentage-point reduction in local mortality, quantifying
causal effects of place on mortality among this population. Migrants' mortality is also lower in destinations
with healthier behaviors and higher incomes but is unrelated to local medical spending and quality.


Tatyana Deryugina
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
deryugin@illinois.edu

David Molitor
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dmolitor@illinois.edu
1     Introduction

Hurricane Katrina, the costliest storm in US history, devastated the Gulf Coast in 2005.
The immediate impact of the storm killed nearly 2,000 individuals and displaced more than
one million residents, resulting in the largest migration of US residents since the Dust Bowl
of the 1930s (Nigg, Barnshaw and Torres, 2006). Climate models predict that such extreme
weather events will increase in frequency and severity (Field et al., 2012), yet little is known
about the effects of environmental catastrophes on long-run health and longevity, which
represent considerable economic value (Murphy and Topel, 2006).
    The disruption induced by extreme weather events can be used to illuminate factors that
affect the accumulation or depreciation of health capital (Grossman, 1972). For example,
when a disaster displaces people from their homes, the regions they move to may play an
important role in shaping long-term health outcomes. While life expectancy varies signifi-
cantly across US locations (Chetty et al., 2016; Dwyer-Lindgren et al., 2017), little is known
about the extent to which this variation reflects the causal effect of place on health. Because
Hurricane Katrina displaced many survivors, it can serve as a natural experiment of how
place affects long-term health. If the geographic variation in life expectancy reflects causal
effects of place, then the widespread migration out of New Orleans to regions with better
economic and health conditions may have generated health benefits.
    This paper has two primary aims. The first is to estimate the short- and long-run
mortality impacts of Hurricane Katrina on the elderly and the long-term disabled of New
Orleans. Prior studies have evaluated how demographic and economic outcomes evolve after
environmental catastrophes (e.g., Hornbeck, 2012; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014; Nakamura,
Sigurdsson and Steinsson, 2017), but little is known about the long-run health effects of
these events, especially among adults. The second aim is to estimate how the mortality of
displaced survivors was shaped by their destinations.
    Quantifying the long-run health impacts of events like Hurricane Katrina has proven
difficult, largely due to lack of data that capture pre-disaster outcomes and track individ-

                                               1
uals post-disaster with minimal attrition. To overcome this challenge, we use Medicare
administrative data from 1992–2013 that allow us to follow elderly and long-term disabled
individuals over time and space and to provide exact dates of death. We identify Medicare
cohorts living in New Orleans just prior to Hurricane Katrina and trace out their mortality
rates up to eight years after the storm, regardless of whether or where they move.
   To identify how outcomes would have evolved in the absence of Hurricane Katrina, we
measure mortality for comparable Medicare cohorts initially residing in ten cities that were
not directly affected by the hurricane, following Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt (2018). To
validate this control group, we show that mortality trends in the New Orleans and control
city cohorts were similar prior to Hurricane Katrina as far back as 1992, the earliest year
for which we have data. We then estimate the causal effects of the hurricane by comparing
how the New Orleans cohort’s post-hurricane outcomes changed relative to those of the
comparison cohort (i.e., a cohort-level difference-in-differences event study analysis).1
   We find that in 2005, the year of the storm, Hurricane Katrina increased mortality by
0.56 percentage points (over 10 percent of the mean). Most of these excess deaths occurred
within a week of the hurricane’s landfall, and this immediate effect dissipated over several
months. In contrast to the short-run mortality increase, we find that Hurricane Katrina led
to sustained reductions in mortality from 2006 to 2013. This long-run mortality decline is
not explained by short-run mortality displacement, or “harvesting.” Inclusive of the initial
increase in mortality, Hurricane Katrina increased the probability of surviving through 2013,
eight years past the storm, by 2.07 percentage points, a 3.2 percent increase relative to the
overall eight-year survival rate of the 2005 New Orleans cohort.
   We also find that the hurricane led to a massive and lasting dislocation of the elderly
and long-term disabled, consistent with prior evidence on the demographic effects of the
hurricane (Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt, 2018; Eyer et al., 2018). Medicare beneficiaries
   1
     As we show, our central findings are robust to using the entire United States (except New Orleans) or
the top 20 mortality regions to define the comparison cohort and to using the synthetic control method to
conduct inference that accounts for the aggregate nature of the shock created by Hurricane Katrina.



                                                    2
living in New Orleans as of March 2005 were nearly 50 percentage points more likely to
leave their commuting zone of residence than members of the control group. Over half of
those who left had not returned as of 2013, conditional on being alive. New Orleans was
one of the highest mortality areas in the country prior to Hurricane Katrina, and displaced
individuals generally moved to lower-mortality regions. To the extent that local mortality
outcomes reflect place-specific determinants of health, relocation to lower-mortality regions
may have driven the decline in mortality among Hurricane Katrina victims.
   To directly examine the role of place on health, we examine the mortality patterns among
New Orleans residents who had moved away by March 2006. We find that hurricane survivors
who moved to low-mortality regions subsequently experienced lower mortality than survivors
who moved to high-mortality regions. Specifically, each percentage-point increase in the
destination region’s mortality rate corresponds to a 0.83–1.01 percentage-point increase in
the movers’ mortality rate. This effect emerges quickly after the move, suggesting it does
not arise entirely through slow-moving channels such as lifestyle.
   The relationship between local and migrant mortality describes the causal effect of place
on individual mortality under the assumption that baseline mortality risk among those who
move is uncorrelated with mortality rates in the destination region. Supporting this as-
sumption, we find little correlation between destination mortality rates and movers’ ex ante
predicted mortality, which we construct from detailed data on demographic characteristics,
past health care utilization, and pre-existing chronic conditions. In addition, the estimated
relationship between movers’ mortality and destination mortality is highly stable, even with
rich controls, including variables that are strongly predictive of mortality. Changes in the
local mortality rate experienced by hurricane victims can explain over 70 percent of the
long-run mortality decline caused by the hurricane.
   Next, we examine how other local attributes correlate with movers’ mortality. We find
that movers’ mortality increases with local rates of obesity or smoking and decreases with
average income, home values, and urban population share. Movers’ mortality is not statisti-


                                              3
cally significantly correlated with local physician or hospital bed supply or a hospital quality
index. We also do not find a relationship between movers’ mortality and local health care
spending, shedding new light on a long-standing question of whether higher-spending regions
generate better health outcomes than lower-spending regions and pointing to low returns to
living in a high-spending region.2
       Our study adds to a growing body of literature that uses migration to identify how
local conditions affect individual outcomes. Song et al. (2010), Finkelstein, Gentzkow and
Williams (2016), and Molitor (2018) study movers in Medicare to identify local determinants
of diagnosis rates, medical spending, and physician practice styles, respectively. Movers
have also been used to study how local conditions affect education and earnings (Chetty,
Hendren and Katz, 2016; Nakamura, Sigurdsson and Steinsson, 2017; Chyn, 2018; Chetty
and Hendren, 2018a), income reporting in tax filings (Chetty, Friedman and Saez, 2013),
and brand preferences (Bronnenberg, Dubé and Gentzkow, 2012). Black et al. (2015) and
Johnson and Taylor (2019) estimate mortality effects of migration but do not study how
migrant outcomes depend on destination characteristics.
       We contribute to this literature by studying how the long-run mortality outcomes of
those displaced by Hurricane Katrina depend on the destination region. Our finding that
migrants’ realized mortality outcomes correspond closely to their destination region’s mor-
tality rate suggests that local conditions are an important determinant of individual health
outcomes. Our study complements contemporaneous work by Finkelstein, Gentzkow and
Williams (2019), who estimate the mortality effects of place among Medicare movers using
a novel method to account for potentially endogenous sorting on unobservables. They also
find that current location matters greatly for life expectancy, although the correlation they
   2
    Higher spending regions often have no better or even worse health outcomes than lower-spending regions
(Fisher et al., 2003a,b; Baicker and Chandra, 2004; Sirovich et al., 2006; Skinner, 2011), but the direction
of causality is not clear from these correlations alone. Doyle (2011) and Doyle et al. (2015) address this
limitation by analyzing quasi-random assignment of patients to hospitals and find that patients have better
outcomes when treated at higher-spending hospitals. Yet the returns to being hospitalized in a high-spending
region may differ from the returns to living in a high-spending region (e.g., higher-quality health systems
could reduce the need for hospitalization).



                                                     4
find between the effect of place on mortality and local mortality is smaller than what we
estimate. Because Hurricane Katrina displaced many people who would not have other-
wise moved, this pattern suggests that place may matter less for the typical mover than for
the typical stayer, analogous to evidence of negative selection on children’s economic gains
among movers to a better neighborhood Chyn (2018).
      Our results also shed light on why life expectancy differs across the United States and
on how health capital accumulates over the life cycle. Regional differences in life expectancy
correlate strongly with numerous demographic factors and health behaviors, like income
and smoking (Chetty et al., 2016; Dwyer-Lindgren et al., 2017). Our results suggest that
geographic variation in life expectancy is at least partly driven by contemporaneous location
characteristics and not just by differences in demographics or health behaviors that affect
mortality only over long time horizons. In addition, the sharp and enduring decline in
the mortality rate of Hurricane Katrina victims contrasts with the canonical Grossman
(1972) model of health capital, which posits that health capital changes slowly, although
it is consistent with a version of the model in which health capital depreciates rapidly, as
may be the case with the elderly and long-term disabled.
      We also provide the longest-run controlled estimates of the mortality effects of a dis-
aster on adult victims. Prior research on disasters and health has been largely limited to
considering birth outcomes and infant health (e.g., Torche, 2011; Currie and Rossin-Slater,
2013; Currie and Schwandt, 2016), immediate post-disaster mortality (e.g., Kahn, 2005), or
survey-based measures of longer-run health for a subset of the victims.3 Survey approaches,
however, generally suffer from non-random sampling, rarely measure pre-existing outcomes,
and usually lack a control group. By contrast, our data track the mortality and location
of every Medicare-eligible individual. Our finding that Hurricane Katrina reduced long-run
mortality among the elderly and long-term disabled populations builds on recent evidence
that the hurricane indirectly generated other long-run benefits, including higher earnings
  3
   See, for example, Armenian, Melkonian and Hovanesian (1998); Sastry and VanLandingham (2009);
Rhodes et al. (2010); Adams et al. (2011); Adeola and Picou (2012); Pietrzak et al. (2012).


                                               5
among the working-age population (Groen, Kutzbach and Polivka, 2016; Deryugina, Kawano
and Levitt, 2018) and improved test scores among displaced students (Sacerdote, 2012).
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of Hurricane Katrina.
Section 3 describes the data and estimation sample. Section 4 outlines our research design,
and Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Setting

2.1    Overview of Hurricane Katrina

Hurricane Katrina formed as a tropical depression on August 23, 2005 (National Weather
Service, 2016). As Katrina’s strength and path became apparent, Louisiana officials declared
a state of emergency on August 26 and issued a mandatory evacuation order for New Orleans
on August 27, resulting in an 80–90 percent evacuation rate (Wolshon, 2006). Hurricane
Katrina struck the city on August 29 as a Category 3 hurricane with sustained winds of 125
miles per hour. The storm surge caused numerous levee and flood wall failures, resulting in
widespread flooding (see Appendix Figure A.1). The hurricane winds and flooding together
severely damaged thousands of homes and other infrastructure throughout New Orleans.
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Hurricane
Katrina caused $161 billion in direct damages (2017 dollars), making it the costliest US
natural disaster on record (National Hurricane Center, 2018; NOAA, 2018).
    Hurricane Katrina’s official death toll was 1,833, also making it the deadliest US natural
disaster since the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane (Beven-II et al., 2008). About half of those
killed by the immediate impact of the storm were over the age of 75 (Brunkard, Namulanda
and Ratard, 2008). The storm further displaced an estimated one million individuals living
in its path (Nigg, Barnshaw and Torres, 2006), including up to 200,000 Medicare beneficiaries
(Super and Biles, 2005). The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) prohibited




                                              6
most New Orleans residents from returning home for months.4 Because of the widespread
damages across Louisiana, many of the displaced were transported to other states. Texas
received about 200,000 evacuees, and Arkansas received about 50,000, but refugees were also
evacuated to at least 32 other states (Grier, 2005). Storm victims unable to find suitable liv-
ing arrangements were given housing assistance, but little systematic information is available
on how victims chose where to relocate in the longer run.
       The aid response to Hurricane Katrina was considerable.5 The federal government pro-
vided about $50 billion in disaster aid to Louisiana, excluding flood insurance payments and
loans. Most of these funds were earmarked for rebuilding infrastructure rather than given
directly to victims. Much of the latter type of aid came through FEMA’s Individual Assis-
tance program, which paid out about $2.9 billion to New Orleans residents for temporary
housing, repairs, rebuilding, and other disaster-related expenses. In 2006–2013, New Orleans
homeowners also received about $4.3 billion through the “Road Home” program to rebuild
or sell their homes. Finally, FEMA also paid about $320 million in Disaster Unemployment
Assistance in the state of Louisiana. In total, aid spending for the city of New Orleans
was as much as $125,000 per capita, of which about $17,000 consisted of direct transfers to
individuals (Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt, 2018). Absent the massive aid response, the
long-term impacts of Hurricane Katrina could have been much worse than what occurred.


2.2       Health and Health Care in New Orleans

Hurricane Katrina devastated the health care infrastructure in New Orleans (Rowland, 2007).
All nine large hospitals operating there in 2005 were closed in the immediate aftermath of
the storm due to damage and/or flooding. One hospital (Touro Infirmary) reopened 28 days
later, a second (Tulane Medical Center) reopened in early 2006, and two more (Memorial
   4
     Residents in 17 out of 19 New Orleans ZIP codes were not allowed to return to their homes before
December 9, 2005 (FEMA, 2005). On that date, residents of 10 of the 17 ZIP codes could return to their
homes and stay (“look-and-stay” ZIP codes); residents in the other 7 ZIP codes could visit their homes but
only during the day (“look-and-leave” ZIP codes).
   5
     Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt (2018) provide a detailed description of Hurricane Katrina aid compo-
nents.


                                                    7
Medical Center and University Hospital/Interim LSU Hospital) reopened in late 2006. The
remaining large hospitals were closed for years or never reopened. Although smaller inpatient
facilities and several hospitals in nearby cities continued operating, the closure of so many
hospitals reduced health care access for many individuals. Many health care professionals
left the city after the storm, likely disrupting access to care across other traditional health
care facilities as well. Overall, the number of beds and employees in the 22 inpatient facilities
in New Orleans fell by nearly 70 percent between 2004 and 2007 (see Appendix Figure A.2)
without any offsetting increase in the nearby parishes. Hospital utilization also declined
precipitously, driven at least partly by the enormous decline in the city’s population.
   By 2008, health care infrastructure in New Orleans had begun to recover, although
problems persisted (DeSalvo, Sachs and Hamm, 2008). The city had returned to 70 percent
of its pre-Katrina population and was continuing to grow, increasing demand for medical
services. At the same time, many hospitals faced staffing and financial problems, resulting
in long wait times. The permanent closure of Charity Hospital, which served a large number
of the uninsured in New Orleans, forced many of the uninsured to seek care in emergency
rooms, placing further strain on hospital resources. However, due to the large reduction in
population, post-Katrina New Orleans still had about the average number of beds per capita
and more physicians per capita than the national average (DeSalvo, Sachs and Hamm, 2008).
Moreover, community-based primary care clinics, funded by various sources, sprang up after
the hurricane, potentially filling the void left by hospital closures.
   Katrina’s large-scale destruction of homes, health care capacity, and general infrastruc-
ture likely created a harsh environment for the elderly and long-term disabled, who have, on
average, a higher incidence of chronic conditions and less robust physical and mental capa-
bilities. These groups are thought to be more vulnerable to environmental catastrophes than
the general population, and emergency managers are often urged to pay special attention to
their needs (e.g., Morrow, 1999; Fernandez et al., 2002). Mensah et al. (2005) summarize
the many additional challenges that chronic conditions pose during natural disasters, most


                                                8
of which are self-evident. For example, following Hurricane Charley in 2004, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (2004) found that many older adults experienced disruptions
in treatment for pre-existing conditions, which could have adversely affected their health. In
the case of Hurricane Katrina, the evacuees as a whole were not a healthy group: a survey
of victims in Houston shelters revealed that 40 percent had at least one chronic condition,
and a similar fraction reported needing prescription medication (Brodie et al., 2006).
       There are several other reasons to expect that Hurricane Katrina led to persistently worse
health outcomes among elderly and long-term disabled victims. The elderly are thought to
be particularly prone to “relocation stress syndrome,” where individuals’ physical and mental
health suffers as a result of being transferred from one environment to another (Barnhouse,
Brugler and Harkulich, 1992). Natural disasters are also thought to lead to a deterioration in
mental health (Freedy, Kilpatrick and Resnick, 1993; Norris et al., 2002; Norris, Friedman and
Watson, 2002), including increased rates of post-traumatic stress disorder (Galea, Nandi and
Vlahov, 2005; Neria, Nandi and Galea, 2008). Additionally, the disruption and displacement
caused by the storm may have made it more difficult for patients to get appropriate health
care. While several studies have found deteriorated mental and physical health following
Hurricane Katrina, these studies generally lack a control group to account for secular trends,
most lack outcomes measured pre-Katrina, and almost all have focused on short-run effects.6
       It is also possible, however, that disaster aid and victims’ responses led to a quick recovery.
In particular, the significant population displacement brought about by Hurricane Katrina
could have improved long-run survival if victims relocated to areas that were more conducive
to good health. After we estimate the aggregate effects of Hurricane Katrina on long-
run mortality among the elderly and long-term disabled, we return to consider the role of
migration and place in shaping the recovery of the hurricane victims.
   6
    See, for example, Brodie et al. (2006); Kessler et al. (2008); Sastry and VanLandingham (2009); Sastry
and Gregory (2013). In the only longer-run study of which we are aware, Paxson et al. (2012) follow 532
low-income mothers who lived in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina, finding long-lasting increases in
post-traumatic stress symptoms and psychological distress.




                                                    9
3         Data and Estimation Sample

3.1        Data

The primary data for our analysis are Medicare administrative records for the universe
of Medicare beneficiaries over the period 1992–2013. As of 2010, over 97 percent of the
US population aged 65 and older was enrolled in Medicare, making these data the most
comprehensive record of elderly health in the United States. Medicare also covers non-
elderly, long-term disabled individuals who have received Social Security Disability benefits
for 24 months or have either end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
        Medicare data offer two features essential for studying health dynamics in our setting.
First, Medicare reports in each year the ZIP code of each beneficiary where Social Security
Administration (SSA) benefits and official communication are mailed, which we refer to as
the “ZIP code of residence.” This information allows us to identify individuals living in a
particular place at a certain time (e.g., New Orleans residents prior to Hurricane Katrina)
and to track those individuals over time without attrition even if they move.7 Second,
Medicare records each individual’s exact date of death based on SSA records.
        Our analysis relies on four sets of annually recorded Medicare variables.8 The first set
comes from Medicare eligibility records and contains beneficiary identifiers and demographic
information obtained from SSA records, including nine-digit ZIP code, race, sex, birth and
death dates, and an ESRD indicator. For 1999, 2007, and 2009–2013, ZIP codes correspond
to the mailing address on record at the end of the calendar year. In all other years, ZIP
codes correspond to the address on record as of March of the following year. Thus, the
2004 ZIP code reflects a beneficiary’s address as of March 2005, about five months prior to
Hurricane Katrina. The 2005 ZIP code reflects a beneficiary’s address as of March 2006,
    7
      When constructing our panel, we drop individuals who disappear from the annual beneficiary summary
file prior to a recorded death or who have gaps in enrollment. For the 2004 cohort, these restrictions drop
0.8 percent of the full sample.
    8
      See Appendix A.1 for additional details on these data and the definitions of key variables used in our
analysis, including beneficiary location, chronic conditions, and cause of death.



                                                    10
about seven months after the hurricane. For individuals who die prior to the date of the
location snapshot, the location variable will reflect their last ZIP code of residence on record.
   The second set of Medicare variables measures health care spending based on fee-for-
service claims. For each beneficiary, we calculate total annual spending as the sum of pay-
ments due to institutional or non-institutional providers (e.g., physicians), excluding pay-
ments for drugs covered under Medicare Part D. Because spending is based on claims, we
do not observe spending for individuals enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans (less than 20
percent of our sample). In these cases, Medicare makes fixed payments to private providers
who then handle any claims these individuals have.
   The third set of Medicare variables includes 27 indicators for common chronic conditions
inferred from medical claim histories. We group the 27 individual conditions into eight broad
categories: heart disease and stroke, respiratory disease, blood and kidney disease, cancer,
diabetes, musculoskeletal diseases, Alzheimer’s/dementia, and other (cataracts, glaucoma,
hypothyrodism, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and depression). These claims-based chronic
condition indicators are available only for individuals who are continuously enrolled in fee-
for-service Medicare over a condition-specific look-back window (usually two years).
   The fourth set of Medicare variables we use in our analysis of New Orleans movers comes
from the National Death Index, created by the Center for Disease Control and matched to
Medicare beneficiaries who died in 1999–2008. We group the ICD-10 codes specifying the
cause of death into four major groups: cardiovascular, cancer, other internal causes (e.g.,
diabetes, influenza), and external causes (e.g., vehicle accidents, suicide).
   Our analysis relies on identifying the regions in which a Medicare beneficiary lives, both
before and after Hurricane Katrina. Our primary units of geography for this purpose are
counties. In some cases, we consider commuting zones (CZs), as defined by the Economic
Research Service of the US Department of Agriculture for the year 2000. CZs aggregate
counties into 709 regions based on work commute patterns. We refer to a county by the
primary city located in the county and use the terms “city” and “county” interchangeably,


                                               11
even though the boundary of the county may extend beyond the city’s political boundary.
For New Orleans, a consolidated city-county, the county and city boundaries are identical.
       We match Medicare beneficiaries to flooding and income neighborhood characteristics
based on their nine-digit ZIP code of residence at baseline, as geocoded by GeoLytics.9 We
calculate Hurricane Katrina flood depth for each nine-digit ZIP code as the average flood
depth within a 50-meter radius of the centroid, using NOAA flood data at a resolution of
five meters. We classify beneficiaries as “flooded” if their nine-digit ZIP code of residence
experienced two or more feet of flooding according to this measure. To measure neighborhood
income, we use the median income of households with a head who is at least 65 years old,
as reported in the 2000 Census for the block group containing each nine-digit ZIP code. We
classify beneficiaries as “below median income” if the neighborhood income measure is below
the median neighborhood income in New Orleans at baseline.
       Finally, to shed light on the relationship between mover mortality and specific local
characteristics, we obtain several county-level attributes related to public health, the en-
vironment, and economic conditions, including average Medicare spending, the number of
physicians per capita, smoking and obesity rates, fine particulate matter (PM 2.5) levels,
frequency of temperature extremes, the crime rate, local government expenditure, and per-
capita income. The construction of these variables is detailed in Appendix Section A.1.4.


3.2       Estimation Sample

Although Hurricane Katrina generated a credibly exogenous shock to New Orleans residents,
identifying the causal effect of the storm on short- and long-run mortality requires estimating
counterfactual mortality outcomes for its victims. Our approach to estimating counterfactual
outcomes relies on examining how outcomes evolve among groups of Medicare beneficiaries
initially residing in other regions. Our primary control regions are the ten US cities with
   9
     To minimize measurement error, we do not assign these neighborhood characteristics to the 4.4 percent
of sample beneficiaries for whom Medicare only reports a five-digit ZIP code or to the additional 8.2 percent
of sample beneficiaries whose nine-digit ZIP codes are not geocoded by GeoLytics.



                                                     12
a population of at least 100,000 chosen by Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt (2018) to most
closely matched New Orleans in the years 2000–2005 along three demographic dimensions:
median earnings, the population growth rate, and the percent of the population that is
black. These cities are Baltimore, MD; Birmingham, AL; Detroit, MI; Gary, IN; Jackson,
MS; Memphis, TN; Newark, NJ; Portsmouth, VA; Richmond, VA; and St. Louis, MO (see
Appendix Figure A.3 for a map). We discuss the robustness of our results to the choice of
control group in Section 5.2.2.
   Because individuals move or die over time, the cohort of individuals who were alive and
eligible for Medicare in 2004 (the “2004 cohort”) is the most relevant one for assessing the
impact of the hurricane among Medicare residents of New Orleans. Thus, individuals in
the 2004 cohort initially residing in either New Orleans (“treatment group”) or one of the
ten control cities (“control group”) form our preferred sample for estimating the long-run
effects of Hurricane Katrina. Table 1 summarizes the baseline (2004) characteristics of this
sample, which contains 65,457 beneficiaries from New Orleans (column (1)) and 941,685
beneficiaries from the ten control cities (column (2)). The gender and age distributions and
average incomes of New Orleans and control city beneficiaries are similar. However, about 61
percent of the New Orleans individuals are black, compared to 39 percent of the control city
beneficiaries. Seventy-eight percent of New Orleans beneficiaries are 65 and older at baseline,
implying that the rest (22 percent) qualify for Medicare because of a disability. Fifty-seven
percent of New Orleans beneficiaries lived in nine-digit ZIP codes that experienced two or
more feet of flooding during Hurricane Katrina.
   Sixty-nine percent of New Orleans beneficiaries were enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare
in 2004, compared to 93 percent of control city beneficiaries. The 2004 Medicare spending
of fee-for-service beneficiaries is slightly higher for treatment than for control individuals
($10,460 and $9,640, respectively). New Orleans beneficiaries are slightly more likely to
have ESRD but are somewhat less likely to have each of the other eight chronic condition
groups, such as diabetes, blood and kidney disease, and heart disease/stroke.


                                              13
       Table 1 also summarizes the characteristics of the 26,467 New Orleans beneficiaries that
left the New Orleans CZ between March 2005 and March 2006 (“movers,” column (3)).
Compared to the average New Orleans beneficiary, movers are younger, poorer, more likely
to be black (76 percent versus 61 percent), and more likely to have experienced at least
two feet of flooding. They are slightly less likely to have some chronic conditions (e.g., heart
disease and cancer) but are more likely to have others (e.g., diabetes and respiratory disease).
       Appendix Table A.2 shows the top 20 destination counties for the New Orleans movers.
These destinations account for slightly over 50 percent of all movers, but only two desti-
nations have more than 5 percent of migrants moving there: Harris County, Texas, which
contains the city of Houston (14.2 percent of migrants), and East Baton Rouge, Louisiana,
which contains the city of Baton Rouge (9.6 percent of migrants). Most of the other top 20
destinations attracted 1–2 percent of movers. The table also implies that nearly half of the
movers relocated to destinations that attracted less than 1 percent of the movers.
       A limitation of the 2004 cohort is that it does not enable us to assess annual mortality
trends prior to Hurricane Katrina. To do so, we consider cohorts based on Medicare eligibility
and residence in 1992 and 1999. Figure 1 plots raw annual death rates for the 1999 Medicare
cohort, by initial region of residence.10 For example, the 2005 mortality rate for New Orleans
is calculated as the 2005 mortality rate among Medicare beneficiaries in the 1999 cohort who
survived past 2004 and initially lived in New Orleans, regardless of where they lived in 2005.
Mortality rates for the New Orleans cohort are plotted in black, and mortality rates for
cohorts from each of the ten control cities are plotted in blue. To see how New Orleans
compares with the rest of the United States, the light gray lines plot mortality rates for the
cohorts initially residing in each CZ except the one containing New Orleans.
       The raw data plotted in Figure 1 reveal one of the key findings we formally estimate below.
Prior to Hurricane Katrina, the New Orleans cohort had one of the highest regional mortality
  10
    Appendix Table A.1 lists the raw annual mortality rates of the 1992, 1999, and 2004 New Orleans
cohorts and the corresponding control city cohorts. Appendix Figure A.4 shows annual death rates for the
1999 Medicare cohort that are adjusted for all combinations of beneficiaries’ current age (in one-year bins),
race, and sex.


                                                     14
rates in the United States. Cohorts from the ten control cities also had high mortality rates,
falling largely in the top half of the national distribution and trending similarly to the New
Orleans cohort. In 2005, the year of Hurricane Katrina, the mortality rate of the New Orleans
cohort spiked and became higher than the mortality rate of any other regional cohort in the
nation. Yet, remarkably, mortality among the New Orleans cohort fell to the middle of the
mortality rate distribution in 2006 and remained there through 2013, the latest year for
which we have data. This pattern suggests that Hurricane Katrina led to a long-run decline
in mortality among the New Orleans cohort. As we estimate formally below, these decreases
are so large that they cannot fully be explained by mortality displacement, or harvesting, as
would occur if Hurricane Katrina killed individuals who would have died soon, even in the
absence of the hurricane, thereby depressing future mortality rates.
   Mortality decreases after 2005 among the New Orleans cohort are also not explained by
regression to the mean, which could occur if regions with relatively high cohort mortality
rates in 1999–2005 tend to experience relatively lower cohort mortality rates in later years.
In Appendix Figure A.5, we partition non-New Orleans commuting zones into groups based
on the average mortality rate of their 1999 cohort over the “pre-period” 1999–2005 and plot
cohort mortality for each group in 1999–2013. Panel (a) plots each group’s annual mortality
rates, while panel (b) plots cumulative mortality rates. Annual cohort mortality trends
roughly in parallel across CZ groups, indicating that cohorts with relatively high mortality
rates from 1999–2005 do not experience relatively lower mortality in 2006–2013. Prior to
2005, cumulative mortality rates for the New Orleans county cohort are similar to the average
cumulative mortality of other CZ cohorts that had the 20 highest pre-period mortality rates.
Following Hurricane Katrina, however, these cumulative mortality paths diverge. By 2013,
cumulative mortality in the New Orleans cohort is 2.35 percentage points lower than it is in
the other top 20 pre-period mortality CZ cohorts. This difference in cumulative mortality is
similar to the main cumulative mortality effect we estimate formally below.




                                             15
4     Research Design

4.1    Short-Run Effects of Hurricane Katrina

We estimate the short-run mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina on the New Orleans Medi-
care population using a difference-in-differences event study analysis of the 2004 New Orleans
and control city cohorts. We define event week t = 0 as the seven-day period beginning on
Monday, August 29, 2005, the day Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans. We construct a
panel data set with observations for each individual i and week t over the 100-week period
beginning 34 weeks prior to and ending 65 weeks after Hurricane Katrina, which corresponds
to weeks starting on January 3, 2005, and on November 27, 2006, respectively. We estimate

                      65
                      X
          Diedit =             βt 1(t = τ ) × NOLAi + [week FE ] + [base ZIP5 FE ] + εit ,   (1)
                     τ =−34,
                      τ 6=−1


where the outcome, Diedit , equals zero if individual i survived through week t and equals
one if he or she died that week. If the individual died prior to week t, then Diedit is missing
and the observation is dropped from the regression. As a result, beneficiaries from the 2004
cohort have to survive until January 3, 2005, to be included in this regression. We define a
“treatment” indicator NOLAi as equal to one if individual i lived in New Orleans at baseline
and equal to zero otherwise. Fixed effects for the five-digit ZIP code of an individual’s
residence in the base year capture baseline geographic differences in mortality rates, while
event week fixed effects capture how mortality evolves over time for the sample as a whole.
Standard errors are clustered by baseline ZIP code.
    The focal parameters in equation (1) are βt , the coefficients on the interactions of event
week and treatment indicators. βt nonparametrically captures how the change in the New
Orleans cohort’s mortality between the reference week and week t differs from the change
in the control city cohorts’ mortality over the same period. βt identifies the causal effect of
Hurricane Katrina on the New Orleans cohort’s mortality rate under the assumption that


                                                   16
the mortality rate among the New Orleans cohort would have paralleled the control city
cohorts’ mortality rates in the absence of the hurricane. The plausibility of this assumption
can be assessed by testing for parallel trends in the weeks prior to the storm (i.e., βt = 0 for
t < 0), which motivates the inclusion of the 34 pre-event week indicators in equation (1). To
minimize sensitivity of the results to the choice of reference week, we calculate and report
adjusted estimates bt = βt − β̄pre , where β̄pre is the average value of βt for t < 0 (including
β−1 , which is mechanically zero). Thus, bt reflects Hurricane Katrina’s mortality effect in
week t, relative to average mortality rate differences in the 34 weeks prior to the hurricane.


4.2    Long-Run Effects of Hurricane Katrina

Annual Mortality and Relocation We estimate the long-run effects of Hurricane Kat-
rina on mortality and relocation using a cohort approach very similar to our short-run weekly
analysis, except that we define the time dimension of the panel data to be annual and extend
our period of analysis to cover up to eight years after 2005, the year of Hurricane Katrina.
Specifically, we include observations for each individual i and year t starting from the base
year used to define the cohort (1992, 1999, or 2004) through 2013, omitting any observations
after the year in which the individual dies. We then estimate

                 2013
                 X
      Yit =                  βt 1(t = τ ) × NOLAi + [year FE ] + [base ZIP5 FE ] + θXit + εit ,   (2)
              τ =BaseYear,
                 τ 6=2004


where the outcome Yit measures either mortality or relocation. The mortality outcome,
Diedit , equals zero if individual i survived through year t and equals one if he or she died
that year. The relocation outcome, LeftCZit , equals zero if the individual resided in their
baseline CZ in year t and equals one if he or she was living in another CZ. Both outcomes
are set to missing in years after death.
   For simplicity, we first estimate equation (2) with no demographic controls beyond base-
line ZIP code fixed effects. Because the residual demographic balance between treatment and


                                                    17
control group cohorts may shift over time and thereby influence mortality trends through a
change in cohort composition, we also report event study results that include fixed effects
Xit for all combinations of baseline age (in one-year bins), race, and sex. All other variables
are defined as in equation (1), except that the time period t reflects years instead of weeks
and we thus include year fixed effects instead of week fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by baseline ZIP code, although for robustness, we also carry out inference using
the synthetic control method with permutation tests conducted at the county and CZ levels.
       We use 2004, the year prior to Hurricane Katrina, as the reference period so that βt
captures how the change in the New Orleans cohort’s mortality between 2004 and year t
differs from changes in the control city cohorts’ mortality over the same period. As with
the weekly analysis, βt identifies the causal effect of Hurricane Katrina on the New Orleans
cohort’s mortality rate in a given year under the assumption that the New Orleans cohort’s
mortality would have paralleled the control city cohorts’ mortality rates in the absence of
the hurricane. The plausibility of this assumption can be assessed by testing for parallel
trends in the years prior to the storm (i.e., βt = 0 for t < 2004), which can be done when
estimating equation (2) for cohorts formed in base years prior to 2004.
       We estimate equation (2) separately for the 1992, 1999, and 2004 Medicare cohorts. The
1992 and 1999 cohorts allow us to examine pre-trends over a long time horizon, but these
cohorts may only partially capture Hurricane Katrina’s impact on Medicare victims, as about
two-thirds (one-third) of individuals in the 1992 (1999) cohort had moved away or died before
2005.11 Furthermore, the elderly in the 1992 (1999) Medicare cohort were at least 77 (70)
by the time Hurricane Katrina struck. While we cannot estimate pre-Katrina trends for the
2004 Medicare cohort, that cohort includes the most relevant group of Medicare beneficiaries
exposed to the hurricane, including younger elderly. Thus, we use the 2004 Medicare cohort
to calculate our preferred estimates of the magnitude of Hurricane Katrina’s mortality effect.
  11
    By 2004, 6,600 of the 71,433 individuals (9.2 percent) from the 1992 New Orleans cohort were living
outside of New Orleans and 39,500 (55.3 percent) had died. Among the 1999 New Orleans cohort, 5,310 of
the 67,649 individuals (7.8 percent) were living outside of New Orleans and 17,434 (25.8 percent) had died
by 2004.


                                                   18
Cumulative Mortality The annual mortality results obtained from equation (2) can be
used to calculate the effect of Hurricane Katrina on changes in cumulative mortality for the
New Orleans cohort.12 Specifically, for each post-Katrina year t between 2005 and 2013, the
change in cumulative mortality probability ∆Mt is given by

                                        t
                                        Y                          t
                                                                   Y
                            ∆Mt =            (1 − mτ + βτ ) −           (1 − mτ ),                           (3)
                                      τ =2005                    τ =2005



where βτ are the annual mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina and mτ is the empirical
fraction of the New Orleans cohort who die in year τ .13 We estimate ∆Mt and its standard
error using the estimates β̂t from equation (2).


Concise Difference-in-Differences Event study estimates from equation (2) nonpara-
metrically identify treatment effects over time and also help to assess the plausibility of the
parallel trends assumption. If there are no pre-trends, and if the treatment effect is constant
over a period of time, then a more efficient approach is to combine years into longer periods.
To that end, we group years into a pre-treatment reference period (base year through 2004),
the year of treatment (2005) for capturing short-run effects, and a post-treatment period
(2006–2013) for estimating long-run effects. Specifically, we estimate


                    Yit = βSR 1(t = 2005) × NOLAi + βLR 1(t ≥ 2006) × NOLAi
                                                                                                             (4)
                        + [year FE ] + [base ZIP5 FE ] + θXit + εit .


The indicators 1(t = 2005) and 1(t ≥ 2006) denote whether the year of observation is 2005
or falls within the period 2006–2013, respectively. As with equation (2), we include year
  12
      Because cumulative mortality converges to one for each cohort, any differences in baseline annual mor-
tality rates between the treatment and control cohorts imply that the cumulative mortality rates would not
have moved in parallel had treatment not occurred. By contrast, annual mortality risk need not converge or
diverge over time. For this reason, we estimate annual mortality effects and use the results to infer changes
in cumulative mortality.
                                                                                               Qt
   13
      To derive equation (3), note that ∆Mt = (1 − StO ) − (1 − StC ) = StC − StO , where S O = τ =2005 (1 − mτ )
                                                   t
is the cohort’s observed survival rate and StC = τ =2005 (1 − mτ + βτ ) is the counterfactual survival rate.
                                                 Q




                                                       19
and baseline ZIP code fixed effects. For robustness, some specifications include additional
controls Xit , such as baseline demographics. The coefficients βSR and βLR thus describe
the average short-run (2005) and long-run (2006–2013) causal effects, respectively, of Hur-
ricane Katrina on mortality among the New Orleans cohort under the same identification
assumption required for interpreting equation (2) estimates as causal.


Heterogeneous Treatment Effects We estimate heterogeneity in treatment effects with
respect to a variety of baseline characteristics, including age, race, income, flooding from
Hurricane Katrina in one’s nine-digit ZIP code of residence, and the presence of various
chronic conditions. To do so, we augment equation (4) above to include interactions between
the treatment indicators and an indicator for the characteristic of interest:


              Yit = βSR 1(t = 2005) × NOLAi + βSR 1(t = 2005) × NOLAi × Hi

                 + βLR 1(t ≥ 2006) × NOLAi + βLR 1(t ≥ 2006) × NOLAi × Hi                     (5)

                 + γNOLAi × Hi + [year-by-Hi FE ] + [base ZIP5 FE ] + εit ,


where Hi indicates whether individual i has the characteristic of interest at baseline. Because
outcome levels at baseline may differ by the chosen characteristic within New Orleans and
between New Orleans and control cities, we also control for each characteristic and its inter-
action with the New Orleans indicator (NOLAi × Hi ). Furthermore, to allow for differential
secular trends, we include full interactions between the characteristic and year fixed effects
whenever there is variation in the characteristic within the control cohort, which occurs for
all characteristics we examine but one. Because there was no flooding from Hurricane Kat-
rina in the control cities, heterogeneity analysis by the flood level of an individual’s residence
at baseline includes year and flood level fixed effects rather than flood-by-year fixed effects.




                                               20
4.3       Migration and Place Effects

To examine the role of relocation in determining mortality risk following Hurricane Katrina,
we estimate how mortality outcomes of individuals displaced by the hurricane depend on
characteristics of the area they moved to. To do so, we restrict our sample to individuals
in the 2004 New Orleans cohort who survived through 2005 and moved to another county
at some point between March 2005 and March 2006. Plausibly, most of these migrants left
New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. To avoid conflating local characteristics
with Hurricane Katrina’s impact in the vicinity of New Orleans, we further exclude from the
movers sample individuals who moved to a county in the same CZ as New Orleans.
       We estimate the relationship between a New Orleans mover’s post-Katrina (2006–2013)
annual mortality rate and the average annual post-Katrina mortality rate of the county in
which mover i resided in 2006, which we denote by MDR2006C(i) .14 To avoid a mechanical
relationship between migrant mortality outcomes and our measure of destination mortality,
we calculate MDR2006C(i) as the annual mortality rate of the county’s 2004 Medicare cohort
(i.e., of Medicare beneficiaries who lived in that county as of March 2005) averaged over
2006–2013. We then estimate


               Diedit = γMDR2006C(i) + [year FE ] + [base ZIP5 FE ] + θXit + εit .                   (6)


Because only New Orleans movers are included in this empirical exercise, it is not necessary
to have New Orleans indicators in equation (6). All remaining control variables are defined
as before. Note that year fixed effects will control for any mortality effects that are common
to all migrants, such as the effect of moving in with relatives. The coefficient γ describes
the causal effect of place, as captured by local mortality, on migrant mortality under the
  14
    In principle, we could let the local mortality rate MDR2006C change each year for individuals who
continue moving. However, in our setting, this is problematic because a non-trivial share of our movers
return to New Orleans in the longer run. As a result, we would either have to drop these individuals from
our sample in those years—which would likely bias the estimates—or use the New Orleans mortality rate,
which was clearly affected by Hurricane Katrina.



                                                   21
assumption that migrants do not sort to high- or low-mortality regions based on unobserved
mortality risk. When we present the results, we evaluate the plausibility of this assumption
by assessing the degree of sorting along observable risk factors as well as the sensitivity of
estimates of γ to the inclusion of rich controls, including baseline demographics, medical
spending, and chronic conditions.
    We also estimate other local correlates of migrant mortality by replacing MDR2006C(i) in
equation (6) with other attributes of each mover’s 2006 destination county, such as health
behaviors, income, and medical spending and quality. To avoid capturing the outcomes of
Hurricane Katrina movers in the destination characteristics, we measure Medicare-derived
characteristics (mortality and medical spending) using the 2004 cohort from each region and,
when possible, all other characteristics before 2005 (see Appendix Section A.1.4).15 As with
local mortality, the estimated relationship captures the causal effect of living in a low- or
high-attribute place only if unobserved mortality risk is uncorrelated with that attribute.
Additionally, for an estimate to reflect the causal effect of that attribute on mortality, there
must be no other unobserved local characteristic that is both correlated with the attribute
of interest and affects movers’ mortality.



5     Results

5.1     Short-Run Effects of Hurricane Katrina

Figure 2a reports raw weekly mortality rates for the 2004 New Orleans and control city
cohorts. Figure 2b reports the corresponding weekly difference-in-differences mortality ef-
fects of Hurricane Katrina from equation (1), adjusted such that the reference period is the
34 weeks prior to the hurricane (as described in Section 4.1).16 The gray dashed line 14
weeks after the hurricane indicates the week of FEMA’s “look-and-leave”/“look-and-stay”
  15
     We measure environmental characteristics over the time period 2006–2013 because these are unlikely to
be affected by Hurricane Katrina movers.
  16
     Numerical values for a subset of the estimates plotted in Figure 2 are reported in Appendix Table A.3.


                                                    22
announcement on December 9, 2005; prior to this date, most New Orleans residents were
formally prohibited from returning to their homes. The lack of differential trends in mor-
tality prior to Hurricane Katrina supports interpreting the post-Katrina estimates as causal
effects of the hurricane on mortality rather than pre-existing differences between treatment
and control individuals.
       Perhaps unsurprisingly, the mortality increase is heavily concentrated in the week of
Hurricane Katrina. That week, the New Orleans cohort’s mortality increased by 6.01 deaths
per thousand (0.61 percentage points), which can fully account for the excess 2005 mortality
we identify later in our annual analysis. Relative to the average of 1.39 deaths per thousand
beneficiaries in the sample we use for this analysis, the mortality rate more than quadrupled
during the week of Katrina. We also see statistically significant increases in mortality for
as long as nine weeks after landfall. While the estimates are about an order of magnitude
smaller (0.011–0.076 percentage points), they nonetheless represent large relative mortality
increases (8–55 percent). In the subsequent 55 weeks, only one of the positive point estimates
is significant at the 10 percent level (week 11), while two of the negative estimates are
significant at the 5 percent level.


5.2       Long-Run Effects of Hurricane Katrina

5.2.1      Annual Mortality and Relocation

Figure 3a shows estimated effects of Hurricane Katrina on annual mortality (equation (2),
solid black lines) as well as on cumulative mortality (equation (3), dashed lines) for the 2004
Medicare cohort.17 The hurricane increased mortality in 2005 by 0.56 percentage points
(over 10 percent of the mean), which is particularly large given that these additional deaths
occurred in the last four months of the year. Remarkably, this initial mortality increase
quickly reversed and became a mortality reduction: in 2006, the death rate fell below pre-
  17
    Event study results are similar if we include fixed effects for all combinations of baseline age (in one-year
bins), race, and sex (see Appendix Figure A.7). Numerical values of the point estimates and standard errors
shown in Figure 3 can be found in Appendix Table A.4.


                                                       23
Katrina levels and remained depressed by at least 0.25 percentage points each year through
2013 (all estimates after 2006 are statistically significant at the 5 percent level). The decrease
in the mortality rate is approximately constant over time in absolute terms, corresponding
to a declining relative effect as a cohort’s mortality rate grows (see Figure 1).
   After an initial increase in 2005, changes in cumulative mortality (dashed lines) fell and
became negative by 2007, indicating that mortality displacement can explain, at most, two
years of post-Katrina mortality reductions. The change in cumulative mortality became
increasingly negative throughout the post-Katrina period: the cumulative share of the 2004
New Orleans cohort dying by 2013, the end of the sample period, was 2.07 percentage points
lower than if their mortality rates had trended in parallel with the control group. Relative to
the 64 percent survival rate of the 2004 cohort over this time period, a decrease in cumulative
mortality of 2.07 percentage points represents a survival improvement of 3.2 percent.
   Using a value of $100,000 per life-year (Cutler, 2004) and a discount rate of 3 per-
cent (Siegel, 1992), we calculate that the net present value of the changes in cumulative
mortality brought about by Hurricane Katrina over the period 2005–2013 is $6,743 per
capita ($8,230 per capita without discounting). Because the cumulative mortality reduction
likely persisted beyond 2013, this figure plausibly provides a lower bound on the value of the
mortality reduction. For our sample of 62,094 elderly and long-term disabled victims from
the 2004 New Orleans cohort who were alive as of January 1, 2005, the implied aggregate
value of the mortality changes over the period 2005–2013 is about $419 million ($511 million
without discounting). Because Hurricane Katrina had other negative consequences, improved
mortality outcomes do not imply that the storm increased victims’ aggregate welfare.
   Finally, Figure 3b shows the effect of Hurricane Katrina on Medicare beneficiaries’ long-
run relocation. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina displaced about 48 percentage points more New
Orleans victims than would have otherwise left, and most of the displaced stayed away in
2006. They began returning slowly in 2007; however, by 2013, those from the New Orleans
cohort who were alive remained about 25 percentage points less likely to be living in their


                                               24
baseline CZ than were individuals from the control city cohorts. Thus, a large share of
New Orleans elderly and long-term disabled left the city after Hurricane Katrina and never
returned. These estimates of cohort-level migration responses to Hurricane Katrina over time
complement recent evidence on the effect of natural disasters on county-level net migration
(Strobl, 2011; Deryugina, 2017; Boustan et al., 2017).


5.2.2    Robustness

Individuals in the 2004 Medicare cohort must have been alive on January 1, 2004, to be
included in our sample. Thus, we must use earlier Medicare cohorts to compare pre-Katrina
mortality trends of New Orleans and the control city cohorts. In Figure 4, we re-estimate
equation (2) for the mortality rate of the 1992 and 1999 Medicare cohorts.18 For both
cohorts, mortality trends are similar between the New Orleans and control city cohorts, with
no statistically significant differences. The post-Katrina differences in mortality rates are
also broadly similar across the cohorts.19
    Appendix Figure A.7 shows the sensitivity of our event study estimates to adding detailed
demographic controls. Controlling for every possible combination of one-year age bins, sex,
and race has little impact on either the pre- or post-Katrina estimates for any of the three
cohorts. Allowing the year fixed effects to vary by every possible combination of age, race,
and sex has a larger effect on the estimates, but the vast majority of them fall within the 95
percent confidence intervals of the original estimates.
    We also estimate a proportional hazard model version of equation (2), which allows de-
mographic controls to shift mortality rates proportionally rather than additively. Appendix
Figure A.8 reports the estimated hazard ratios for the interactions between year and New
Orleans indicators, analogous to the linear model estimates reported in Figures 3–4. Esti-
  18
     Appendix Table A.5 reports numerical values of the mortality event study point estimates and standard
errors shown in Figure 4. Appendix Figure A.6 reports relocation event study estimates for the 1999 cohort.
  19
     The 2005 increases in the mortality rate for the 1992 and 1999 New Orleans cohorts are even larger than
that of the 2004 cohort. This is likely due to elderly individuals in the former cohorts being at least 77 and
70 years old, respectively, at the time of Hurricane Katrina, which may have made them more susceptible
to the disaster’s short-run negative effects than younger Medicare beneficiaries.


                                                     25
mates that control for all combinations of one-year age bins, race, and sex (right panels) are
similar to those that include no demographic controls (left panels), and both cases reflect
effects similar to those estimated by the linearly additive model.
   To assess the sensitivity of the event study estimates to our choice of control group, we
replicate the mortality results displayed in Figures 3–4 using the entire United States except
New Orleans—not just the ten control cities—to construct control cohorts (see Appendix
Figure A.9). Each regression includes at least 340 million observations (the number of
individuals times the number of years in which they were alive during the sample period).
As with the ten control cities, we see no differential mortality pre-trends with either the
1999 or 1992 cohorts. We obtain similar, but slightly larger, estimates of the post-Katrina
reductions in the mortality rate, indicating that the cumulative mortality of the New Orleans
cohorts decreased by 2.3–3.3 percentage points by 2013. The similarity of our baseline results
to those obtained from using the rest of the United States as the control group demonstrates
that our results do not hinge on the particular choice of ten cities as the main controls.
   Finally, we probe the robustness of our baseline method of inference, which allows for
clustering at the ZIP code level. Because the entire city of New Orleans was affected by
Hurricane Katrina, our setting could reasonably be viewed as a case with only one treated
unit, which presents a challenge for reliable inference. Test statistics based on cluster-
robust standard errors will over-reject when there is only a single treated group (Conley
and Taber, 2011), while those based on the wild cluster bootstrap can either over- or under-
reject (MacKinnon and Webb, 2017). As detailed in Appendix Section A.2, we address
these challenges by re-estimating the mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina for the 1999
cohort using the synthetic control method of Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller (2010, 2015),
which yields point estimates similar to those of our regression approach. Following Abadie,
Diamond and Hainmueller (2015), we use permutation inference to assess the statistical
significance of the results by comparing the synthetic control estimate for New Orleans to
the distribution of “placebo” estimates obtained from assigning treatment status to each of


                                             26
the units (treatment or control). The synthetic control treatment effects for New Orleans
are almost always outliers at the 5 percent level or better, leading to similar inference as in
our baseline regression analysis where we cluster standard errors at the ZIP code level.


5.2.3   Concise Difference-in-Differences

Table 2 shows mortality estimates from equation (4) for the 2004 cohort (columns (1)–(3))
and the 1999 cohort (columns (4)–(6)). In addition to our preferred specification (columns
(1) and (4), labeled “A”), we also show results that additionally control for all combinations
of one-year age bins, sex, and race (labeled “B”) and where we further allow the year fixed
effects to vary by each one-year age bin, sex, and race combination (labeled “C”).
   Overall, the point estimates remain stable across control specifications and are similar in
magnitude to those obtained in the event study but are more precisely estimated. The esti-
mated initial (2005) mortality increase for the 2004 cohort is 0.55–0.56 percentage points. In
2006–2013, the 2004 New Orleans cohort experienced a statistically significant decline in its
mortality rate of 0.36–0.49 percentage points. The 1999 New Orleans cohort likewise expe-
rienced a short-run mortality rate increase, with an estimated magnitude ranging from 0.91
to 1.00 percentage points across control specifications. In the longer run, annual mortality
declined by 0.23–0.49 percentage points.


5.2.4   Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

The cohort-level mortality effects presented above could mask heterogeneity in Hurricane
Katrina’s effects across subpopulations of victims. To investigate potential heterogeneity,
we estimate the annual event study specification in equation (2) separately by gender (male
or female), race (black or not black), and age (65 and older or 64 and under at baseline).
The results for the 1992 and 2004 cohorts are shown in Appendix Figure A.10. We see no
evidence of differential pre-Katrina mortality trends for any group, further reinforcing the
validity of our counterfactual. The initial effect of Hurricane Katrina on mortality is larger


                                              27
for men, non-black individuals, and those aged 65 and older. Only those who are 64 or
younger at baseline do not experience a statistically significant mortality increase in 2005,
suggesting that, among these characteristics, age is the most important predictor of short-
run vulnerability to this disaster. Despite these initial differences, the mortality declines we
observe in 2006–2013 are similar for each group, supporting our decision to combine them
in our main analyses.
   We also use equation (5) to more concisely estimate heterogeneous treatment effects along
these and other dimensions, including the extent of flooding in one’s neighborhood and pre-
existing chronic conditions. Appendix Table A.6 presents the complete set of results. We
find that short-run mortality effects are larger, but not statistically significantly so, among
individuals initially living in parts of New Orleans that experienced two or more feet of
flooding. However, long-run mortality effects are similar for these two groups. A general
takeaway from examining other dimensions of heterogeneity is that long-term mortality
reductions following Hurricane Katrina do not appear to be limited to narrow subsets of
New Orleans victims. Even individuals that seem more vulnerable ex ante, such as those
with chronic conditions, did not experience increases in long-run mortality, and the long-run
survival gains for low-income individuals are statistically larger than those for higher-income
individuals. Finally, there is suggestive evidence that black individuals experience lower
initial mortality increases and larger subsequent mortality decreases, although the latter
difference is not statistically significant.


5.3    Migration and Place Effects

Thus far, we have shown that Hurricane Katrina led to significant declines in long-run mortal-
ity among the elderly and long-term disabled. This result, in isolation, is counterintuitive, as
natural disasters are unlikely to have positive direct effects on health. A natural hypothesis,
then, is that the mortality improvements following Hurricane Katrina came about indirectly,
through other effects of the hurricane. Such indirect benefits of Hurricane Katrina have been


                                               28
demonstrated in other contexts including higher earnings among the working-age population
(Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt, 2018) and improved test scores among displaced students
(Sacerdote, 2012). In this section, we explore the hypothesis that Hurricane Katrina may
have increased long-run survival rates by causing elderly and long-term disabled individuals
to move to areas more conducive to good health.20
       The elderly and long-term disabled mortality rate in New Orleans was among the highest
in the country prior to Hurricane Katrina, and individuals displaced by the storm generally
relocated to places with better health outcomes. To the extent that regional mortality
differences reflect causal effects of place, migrant health may have improved as a result of
the move. To examine the effect of place on mortality outcomes, we focus on individuals who
were displaced by the hurricane and relate their mortality outcomes to the local mortality
rate of the region they moved to, as outlined in Section 4.3 and captured by equation (6).


5.3.1      Determinants of Migration

The relationship in equation (6) reflects the causal effect of place, as captured by mortality
rates, on individual mortality under the assumption that baseline mortality risk among those
who move is uncorrelated with mortality rates in the destination region. This identification
assumption would be violated if migrants with lower latent mortality risk systematically sort
to destinations with different mortality rates.
       As a direct test of differential sorting, we estimate how migrants’ predicted mortality risk
varies with the local mortality of the county to which they move. To predict mortality risk,
we model the relationship between mortality and baseline (2004) characteristics Xi,2004 as


                                        Diedit = Xi,2004 β + it .


We estimate this model using the 2004 control county cohorts over the period 2006–2013. The
  20
    Hurricane Katrina may have also generated health benefits through other channels, including quality
improvements in New Orleans itself (e.g., Marsa, 2015). In Appendix Section A.3, we demonstrate that there
is no evidence of improvements over time in the health of those who stayed in New Orleans.


                                                   29
fitted model is then used to generate out-of-sample mortality predictions, PredictedMortalityi ,
for individuals in the 2004 New Orleans cohort, providing a time-invariant index of an in-
dividual’s ex ante mortality risk over the period 2006–2013. Our preferred set of predictors
Xi,2004 , described below, yields mortality predictions that are strongly correlated with real-
ized mortality among the New Orleans movers (see Appendix Figure A.13).
   To test whether migrants’ predicted mortality risk is correlated with the local mortality
of the county they move to, we estimate the following regression:


                 MDR2006C(i) = βPredictedMortalityi + [base ZIP5 FE ] + i ,                  (7)


where MDR2006C(i) is the mortality rate in migrant i’s destination county, as in equation (6).
We estimate equation (7) using one observation per mover from the 2004 New Orleans cohort.
   Table 3 reports the results of estimating equation (7) using increasingly rich sets of base-
line characteristics Xi,2004 to generate migrants’ predicted mortality risk. When mortality
risk is predicted using demographics alone (all possible one-year age, race, and sex combi-
nations), the relationship between predicted mortality and destination mortality is a small
and statistically insignificant (column (1)). However, when augmenting the mortality pre-
dictors to also include indicators for ESRD, eight chronic condition groups, and ventiles of
health care spending at baseline (our preferred set of predictors), the coefficient on predicted
mortality remains small but becomes statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
   Appendix Table A.8, which reports the relationship between destination mortality and
Xi,2004 directly (i.e., without combining the characteristics into a mortality risk measure),
suggests that this relationship is driven by a small number of individuals with
Alzheimer’s/dementia who have high predicted mortality risk and who move to higher-
mortality areas. When we exclude these individuals from the sample (column (3)), the
estimated relationship between predicted mortality and destination mortality ceases to be
statistically significant and the magnitude of the coefficient falls nearly to zero. For this sam-



                                               30
ple, the coefficient remains small and statistically insignificant even when enriching mortality
predictors to include all two-way interactions between chronic condition groups (column (4))
or when replacing grouped chronic conditions and spending ventiles with all available 27
chronic condition indicators and centiles of baseline spending (column (5)).21
   The limited degree of sorting on observable mortality risk supports the assumption that
the underlying mortality risk of New Orleans migrants was unrelated to destination mortality,
especially among those without Alzheimer’s/dementia. As a second test of this assumption,
we report in the next section how estimates of the relationship between mover mortality and
destination region mortality rates change when using increasingly comprehensive controls
and when restricting the movers sample to those without Alzheimer’s/dementia.


5.3.2   Movers’ Mortality and Local Mortality

Table 4 reports how movers’ 2006–2013 mortality varies with the mortality rate in their
destination county (equation (6)). Column (1) reports effects for the full movers sam-
ple when controlling only for baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects. The results show
that each percentage-point reduction in the destination mortality rate corresponds to a 0.85
percentage-point reduction in the mortality rate of New Orleans migrants who had relocated
to that region by 2006.
   Columns (2)–(6) of Table 4 show the results of estimating equation (6) using increasingly
comprehensive controls for baseline demographics and chronic conditions. Whenever we
control for chronic conditions, which restricts us to a subset of fee-for-service beneficiaries, we
also include fixed effects for centiles of beneficiaries’ 2004 Medicare spending. The estimated
coefficient on destination mortality changes little across these specifications, ranging from
0.83 to 1.01. Importantly, excluding beneficiaries with Alzheimer’s/dementia (columns (5)
and (6)) yields similar results to estimates that include those individuals (column (4)). The
stability of this estimate across the various sets of controls further suggests that significant
  21
     By contrast, Appendix Table A.7 shows that there is a consistent and strong negative relationship
between predicted mortality and the probability of leaving New Orleans in 2005–2006.


                                                 31
migrant sorting on latent mortality risk is unlikely in our context.
       Finally, as a placebo test to complement Table 3, column (7) reports the estimated “effect”
of destination mortality on predicted mortality, yielding a small and statistically insignifi-
cant coefficient. Because many beneficiaries who left New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
eventually returned (Figure 3b), the relationship between local mortality and movers’ sub-
sequent mortality should be interpreted as an intent-to-treat estimate.22 Additionally, even
if local mortality is a good proxy for the effect of place, the magnitude of the relationship
between local mortality and migrant mortality could reflect other factors, such as differences
between the demographics of the movers and those of local residents.
       Figure 5 shows a graphical representation of the results in columns (5) and (7) of Table 4.
Specifically, we residualize destination county mortality by the fixed effects included in each
regression and bin observations by centile of the resulting residuals, yielding 100 groups. For
each centile, we plot movers’ mean residualized mortality (black circles) and mean residual-
ized predicted mortality (green squares), with the sample means added for interpretability.
The resulting relationship between local mortality and movers’ subsequent mortality reflects
a general upward trend, demonstrating that the findings in Table 4 are not driven by a
few outliers. The relationship between destination mortality and movers’ ex ante predicted
mortality appears to be flat, supporting the absence of mover sorting on this dimension.
       In Appendix Table A.10, we extend these results by separating the post-Katrina years
into two periods: 2006–2007 and 2008–2013. We find a strong relationship between local
mortality and movers’ mortality as early as 2006–2007, suggesting that changes in migrant
mortality rates are not shaped solely by slow-moving channels such as lifestyle changes.
More generally, the speed with which individuals’ mortality rates reflect the local rate makes
it unlikely that this relationship is primarily due to them becoming more or less likely to
develop chronic conditions. Rather, faster-moving channels, such as the quality of the local
  22
    A potential difficulty with interpreting the intent-to-treat effect is that the probability of returning to
New Orleans could differ across high- and low-mortality destinations. However, Appendix Table A.9 indicates
that this was not the case.



                                                      32
health care system or other environmental factors, appear to be driving both local mortality
rates and the mortality rates of new arrivals.
       In Appendix Table A.11, we consider how movers’ mortality from specific causes varies
with destination mortality. We divide causes of death into four comprehensive categories:
cardiovascular, cancer, other internal causes, and external causes. For reference, column (1)
shows the all causes estimate for the years 2006–2008, as cause of death information is not
available for later years. We find that cardiovascular and other internal causes of death are
each statistically significantly associated with the destination mortality rate, but we estimate
small and statistically insignificant relationships with respect to cancer and external causes.
       Appendix Table A.12 shows that a mover’s mortality is more correlated with the local
mortality of beneficiaries of his/her race (black or not black) and with the local mortality
of his/her age group (65 or older versus 64 or younger). Our gender-specific estimates are
inconclusive: coefficients on both own-gender and other-gender local mortality rates are
sizable and positive, but neither is statistically significant when we estimate them jointly,
possibly because of a high correlation between the two mortality rates.23
       Appendix Table A.13 performs a similar exercise. with destination mortality defined
at the movers’ 2006 ZIP code, county, or CZ level. Destination ZIP code mortality is
strongly related to movers’ mortality (column (2)), but the magnitude is about half of
our preferred county-level mortality estimate (column (1)). Both ZIP- and county-level
mortality are individually significant when included jointly (column (3)). CZ mortality is
also significantly correlated with movers’ subsequent mortality, with a coefficient of 1.03
(column (3)). However, we lose power when we estimate a specification that includes both
county and CZ mortality (column (5)), likely due to the high correlation between county
mortality and CZ mortality (0.80 in our sample).24
       Appendix Table A.14 estimates the relationship between the destination mortality rate
  23
     The correlation between the local male and female mortality rates is 0.75 in our sample. By contrast, the
correlations between local black and non-black mortality rates and between local mortality rates for those
under 65 and those over 65 are much smaller (0.37 and 0.06, respectively).
  24
     The correlation between ZIP- and county-level mortality is smaller (0.41 in our sample).


                                                     33
and the probability that a mover has died by the end of 2013. Each percentage-point
increase in the destination mortality rate increases this probability by 3.3–4.0 percentage
points or 9–11 percent of the average cumulative mortality rate in the movers’ sample.
This is comparable to our preferred estimate that considers annual mortality (column (3) of
Table 4), which implies that a 1 percentage-point increase in the destination mortality rate
increases a movers annual mortality rate by about 15.5 percent of its mean.
   In Appendix Table A.15, we estimate the relationship between movers’ own mortality and
the mortality in their destination county using individuals’ locations from the 2006 Medicare
eligibility files (i.e., locations as of March 2007). This should exclude any short-term moves
and include moves that had not been reported by the beneficiary until later in 2006. The
coefficients on local mortality are slightly lower than, but similar to, the baseline estimates.
In Appendix Table A.16, we further demonstrate that our results are robust to controlling for
each of the 27 chronic condition indicators separately, controlling for distance between New
Orleans and the destination county, or excluding Houston and Baton Rouge (the two most
common destinations for New Orleans movers). Taken together, these results demonstrate
the importance of place in shaping health outcomes, even later in life.


5.3.3   Movers’ Mortality and Other Local Characteristics

Next, we examine how movers’ mortality rates vary with other attributes of the destination
county, including health behaviors, health care supply and quality, the environment, income
and income mobility, crime, urbanicity, and social capital. The full set of 21 attributes is
summarized in Appendix Table A.17, where we display the median, 10th percentile, and
90th percentile of each destination characteristic, as measured in the 2006 cross-section of
New Orleans movers.
   To estimate the correlation between movers’ mortality and each of these characteristics,
we simply replace the local mortality rate in equation (6) with the local characteristic of
interest. The correlation reflects the causal mortality effect of place, as captured by the local


                                               34
characteristic, under the assumption that migrants’ baseline mortality risk is uncorrelated
with the destination characteristic. Even if this assumption holds, we emphasize that the
estimates reflect the causal effect of the given characteristic itself only if the characteristic is
uncorrelated with any other local attribute that also affects movers’ mortality. Because each
region is a bundle of many, often correlated, characteristics, these results should be viewed
as suggestive of what actually determines place effects.
       Figure 6 reports the results for the no-Alzheimer’s/dementia sample, controlling for ZIP
code and year-by-age-by-race-by-sex fixed effects as well as for eight chronic condition indi-
cators and centiles of baseline spending. Black markers indicate effects when the outcome
is Diedit , an indicator for realized mortality. Green markers indicate effects when the out-
come is PredictedMortalityi , which evaluates the extent of differential sorting to regions with
high or low values of the characteristic by ex ante predicted mortality risk. In the figure,
we report standardized mortality effects and 95 percent confidence intervals, constructed by
multiplying coefficients and confidence intervals by the interdecile range of each characteris-
tic.25 Thus, each estimate can be interpreted as the change in actual or predicted mortality
when moving from a place in the 10th to a place in the 90th percentile of a characteristic’s
distribution in the movers sample.
       Across all local health characteristics we consider (Figure 6a), the estimated standardized
mortality effect is largest for the local mortality rate: moving to a region in the 10th versus
the 90th percentile of local mortality corresponds to a 0.76 percentage-point decrease in
realized mortality. The estimate is similar when we adjust the local mortality rate to account
for the demographics of local residents, which we construct by demeaning raw mortality by
interactions of one-year age, race, and sex. Migrants’ mortality is also higher in places with
higher rates of smoking, higher rates of obesity, or lower rates of exercise. We find small and
statistically insignificant relationships between movers’ mortality and the number of hospital
  25
    Appendix Table A.17 reports the interdecile range of each local characteristic among the movers sample.
Appendix Tables A.18 and A.19 report the numerical values of coefficients and standard errors graphed in
Figure 6, along with the correlation between each local characteristic and the local mortality rate.



                                                    35
beds per capita, the frequency of extremely hot days, the number of MDs per capita, an
index of hospital quality, or average medical spending. Surprisingly, moving to areas with
more air pollution, as measured by PM 2.5, is associated with a lower subsequent mortality
rate. However, in contrast with the other local health characteristics, this correlation can
largely be explained by sorting of ex ante healthier individuals into more polluted areas.
   Our analysis of movers’ mortality and local health care spending sheds new light on a long-
standing question of whether higher-spending regions generate better health outcomes than
lower-spending regions. Higher spending regions often have no better or even worse health
outcomes than lower-spending regions, suggesting that the returns to additional medical
spending may be low (e.g., Fisher, Bynum and Skinner, 2009; Cutler, 2010; Skinner and
Fisher, 2010). However, higher spending could be partly due to worse population health,
which could result in a net zero or even positive correlation between local spending and local
mortality even if the returns to living in a higher spending region are positive. Our focus on
movers allows us to sidestep this concern, and our results indicate that the return to living
in a high-spending region is low.
   Low returns to living in a high-spending area need not imply low returns to additional
medical spending: it depends on the extent to which differences in local health care spending
reflect differences in spending among the migrants themselves. We therefore estimate the
relationship between the average spending in destination counties and movers’ own subse-
quent spending. For this analysis, we restrict the sample to New Orleans residents who were
enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare for all 12 months of 2004 and only consider post-2006
spending in years in which they were enrolled in fee-for-service for all 12 months. As reported
in Appendix Table A.20, we find that a mover’s spending increases by $0.61–$0.93 for each
$1 increase in average local spending, estimates that are broadly consistent with those of
Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016).
   Our estimates of the spending and mortality effects of moving to a higher-spending region
can be combined in a back-of-the-envelope fashion to derive an implied cost of saving one


                                              36
life-year. Because we do not find a statistically significant relationship between destination
spending and movers’ mortality, we focus on deriving the lowest cost that is not ruled out
by our estimates. We start with our smallest estimate of the effect of an interdecile range
increase in destination medical spending (about a $4,000 increase) on a mover’s own spending
(0.61 × $4, 000). We divide the result by the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence
interval of the estimated annual mortality effect (−0.21 − 1.96 × 0.19 percentage points).
This calculation implies that we can rule out costs of less than $420,000 to save one life-year.
    Figure 6b reports how migrant mortality varies with local economic conditions. Migrants
to higher-income areas, areas with higher housing prices, more urban areas, or areas with
higher local government spending per capita subsequently experience lower mortality. Per-
haps counterintuitively, movers to areas with higher social capital experience significantly
higher mortality, although this could partly reflect ex ante sorting on mortality risk. We do
not find statistically significant differences in mortality with respect to local crime, poverty,
upward income mobility, or income segregation. While some of these economic character-
istics correlate with migrants’ mortality, all of the estimated standardized mortality effects
are smaller than that of the local mortality rate.


5.3.4    Discussion

We perform a back-of-the-envelope evaluation of the extent to which migration can account
for the average mortality decline among the New Orleans cohort in 2006–2013 (Table 2). The
2005–2006 local mortality change experienced by surviving Hurricane Katrina victims aver-
ages −0.31 percentage points (−0.39 of the interquartile range), including individuals who
remained in New Orleans, for whom the difference is zero.26 Combining our most carefully
  26
     To measure the changes in local mortality following Hurricane Katrina, we calculate the difference in
mortality between each individual’s 2006 county and the New Orleans county using the 2004 mortality rate
of each area’s 2004 cohort. Calculating mortality rate differences over the period 2006–2013 instead of 2004
would adhere most closely to our movers’ regression framework, but the 2006–2013 mortality rate for New
Orleans would be confounded by the effects of the hurricane. If counterfactual cohort mortality rates trend
in parallel across regions, then differences in 2004 mortality rates provide an unbiased, although perhaps less
precise, estimate of longer-run differences.



                                                      37
controlled estimates of the 2006–2013 mortality reduction (−0.36, column (3) of Table 2)
with the normalized relationship between local mortality rates and Katrina movers’ own
subsequent mortality (0.67, column (2) of Table A.18), we conclude that changes in victims’
                                                    
                                         0.67×0.39
local mortality explain 73 percent          0.36
                                                         of the average long-run mortality decline caused
by the hurricane.
   There are a number of factors that may explain the remaining 27 percent of the 2006–
2013 mortality decline. First, some of the long-run mortality decline following Hurricane
Katrina may be driven by variation in other destination characteristics that is orthogonal to
the local mortality rate. Appendix Table A.21 shows the results of simultaneously regressing
movers’ mortality on the local mortality rate and other local characteristics that, according to
Appendix Tables A.18 and A.19, are individually large and significant predictors of movers’
mortality (e.g., the local smoking rate). To preserve power, we add one other characteristic
at a time, reporting coefficients that are normalized by the interdecile range of the given
characteristic in the sample of movers (columns (1)–(6)). Nonetheless, jointly considering
both the local mortality rate and another local characteristic causes the coefficient on the
latter to cease to be statistically significant, likely due to the high correlation between local
mortality and these characteristics (see column (3) of Appendix Tables A.18 and A.19).
   Column (7) shows the average 2005–2006 change in each local characteristic for the sam-
ple of Hurricane Katrina victims who survived past 2005 as a share of the aforementioned
interdecile range. The local smoking rate and the median housing values of Hurricane Ka-
trina victims did not change meaningfully, but the local obesity rate and the percent of
population living in an urban area decreased, while the local per-capita income and the per-
cent of population exercising increased. For each specification, we also calculate the share
of the −0.36 mortality increase that the two variables in question can explain. The answer
ranges from 61 percent (when considering local mortality and smoking) to 85 percent (when
considering local mortality and exercise rates).
   Second, some of the mortality decline may reflect mortality displacement, although our


                                                         38
cumulative mortality results show that harvesting cannot explain the persistent mortality
reduction. Third, the mortality decline may be due in part to effects that were uncorre-
lated with whether or where victims moved. For example, the disaster may have increased
resilience among the elderly and long-term disabled (Adams et al., 2011). Fourth, it is
possible that earnings gains experienced by Hurricane Katrina victims (Groen, Kutzbach
and Polivka, 2016; Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt, 2018) contributed to mortality improve-
ments, although it should be noted that our sample consists mainly of retired and disabled
individuals, making this channel less likely.
       Fifth, elderly and long-term disabled victims may have become more likely to move in
with, or closer to, relatives. This mechanism is difficult to evaluate with existing data, but to
the extent that the propensity to move in with relatives is uncorrelated with local mortality,
its presence should not affect our conclusion.27 Finally, some of the long-run mortality decline
following Hurricane Katrina may be driven by where people move but may be based on local
factors that are uncorrelated with the attributes we considered in our analysis.
       The finding that destination mortality explains much of the estimated mortality effect
among Medicare victims of Hurricane Katrina suggests that the mortality declines in Fig-
ures 1 and 3a would have been even larger had more victims left New Orleans or had fewer
returned. Because the hurricane disproportionately displaced vulnerable individuals, includ-
ing those with higher medical spending or living in low-income neighborhoods (Appendix
Table A.8), one possible explanation for this large effect is that place effects may be larger
for this subpopulation than for healthier individuals. A related possibility is that place may
have a larger impact for black individuals, who make up a large share of the New Orleans
victims and were also disproportionately likely to move after the hurricane, than for other
races. Finally, it may be that place effects are particularly large in our sample of destinations,
which, for example, tend to be more urban than the average US location.
  27
    Between October 2005 and October 2006, the Current Population Survey collected information on Hur-
ricane Katrina evacuees and on whom they were living with. However, the sample size of elderly evacuees
(58 individuals in the March 2006 survey) is too small for meaningful statistical inference.



                                                  39
6     Conclusion

Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans and other parts of the Gulf Coast, causing bil-
lions of dollars’ worth of direct damage and displacing over one million individuals from their
homes. However, the hurricane appears to have come with a silver lining: the elderly and
long-term disabled living in New Orleans at the time of the hurricane experienced reductions
in long-run mortality. Our analysis suggests that relocation to areas with better mortality
outcomes can explain about 70 percent of the post-Katrina mortality decline among the el-
derly and long-term disabled. Migrants’ mortality is also lower in destinations with healthier
behaviors and higher incomes but is unrelated to local medical spending and quality.
    While we find that Hurricane Katrina reduced long-run mortality rates, these effects do
not necessarily imply that individuals’ welfare increased, as the destruction of physical assets
and lost utility due to displacement may have more than offset any indirect benefits of the
hurricane. We estimate that changes in mortality due to the hurricane—inclusive of the
initial mortality shock—are worth about $6,700 per capita. Given that moving costs have
been estimated to be as high as $300,000 for some populations (Kennan and Walker, 2010),
New Orleans residents may not have voluntarily relocated for these mortality benefits alone.
    Our paper provides novel evidence that one’s location of residence has a causal effect
on mortality, adding to a growing body of work on the importance of place for shaping
individual choices and well-being. The speed with which movers’ mortality rates respond to
the local mortality rate also suggests that health capital may accumulate or depreciate more
rapidly than the canonical model of Grossman (1972) implies, at least for the population
in our study. Finally, we estimate the effect of a natural disaster on long-run mortality,
something that data challenges have hindered in the past. Our conclusion that Hurricane
Katrina reduced mortality by inducing relocation demonstrates the importance of accounting
for migration and local conditions when projecting the long-run impacts of disasters.




                                              40
References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control
  Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco
  Control Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490): 493–505.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2015. “Comparative Poli-
  tics and the Synthetic Control Method.” American Journal of Political Science, 59(2): 495–
  510.
Adams, Vincanne, Sharon R. Kaufman, Taslim Van Hattum, and Sandra Moody.
  2011. “Aging Disaster: Mortality, Vulnerability, and Long-Term Recovery among Katrina
  Survivors.” Medical Anthropology, 30(3): 247–270.
Adeola, Francis O., and J. Steven Picou. 2012. “Race, Social Capital, and the Health
  Impacts of Katrina: Evidence from the Louisiana and Mississippi Gulf Coast.” Human
  Ecology Review, 19(1): 10–24.
Armenian, Haroutune K., Arthur K. Melkonian, and Ashot P. Hovanesian. 1998.
  “Long-Term Mortality and Morbidity Related to Degree of Damage Following the 1988
  Earthquake in Armenia.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 148(11): 1077–1084.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2004. “Medicare Spending, the Physician
  Workforce, and Beneficiaries’ Quality of Care.” Health Affairs, W4.
Barnhouse, Ann H., Christine J. Brugler, and Joan T. Harkulich. 1992. “Relocation
  Stress Syndrome.” International Journal of Nursing Terminologies and Classifications,
  3(4): 166–168.
Beven-II, John L., Lixion A. Avila, Eric S. Blake, Daniel P. Brown, James L.
  Franklin, Richard D. Knabb, Richard J. Pasch, Jamie R. Rhome, and Stacy R.
  Stewart. 2008. “Annual Summary–Atlantic Hurricane Season of 2005.” Tropical Predic-
  tion Center, NOAAN/NWS/National Hurricane Center.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2015. “The
  Impact of the Great Migration on Mortality of African Americans: Evidence from the
  Deep South.” American Economic Review, 105(2): 477–503.
Boustan, Leah Platt, Matthew E. Kahn, Paul W. Rhode, and Maria Lucia Yan-
  guas. 2017. “The Effect of Natural Disasters on Economic Activity in US Counties: A
  Century of Data.” NBER working paper 23410.
Brodie, Mollyann, Erin Weltzien, Drew Altman, Robert J. Blendon, and John M.
  Benson. 2006. “Experiences of Hurricane Katrina Evacuees in Houston shelters: Impli-
  cations for future planning.” American Journal of Public Health, 96(8): 1402–1408.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre H. Dubé, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2012. “The
  Evolution of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration.” American Economic
  Review, 102(6): 2472–2508.
Brunkard, Joan, Gonza Namulanda, and Raoult Ratard. 2008. “Hurricane Katrina
  Deaths, Louisiana, 2005.” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 2(04): 215–
  223.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2004. “Rapid Assessment of the Needs


                                            41
 and Health Status of Older Adults after Hurricane Charley–Charlotte, DeSoto, and Hardee
 Counties, Florida, August 27–31, 2004.” JAMA, 292(15): 1813–1814.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on In-
 tergenerational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 133(3): 1107–1162.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018b. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Inter-
 generational Mobility II: County-level estimates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 133(3): 1163–1228.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in
 Knowledge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 103(7): 2683–2721.
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scud-
 eri, Nicholas Turner, Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2016. “The Asso-
 ciation Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001–2014.” JAMA,
 315(16): 1750–1766.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Expo-
 sure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
 Experiment.” American Economic Review, 106(4): 855–902.
Chyn, Eric. 2018. “Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing De-
 molition on Children.” American Economic Review, 108(10): 3028–3056.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber. 2011. “Inference with “Difference
 in Differences” with a Small Number of Policy Changes.” The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 93(1): 113–125.
Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. 2016. “The 9/11 Dust Cloud and Pregnancy
 Outcomes: A Reconsideration.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(4): 805–831.
Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2013. “Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and
 Birth Outcomes.” Journal of Health Economics, 32(3): 487–503.
Cutler, David. 2010. “How Health Care Reform Must Bend the Cost Curve.” Health Affairs,
 29(6): 1131–1135.
Cutler, David M. 2004. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health
 Care System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Deryugina, Tatyana. 2017. “The Fiscal Cost of Hurricanes: Disaster Aid versus Social
 Insurance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 168–198.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Laura Kawano, and Steven Levitt. 2018. “The Economic Impact
 of Hurricane Katrina on its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns.” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(2).
DeSalvo, Karen B., Benjamin P. Sachs, and L. Lee Hamm. 2008. “Health Care
 Infrastructure in Post-Katrina New Orleans: A Status Report.” The American Journal of
 the Medical Sciences, 336(2): 197–200.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2011. “Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Evidence from
 Health Shocks to Patients Far from Home.” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 3(3): 221–243.

                                          42
Doyle, Joseph J., John A. Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel A. Kleiner.
  2015. “Measuring Returns to Hospital Care: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 123(1): 170–214.
Dwyer-Lindgren, Laura, Amelia Bertozzi-Villa, Rebecca W. Stubbs, Chloe Mo-
  rozoff, Johan P. Mackenbach, Frank J. van Lenthe, Ali H. Mokdad, and
  Christopher J.L. Murray. 2017. “Inequalities in Life Expectancy Among US Counties,
  1980 to 2014: Temporal Trends and Key Drivers.” JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(7): 1003–
  1011.
Eyer, Jonathan, Robert Dinterman, Noah Miller, and Adam Rose. 2018. “The Ef-
  fect of Disasters on Migration Destinations: Evidence from Hurricane Katrina.” Economics
  of Disasters and Climate Change, 2(1): 91–106.
Federal         Emergency         Management            Agency.       2005.      “Residents
  in     17    Orleans     Parish    Zip    Codes     May     Return    Home      to    In-
  spect            Damage.”           https://www.fema.gov/news-release/2005/12/09/
  residents-17-orleans-parish-zip-codes-may-return-home-inspect-damage
  (accessed March 23, 2018).
Fernandez, Lauren S., Deana Byard, Chien-Chih Lin, Samuel Benson, and
  Joseph A. Barbera. 2002. “Frail Elderly as Disaster Victims: Emergency Management
  Strategies.” Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 17(2): 67–74.
Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D.
  Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M.
  Midgley(Eds.). 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
  Climate Change Adaptation. Cambridge University Press.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of Ge-
  ographic Variation in Health Care: Evidence From Patient Migration.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131(4): 1681–1726.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2019. “Place-Based
  Drivers of Mortality: Evidence from Migration.” NBER Working Paper 25975.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thrse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
  F. Lee Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder. 2003a. “The Implications of Regional Variations
  in Medicare Spending. Part 1: The Content, Quality, and Accessibility of Care.” Annals
  of Internal Medicine, 138(4): 273–287.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thrse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
  F. Lee Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder. 2003b. “The Implications of Regional Variations
  in Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care.” Annals of
  Internal Medicine, 138(4): 288–298.
Fisher, Elliott S., Julie P. Bynum, and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2009. “Slowing the
  Growth of Health Care Costs—Lessons from Regional Variation.” New England Journal
  of Medicine, 360(9): 849–852.
Freedy, John R., Dean G. Kilpatrick, and Heidi S. Resnick. 1993. “Natural Disasters
  and Mental Health: Theory, Assessment, and Intervention.” Journal of Social Behavior
  and Personality, 8(5): 49.


                                            43
Galea, Sandro, Arijit Nandi, and David Vlahov. 2005. “The Epidemiology of Post-
  Traumatic Stress Disorder after Disasters.” Epidemiologic Reviews, 27(1): 78–91.
Grier, Peter. 2005. “The Great Katrina Migration.” The Christian Science Monitor.
Groen, Jeffrey A., Mark Kutzbach, and Anne E. Polivka. 2016. “Storms and Jobs:
  The Effect of Hurricanes on Individuals’ Employment and Earnings over the Long Term.”
  U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper No. CES 15-21R.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223–255.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-
  and Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” American Economic Review,
  102(4): 1477–1507.
Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migra-
  tion and Economic Development in the American South.” American Economic Review,
  104(3): 963–90.
Johnson, Janna E., and Evan J. Taylor. 2019. “The Long-Run Health Consequences of
  Rural-Urban Migration.” Quantitative Economics, 10(2): 565–606.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2005. “The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income,
  Geography, and Institutions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 271–284.
Kennan, John, and James R. Walker. 2010. “Wages, Welfare Benefits and Migration.”
  Journal of Econometrics, 156(1): 229–238.
Kessler, Ronald C., Sandro Galea, Michael J. Gruber, Nancy A. Sampson,
  Robert J. Ursano, and Simon Wessely. 2008. “Trends in Mental Ellness and Sui-
  cidality after Hurricane Katrina.” Molecular Psychiatry, 13(4): 374.
MacKinnon, James G, and Matthew D Webb. 2017. “Wild Bootstrap Inference for
  Wildly Different Cluster Sizes.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 32(2): 233–254.
Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, Steven Ruggles,
  et al. 2017. “IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 12.0
  [Database].” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 39.
Marsa, Linda. 2015. “Top-notch community health care emerges in New Orleans from
  Hurricane Katrina’s rubble.” USA Today.
Mensah, George A., Ali H. Mokdad, Samuel F. Posner, Eddie Reed, Eduardo J.
  Simoes, Michael M. Engelgau, Vulnerable Populations in Natural Disasters
  Working Group, et al. 2005. “When Chronic Conditions Become Acute: Prevention
  and Control of Chronic Diseases and Adverse Health Outcomes During Natural Disasters.”
  Preventing Chronic Disease, 2(Spec No).
Molitor, David. 2018. “The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardi-
  ologist Migration.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1): 326–56.
Morrow, Betty Hearn. 1999. “Identifying and Mapping Community Vulnerability.” Dis-
  asters, 23(1): 1–18.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 114(5): 871–904.


                                          44
Nakamura, Emi, Jósef Sigurdsson, and Jón Steinsson. 2017. “The Gift of Moving:
  Intergenerational Consequences of a Mobility Shock.” NBER Working Paper 22392.
National Hurricane Center. 2018. “Costliest U.S. Tropical Cyclones Tables Update.”
  https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/news/UpdatedCostliest.pdf (accessed March 23, 2018).
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2018. “Billion-Dollar Weather
  and Climate Disasters: Table of Events.” https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/ (ac-
  cessed March 23, 2018).
National Weather Service. 2016. “Extremely Powerful Hurricane Katrina Leaves a His-
  toric Mark on the Northern Gulf Coast.” https://www.weather.gov/mob/katrina (ac-
  cessed May 24, 2018).
Neria, Yuval, Arijit Nandi, and Sandro Galea. 2008. “Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
  Following Disasters: A Systematic Review.” Psychological Medicine, 38(04): 467–480.
Nigg, Joanne M., John Barnshaw, and Manuel R. Torres. 2006. “Hurricane Katrina
  and the Flooding of New Orleans: Emergent Issues in Sheltering and Temporary Housing.”
  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 604(1): 113–128.
Norris, Fran H., Matthew J. Friedman, and Patricia J. Watson. 2002. “60000
  Disaster Victims Speak: Part II. Summary and Implications of the Disaster Mental Health
  Research.” Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes, 65(3): 240–260.
Norris, Fran H., Matthew J. Friedman, Patricia J. Watson, Christopher M.
  Byrne, Eolia Diaz, and Krzysztof Kaniasty. 2002. “60,000 Disaster Victims Speak:
  Part I. An Empirical Review of the Empirical Literature, 1981–2001.” Psychiatry: Inter-
  personal and Biological Processes, 65(3): 207–239.
Paxson, Christina, Elizabeth Fussell, Jean Rhodes, and Mary Waters. 2012. “Five
  Years Later: Recovery from Post-Traumatic Stress and Psychological Distress Among Low-
  Income Mothers Affected by Hurricane Katrina.” Social Science & Medicine, 74(2): 150–
  157.
Pietrzak, Robert H., Melissa Tracy, Sandro Galea, Dean G. Kilpatrick, Ken-
  neth J. Ruggiero, Jessica L. Hamblen, Steven M. Southwick, and Fran H.
  Norris. 2012. “Resilience in the Face of Disaster: Prevalence and Longitudinal Course of
  Mental Disorders following Hurricane Ike.” PLOS One, 7(6): e38964.
Rhodes, Jean, Christian Chan, Christina Paxson, Cecilia Elena Rouse, Mary
  Waters, and Elizabeth Fussell. 2010. “The Impact of Hurricane Katrina on the Men-
  tal and Physical Health of Low-Income Parents in New Orleans.” American Journal of
  Orthopsychiatry, 80(2): 237–247.
Rowland, Diane. 2007. “Health Care in New Orleans: Before and After Katrina.” Con-
  gressional Testimony, Hearing on “Post Katrina Health Care: Continuing Concerns and
  Immediate Needs in the New Orleans Region”.
Sacarny, Adam. 2018. “CMS Hospital Compare Data 2004–2016.” https://github.com/
  asacarny/hospital-compare (accessed October 1, 2019).
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2012. “When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term Outcomes for
  Student Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.” American Economic Journal: Ap-
  plied Economics, 4(1): 109–135.


                                           45
Sastry, Narayan, and Jesse Gregory. 2013. “The Effect of Hurricane Katrina on the
  Prevalence of Health Impairments and Disability among Adults in New Orleans: Differ-
  ences by Age, Race, and Sex.” Social Science & Medicine, 80: 121–129.
Sastry, Narayan, and Mark VanLandingham. 2009. “One Year Later: Mental Illness
  Prevalence and Disparities Among New Orleans Residents Displaced by Hurricane Kat-
  rina.” American Journal of Public Health, 99(Suppl 3): S725–S731.
Siegel, Jeremy J. 1992. “The Real Rate of Interest from 1800–1990: A Study of the US
  and the UK.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 29(2): 227–252.
Sirovich, Brenda E., Daniel J. Gottlieb, H. Gilbert Welch, and Elliott S. Fisher.
  2006. “Regional Variations in Health Care Intensity and Physician Perceptions of Quality
  of Care.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(9): 641–649.
Skinner, Jonathan. 2011. “Causes and Consequences of Regional Variations in Health
  Care.” In Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 2, edited by Mark Pauly, Thomas McGuire,
  and Pedro Barros, 45–93. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Skinner, Jonathan, and Elliott Fisher. 2010. “Reflections on Geographic Variations in
  U.S. Health Care.”
Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John E.
  Wennberg, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2010. “Regional Variations in Diagnostic Practices.”
  New England Journal of Medicine, 363(1): 45–53.
Strobl, Eric. 2011. “The Economic Growth Impact of Hurricanes: Evidence from U.S.
  Coastal Counties.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 575–589.
Super, N., and B. Biles. 2005. “Displaced by Hurricane Katrina: Issues and Options for
  Medicare Beneficiaries.” Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Medicare Policy Brief.
Torche, Florencia. 2011. “The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a
  Natural Experiment.” Demography, 48(4): 1473–1491.
Wolshon, Brian. 2006. “Evacuation Planning and Engineering for Hurricane Katrina.” The
  Bridge, 36(1): 27–34.




                                           46
Figures

                             Figure 1: Cohort annual mortality rates for New Orleans versus other areas


                        10
Annual mortality rate




                         8




                         6




                         4
                                                                Hurricane Katrina


                             1999      2001       2003       2005         2007         2009    2011       2013
                                     New Orleans County             Control Counties          Commuting Zones

Notes: The figure shows raw annual death rates for the 1999 Medicare cohort, by initial region of residence.
Mortality rates for the New Orleans county cohort are plotted in black, and mortality rates for the ten
control county cohorts are plotted in blue. The light gray lines plot mortality rates for each US commuting
zone cohort with at least 1,000 beneficiaries, except for the New Orleans commuting zone.




                                                                47
                                   Figure 2: Short-run effects of Hurricane Katrina (2004 Medicare cohort)

                              8

                              7

                              6
 Deaths per 1,000




                              5

                              4

                              3

                              2

                              1
                                                                                               New Orleans        Control cities
                                                               Hurricane Katrina
                              0
                                   -30     -20     -10        0       10       20       30       40          50       60
                                                              Weeks since Hurricane Katrina
                                                         (a) Raw weekly mortality rates

                              8

                              7
 Change in deaths per 1,000




                              6

                              5

                              4

                              3

                              2

                              1

                              0
                                                               Hurricane Katrina
                              -1
                                   -30     -20     -10        0       10       20       30       40          50       60
                                                              Weeks since Hurricane Katrina
                                                   (b) Difference-in-differences event study
Notes: Panel (a) shows raw weekly mortality rates over the 34 weeks preceding and the 65 weeks following
Hurricane Katrina for the New Orleans cohort (black line) and for the control cities cohort (blue line).
Panel (b) shows difference-in-differences estimates and corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals from
equation (1), adjusted such that the reference period is the average of the 34 weeks prior to the hurricane.
The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire
week and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given week. The week in which Hurricane Katrina
struck New Orleans is labeled “0” on the horizontal axis (this week begins on Monday, August 29, 2005).
The gray dashed line indicates the week of FEMA’s “look-and-leave”/“look-and-stay” announcement date
(December 9, 2005). Standard errors are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. Coefficients and
confidence intervals have been scaled by 1,000 to reflect changes in deaths per thousand beneficiaries. See
Appendix Table A.3 for numerical values of a subset of the statistics plotted here.


                                                                          48
                                                Figure 3: Long-run effects of Hurricane Katrina (2004 Medicare cohort)

                                          1
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                          0



                                         -1


                                                          Hurricane Katrina
                                         -2
                                                                                                                              -2.07


                                                     Annual mortality
                                         -3
                                                     Cumulative mortality

                                              2004    2005       2006         2007       2008     2009   2010   2011   2012     2013
                                                                     (a) Annual and cumulative mortality
 Change in leaving (percentage points)




                                         50


                                         40


                                         30


                                         20


                                         10
                                                          Hurricane Katrina

                                          0
                                              2004    2005       2006         2007       2008     2009   2010   2011   2012     2013
                                                                                     (b) Relocation
Notes: The figure shows estimates of changes in the probability that an individual dies (panel (a)) or is
living outside of their 2004 CZ of residence (panel (b)). The black solid lines reflect estimates from
equation (2). The dashed line in panel (a) tracks the implied changes in cumulative mortality probability
(equation (3)). The gray shaded areas represent 95 percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
that are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. Section 4.2 defines the dependent variables.
Coefficients and confidence intervals have been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points.
Appendix Table A.4 reports numerical values of these point estimates and their standard errors along with
the empirical survival rate of the 2004 New Orleans cohort.




                                                                                           49
                                        Figure 4: Long-run mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina (earlier Medicare cohorts)

                                        1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0
                                        0.5
                                        0.0
                                        -0.5
                                        -1.0
                                        -1.5
                                        -2.0
                                                                                          Hurricane Katrina                         -2.06
                                        -2.5
                                        -3.0
                                                       Annual mortality
                                        -3.5           Cumulative mortality

                                               1992   1994     1996      1998     2000    2002      2004      2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                              (a) 1992 Medicare cohort

                                        1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0
                                        0.5
                                        0.0
                                        -0.5
                                        -1.0
                                        -1.5
                                        -2.0
                                                                                          Hurricane Katrina                         -1.99
                                        -2.5
                                        -3.0
                                                       Annual mortality
                                        -3.5           Cumulative mortality

                                               1992   1994     1996      1998     2000    2002      2004      2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                              (b) 1999 Medicare cohort
Notes: The figure shows estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals from equation (2) for the Medicare
cohort indicated below each panel. The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a
beneficiary was alive during the entire year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year.
Standard errors are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. Coefficients and confidence intervals have
been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points. Appendix Table A.5 reports numerical values of
these point estimates and their standard errors.




                                                                                         50
                                           Figure 5: Mover mortality by destination mortality

                              7.5

                              7.0
Mover mortality (residuals)




                                                                                                                slope (se):
                              6.5                                                                                0.94 (0.29)


                              6.0

                              5.5

                              5.0                                                                               slope (se):
                                                                                                                 -0.07 (0.20)
                              4.5

                              4.0

                                    4.50   4.75      5.00        5.25       5.50          5.75           6.00       6.25
                                                       Destination county mortality (residuals)
                                                    Annual mortality        Predicted annual mortality

Notes: The figure shows a graphical representation of the results in columns (5) and (7) of Table 4, which
describe, respectively, how movers’ realized and ex ante predicted mortality rates relate to the local
mortality of their destination county. For each outcome, both the outcome and destination county mortality
are residualized by the fixed effects included in their respective regression, with the sample means added
for interpretability. For each centile of residualized destination county mortality, the plot shows movers’
mean residualized mortality (black circles) and mean residualized predicted mortality (green squares).




                                                                       51
                      Figure 6: Mover mortality by destination characteristic

                       Mortality rate

                    Percent smoking

              Adjusted mortality rate

                       Percent obese

             Hospital beds per capita

               Hot days/year (90°F+)

                Physicians per capita

               Hospital quality index

   Medicare spending per beneficiary

                   Percent exercising
                                                                                                Died
              PM 2.5 concentrations                                                             Predicted mortality
                                          -1.0             -0.5           0.0             0.5             1.0
                                                              Standardized mortality effect

                                  (a) Destination health characteristics

                 Social capital index

                          Crime rate

                    Poverty rate, 65+

 Upward income mobility (from p75)

 Upward income mobility (from p25)

                 Income segregation

       Local gov. spending per capita

              Urban population share

                 Median home value
                                                                                                Died
                   Income per capita                                                            Predicted mortality
                                          -1.0             -0.5           0.0             0.5             1.0
                                                              Standardized mortality effect

                                (b) Destination economic characteristics
Notes: The figure shows estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of how realized and ex ante
predicted mortality rates of movers relate to the local characteristics of the counties to which they moved.
The standardized mortality effect reflects the effect of an interdecile range change in the local characteristic
reported in the row, based on the 10th and 90th percentiles of the local characteristic exposure among
movers. Numerical values of the point estimates and standard errors for the “died” and “predicted
mortality” outcomes are reported in columns (1) and (4), respectively, of Appendix Tables A.18–A.19.
Appendix Table A.17 reports summary statistics for each of the destination characteristics. See notes to
Appendix Table A.18 for additional details about the sample and controls.
                                                      52
Tables

                       Table 1: Summary statistics (2004 Medicare cohort)

                                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)
                                                                                10 Control       NOLA
                                                                   NOLA            cities        movers

 Percent male                                                        43.0           41.9           41.4
 Percent black                                                       60.5           39.2           75.6
 Age                                                                 70.1           71.0           67.2
 Percent 65+                                                         77.7           81.2           69.5
 Percent 75+                                                         40.7           42.2           32.9
 Income for 65+ year-olds in 9-digit ZIP                            28,230         30,962         25,005
 Percent below median income                                         49.9           34.8           55.4
 Percent who experienced 2+ feet of flooding during Katrina          56.5           N/A            67.1
 Percent enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare in 2004                68.6           92.5           69.7
 2004 Medicare spending (fee-for-service only)                      10,460         9,640          8,857
 Percent with end-stage renal disease                                 2.1            1.7            2.0
 Percent with blood and kidney disease                               46.2           52.7           43.6
 Percent with heart disease and stroke                               64.8           69.4           63.2
 Percent with diabetes                                               27.4           28.5           28.9
 Percent with musculoskeletal condition                              28.6           30.4           27.0
 Percent with respiratory disease                                    12.8           14.0           12.8
 Percent with cancer                                                  6.8            8.3            4.9
 Percent with Alzheimer’s/dementia                                   12.4           12.6            8.5
 Percent with other chronic condition                                39.9           41.1           38.9
 Number of individuals                                              65,457        941,685         26,467


Notes: The table summarizes baseline (2004) characteristics of the 2004 Medicare cohort. The unit of
observation is a beneficiary. Income and flood variables are available only for individuals with valid
nine-digit ZIP codes (57,314 New Orleans individuals, 23,295 New Orleans movers, and 847,509 individuals
from the ten control cities). Medicare spending is available only for individuals enrolled in fee-for-service
Medicare (44,913 New Orleans individuals, 18,695 New Orleans movers, and 871,007 individuals from the 10
control cities). Chronic condition variables are only available for beneficiaries who have been continuously
enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare over a condition-specific look-back window, typically two years.
Chronic conditions sample sizes range from 31,027 to 37,944 for New Orleans individuals, from 12,532 to
15,797 for New Orleans movers, and from 656,230 to 769,430 for individuals from the ten control cities.




                                                     53
                  Table 2: Concise mortality difference-in-differences estimates

                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                             2004 Cohort                             1999 Cohort

 2005 x New Orleans               0.56***      0.55***      0.56***       0.91***      0.91***      1.00***
                                   (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.16)        (0.18)       (0.19)       (0.15)
 (2006–2013) x New Orleans       −0.48***     −0.49***     −0.36***      −0.49***     −0.48***      −0.23**
                                  (0.12)       (0.14)       (0.11)        (0.14)       (0.17)        (0.09)

 Included controls                   A            B            C             A            B            C
 Dep. var. mean                     5.55         5.55         5.55         6.31         6.31          6.31
 Observations                    7,987,100    7,987,100    7,986,926    10,470,949   10,470,949    10,470,692


Notes: The table reports difference-in-differences estimates of equation (4) based on the 2004 cohort
(columns (1)–(3)) and the 1999 cohort (columns (4)–(6)). The dependent variable is a mortality indicator
equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary
died in a given year. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have
been scaled by 100. Controls are as follows: A includes baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects; B also
includes fixed effects for each age (one-year bins), race, and sex combination. C additionally controls for
age-race-sex effects by year. Standard errors are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                      54
    Table 3: Correlation between ex ante predicted mortality and destination mortality
                                  (New Orleans movers)

                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

 Predicted mortality                  0.0007       0.0016**        0.0004         0.0004         0.0006
                                     (0.0009)      (0.0008)       (0.0009)       (0.0008)       (0.0008)
 Alzheimer’s/dementia dropped          No             No             Yes           Yes            Yes
                                                                                 Two-way
 Chronic conditions predictors        None         Grouped        Grouped      interactions    Individual
 Baseline spending predictors         None          Ventiles      Ventiles       Ventiles       Centiles

 Dep. var. mean                        5.40          5.40           5.39           5.39           5.39
 Observations                         26,467        12,319         11,268         11,268         11,268


Notes: The table reports the results of estimating equation (7) using increasingly rich sets of baseline
characteristics to generate migrants’ predicted mortality risk. The dependent variable is the average
2006–2013 mortality rate of the destination county’s 2004 cohort. All regressions control for baseline ZIP
code fixed effects. Both predicted mortality and destination mortality are expressed in percentage points.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.10.




                                                    55
         Table 4: Migrant mortality by destination mortality (New Orleans movers)

                                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)
                                                                                                       Pred.
                                                              Died indicator                           mort.

 Mean death rate in 2006 county      0.85***    0.83***      0.86***   1.01***   0.94***   0.98***     −0.07
                                      (0.29)     (0.23)       (0.23)    (0.30)    (0.29)    (0.29)     (0.20)

 Set of fixed effects                   A         B            C        C          C          C          A
 Alzheimer’s/dementia dropped           No        No           No       No        Yes       Yes         Yes
 Chronic conditions controls            No        No           No       Gr.       Gr.      All int.     No
 Dep. var. mean                        5.55       5.55         5.54     6.11      5.48       5.47      5.21
 Observations                        175,936    175,936      175,821   80,084    75,142     75,137    75,286
 R-squared                            0.00        0.04         0.05     0.09      0.08       0.08      0.04


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6). The dependent variable in columns (1)–(6) is a
mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to
one if the beneficiary died in a given year. The dependent variable in column (7) is the beneficiary’s ex
ante predicted mortality. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and dependent variable mean have
been scaled by 100. Controls are as follows: A includes baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects; B also
includes fixed effects for each age (one-year bins), race, and sex combination. C additionally controls for
age-race-sex effects by year. Gr. means that indicators for eight groups of chronic conditions are included;
All int. means that indicators for each possible interaction of the eight groups of chronic conditions are
included. All specifications that include chronic condition controls also include fixed effects for centiles of
baseline Medicare spending. Standard errors are clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                        56
A       Online Appendix
A.1      Data
A.1.1     Medicare Beneficiary Location

Medicare eligibility files provide the ZIP code of each beneficiary’s mailing address, which
is maintained by the Social Security Administration (SSA). This is the address that is used
to deliver cash benefits to the beneficiary (such as Social Security) and is also used by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for premium billing. While the address
from SSA may be updated by the beneficiary at any time, the Medicare eligibility files that
are made available to researchers only report beneficiary ZIP codes as of a given date in each
year.
    The format of Medicare’s eligibility files have changed over time, including the date on
which the location variable is “frozen.”1 For some file years, the location variable reflects a
beneficiary’s ZIP code as of March of the following calendar year (in these cases, CMS does
not specify the exact day in March on which records were frozen). In the remaining file years,
the location variable reflects a beneficiary’s ZIP code as of December 31 of that calendar
year. If the beneficiary dies prior to the date on which the location variable is frozen for the
Medicare eligibility file, then the location variable will reflect the beneficiary’s last location
on record prior to his or her death.
    The Medicare eligibility files we use, which we access through the National Bureau of
Economic Research, span eligibility file formats. The chart below summarizes when the
location variable is frozen for each eligibility file that we use.

                 Medicare eligibility file year t         ZIP code reflects residence as of...
                    
                 t ∈ 1999, 2007, [2009, 2013]             min(date of death; December 31, t)
                    
                 t ∈ [1992, 1998], [2000, 2006], 2008     min(date of death; March t + 1)


    We illustrate how the structure of the Medicare eligibility files affects observations in
our sample with two examples. Suppose a beneficiary moves in November 2005 and dies
on January 10, 2006. Because she survived until January 1, 2006, she will appear in the
2006 Medicare eligibility file. In both the 2005 and 2006 eligibility files, her ZIP code will
correspond to where she moved in November 2005. Suppose another beneficiary who turned
65 in the year 2000 moves in January 2005 and remains alive through 2013. He will appear
in each of the 2000–2013 Medicare eligibility files. In the 2000–2003 files, his ZIP code will
   1
    For a description of how Medicare’s beneficiary eligibility and enrollment files have changed over time,
see https://www.resdac.org/resconnect/articles/138 (accessed on June 19, 2018).


                                                        A-1
correspond to his location prior to the move. In the 2004–2013 files, his ZIP code will reflect
his new location.

A.1.2    Chronic Conditions

We use end-of-year chronic condition flags from the 2004 Medicare beneficiary summary file
to determine whether an individual in the 2004 Medicare cohort has a particular condition at
baseline. These flags are based on patterns of services that the beneficiary has received and
serve as a proxy for whether the beneficiary is receiving treatment for a particular condition.2
Because patterns of services are only available for Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in tradi-
tional fee-for-service Medicare, our chronic condition flags are only defined for beneficiaries
who have been continuously enrolled in fee-for-service for the condition-specific look-back
window used to construct the condition flag.
    The Medicare data we use include 27 chronic condition flags, which we group into eight
categories as follows:

  1. Heart disease and stroke: acute myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, heart
     failure, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, stroke/transient ischemic attack

  2. Respiratory disease: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma

  3. Blood and kidney disease: chronic kidney disease, anemia, hyperlipidemia

  4. Cancer: breast cancer, colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, endometrial
     cancer

  5. Diabetes: own category

  6. Musculoskeletal: hip fracture, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis/osteoarthritis

  7. Alzheimer’s/dementia: Alzheimer’s disease, dementia

  8. Other: cataracts, glaucoma, hypothyroidism, benign prostatic hyperplasia, depression

A.1.3    Cause of Death

We use cause of death information, which is available for all Medicare beneficiaries from
1999–2008. For beneficiaries who die during this period, Medicare provides the ICD-10
  2
    The CMS Chronic Conditions Data Flags Data Dictionary provides details on how each
flag is defined, available from https://healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/seermedicare/medicare/
chronic-conditions-flags.pdf (accessed June 20, 2018).



                                              A-2
cause of death code from the National Death Index (NDI), a centralized database of death
record information compiled from state vital statistics offices and maintained by the National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).3
    We first categorize ICD-10 cause of death codes into 39 groups based on the NCHS’s list
of 39 selected causes of death.4 For use in our analysis, we further categorize these 39 causes
of death into four groups as follows:

   1. Cardiovascular deaths: hypertensive heart disease with or without renal disease,
      ischemic heart disease, other diseases of the heart, essential (primary) hypertension
      and hypertensive renal disease, cerebrovascular diseases, atherosclerosis, other diseases
      of circulatory system

   2. Cancer deaths: stomach cancer, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung cancer, breast
      cancer, ovarian and uterine cancer, prostate cancer, bladder cancer, non-Hodgkin’s
      lymphoma, leukemia, other cancer

   3. Other internal causes of death: tuberculosis; syphilis; HIV; diabetes; Alzheimer’s
      disease; influenza and pneumonia; chronic lower respiratory disease; peptic ulcer;
      chronic liver disease and cirrhosis; nephritis; pregnancy, childbirth, and the puer-
      perium; perinatal conditions; congenital abnormalities; SIDS; abnormal clinical find-
      ings; all other diseases

   4. External causes of death: Motor vehicle accidents, suicide, homicide, other acci-
      dents, other external causes

A.1.4    Destination Characteristics

For our analysis of the effect of place on migrant mortality, we relate migrant outcomes to
21 destination county characteristics. The characteristics are derived from various sources
and are intended to capture a broad range of environmental, economic, and public health
conditions. Summary statistics for these characteristics among the sample of New Orleans
movers are shown in Appendix Table A.17. Below, we list all of the characteristics, organized
by data source. We then describe how each variable was constructed.




  3
     For more information about the NDI, see https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ndi.htm (accessed June 20,
2018).
   4
     The list of 39 selected causes of death and the ranges of ICD-10 codes that comprise each cause are
available at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/im9_2002.pdf.pdf [sic] (accessed June 20, 2018).


                                                 A-3
• Medicare administrative records

     – Mortality rate
     – Adjusted mortality rate
     – Medicare spending per beneficiary

• Census

     – Income per capita
     – Poverty rate, 65+
     – Median home value
     – Urban population share

• Area Resources Files

     – Physicians per capita
     – Hospital beds per capita

• CMS Hospital Compare

     – Hospital quality index

• Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System

     – Percent obese
     – Percent smoking
     – Percent exercising

• Chetty and Hendren (2018)

     – Upward income mobility (from p25)
     – Upward income mobility (from p75)
     – Social capital index
     – Crime rate
     – Local government spending per capita
     – Income segregation

• Climate

     – PM 2.5 concentrations
     – Hot days/year (90°F+)

                                      A-4
Medicare administrative records We calculate mortality rates and medical spending
using the annual Medicare beneficiary summary files. We calculate the raw mortality rate
for each county as the annual mortality rate of the county’s 2004 Medicare cohort (i.e.,
of Medicare beneficiaries who lived in that county as of March 2005) averaged over 2006–
2013. We construct adjusted mortality rates for each county by demeaning raw mortality
by interactions of one-year age bins, race, and sex, using the demographics of the county’s
2004 cohort.
    We measure local spending analogously to how we measure the raw mortality rate: by
averaging the post-2006 Medicare spending across fee-for-service beneficiaries in the county’s
2004 Medicare cohort. We exclude beneficiary-years where the beneficiary was not enrolled
in fee-for-service Medicare for all twelve months.

Census We measure income, poverty, home values, urban population share, and total
population for each county using 2000 Decennial Census data, which we obtain from the
IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS) (Manson et al., 2017).
The table and dataset names we refer to below are from the NHGIS.
    We measure income as per capita income in 1999 (table NP082A of dataset 2000_SF3a).
We measure the poverty share among the 65+ population as the number of individuals
aged 65 or older with income in 1999 below the poverty level (table NP087C of dataset
2000_SF3a) as a share of the 65+ population for whom poverty status can be determined
(table NP087C of dataset 2000_SF3a). We measure median home values as the median value
of owner-occupied housing units (table NH085A of dataset 2000_SF3a). Finally, we use the
total population of a county (table NP001A of dataset 2000_SF1a) as the denominator for
physicians and hospital beds per capita.

Area Resources File (ARF) We obtain the number of physicians and hospital beds for
each county in 2004 from the ARF. For the number of doctors, we use variable F12129-04,
the total number of active MDs (federal and non-federal) in 2004, taken from the 2005 release
of the ARF (sourced from the AMA Physician Master File). The variable F08921-04, taken
from the 2009 release of the ARF (sourced from the AHA Survey Database), reports the
total number of hospital beds in 2004.
    We calculate the number of physicians per capita by dividing the total number of active
MDs by the total population in the county (from census data, described above). Likewise,
we calculate hospital beds per capita by dividing the total number of hospital beds by the
county population.



                                             A-5
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) We measure obesity, smok-
ing, and exercise behavior using the BRFSS, a telephone survey that collects information
on health-related behaviors and chronic conditions. We pool survey responses for the period
1995–2004.
    We calculate percent smoking in each county as the percent of survey respondents for
whom the reported smoking status is either “current, daily” or “current, other than daily”.
We calculate percent obese in each county as the percent of survey respondents who report
a body mass index of 30 or greater. We calculate percent exercising in each county as the
percent of survey respondents who report participating in any physical activities or exercises
other than their regular job in the past month.

CMS Hospital Compare We measure hospital quality within each county using data
from the CMS Hospital Compare Process of Care Scores for 2004, which we obtain from
Sacarny (2018). We focus on process of care measures for heart attack (AMI), heart
failure (HF), and pneumonia (PN), and restrict to metrics that are reported in at least
1,750 counties. This restriction selects a total of 13 metrics, consisting of four AMI met-
rics (ami1_share, ami2_share, ami5_share, ami6_share), three HF metrics (hf1_share,
hf2_share, hf3_share), and six PN metrics (pn1_share, pn2_share, pn3_share, pn4_share,
pn5_share, pn6_share).
    For each process of care metric, we calculate the share of patients in each county who
receive appropriate care according to that metric, among hospitals for whom the metric is
reported. We combine these 13 process of care metrics into a single hospital quality index,
defined as the county-level mean across all metrics (this mean will be missing if any of the
underlying metrics are missing for that county). Thus, this hospital quality index can be
loosely interpreted as the share of AMI/HF/PN patients receiving appropriate care in the
county.

Chetty and Hendren (2018) We obtain county-level measures of upward income mobil-
ity, social capital, crime, local government spending, and income segregation from Chetty and
Hendren (2018b).         For measuring upward income mobility, we use the variables
pct_causal_p25_kr26 and pct_causal_p75_kr26 from Online Data Table 2, “Preferred Esti-
mates of Causal Place Effects by County.”5 The measures of upward income mobility capture
the percentage change in income at age 26 from spending one more year of childhood in the
county, for children whose parents were at the 25th or 75th percentiles, respectively, of the
  5
   A description of the variables in Online Data Table 2 can be found at https://opportunityinsights.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/online_table2-2.pdf (accessed October 1, 2019).



                                                A-6
US household income distribution.
    The measures of social capital, crime, local government spending, and income seg-
regation come from Online Data Table 4, “Complete County-Level Dataset: Causal Ef-
fects and Covariates.” Specifically, we use the variables scap_ski90pcm, crime_total, sub-
cty_total_expend_pc, and cs00_seg_inc.6

Climate We measure fine particulate (PM 2.5) air pollution concentrations and the number
of extremely hot days using data recorded by ground monitor stations. We measure the
average PM 2.5 concentration in a county for the period 2006–2013. We obtain PM 2.5
air pollution data from EPA’s Air Quality System database, which provides hourly data
at the pollution-monitor level for pollutants that are regulated by the Clean Air Act. We
aggregate monitor readings to the daily level by averaging across hourly observations and
then construct daily ZIP code level pollution measures by calculating the inverse distance-
weighted average across all monitors located within 20 miles of the ZIP code centroid. We
then average these daily values over the period 2006–2013. Finally, we aggregate ZIP code
level average pollution concentrations to the county level by averaging across all ZIP codes
matched to a county based on the county recorded for the plurality of Medicare beneficiaries
living in that ZIP code.
    Our source for daily temperature variables is the Global Historical Climatology Network
GHCN-Daily database, which provides weather measurements from land surface stations
across the United States. For the period 2006–2013, we calculate daily high and low tem-
peratures for each ZIP code as the inverse distance-weighted average of all available daily
maximum and minimum temperatures, respectively, for GHCN stations within a 20-mile
radius of the ZIP code centroid. The daily average temperature for a ZIP code is calculated
as the midpoint of the daily high and low temperatures. We calculate the number of days
per year in which the average daily temperature exceeded 90°F in a ZIP code, and then
aggregate to the county level using the same ZIP code to county crosswalk used to construct
the pollution measure.


A.2     Estimation via Synthetic Control
We estimate the effect of Hurricane Katrina on mortality using individual-level data and re-
gression analysis. An alternative approach is to treat the New Orleans cohort as a single unit
and compare its survival prospects to those of cohorts from other areas using the synthetic
control method (Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller, 2010, 2015). Because the synthetic
  6
   A description of the variables in Online Data Table 4 can be found at https://opportunityinsights.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/online_table4-2.pdf (accessed October 1, 2019).


                                                A-7
control method is not easily adaptable to individual-level controls and is not appropriate for
studying how movers’ subsequent mortality is related to local mortality, we do not adopt
it as our primary specification. Here, we demonstrate that our main annual event study
findings are similar if we use this approach.
    We focus on the 1999 cohort, as this provides multiple years of pre-Katrina data to form
the synthetic control unit. Because meaningful permutation inference would be difficult to
do with only ten control cities, our set of potential control units consists either of all counties
with a baseline beneficiary population of over 50,000 (yielding 157 counties, including New
Orleans) or the 400 commuting zones (CZs) closest in log Medicare population to the city
of New Orleans in 1999.7 We exclude smaller counties and CZs because their annual death
rates are inherently more variable, making them less reliable counterfactuals for New Orleans.
Similarly, the largest CZs are less plausible counterfactuals. Whether implementing synthetic
controls using control counties or CZs, we always use the city (not CZ) for the New Orleans
region.
    Because we are primarily interested in changes in the death rate, our outcome variable
is a county’s/CZ’s annual death rate minus its 1999–2004 average death rate. We use this
demeaned death rate in each year between 1999 and 2004 to form the synthetic treatment
unit, whose outcomes are used as the counterfactual. The synthetic control algorithm assigns
weights to the control units such that the difference between the demeaned death rate of
the treated unit (the city of New Orleans) and the weighted average of the control units is
minimized in the pre-treatment period. The weighted difference in the post-period is then
the estimated treatment effect.
    The synthetic control method does not produce standard errors directly. To conduct
statistical inference, Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller (2015) suggest “in-space placebos”
tests, where treatment status is assigned to each of the control units one at a time. The same
synthetic control methodology is applied in each case to produce a distribution of estimated
treatment effects. Statistical inference is based on how often the “effect” for a control unit is
more extreme than that of the actually treated unit (in this case, New Orleans). We follow
this procedure, fixing the timing of the treatment in 2005.8
    The results for the annual mortality rate are shown in Appendix Figure A.11. We plot the
estimated treatment effect for the New Orleans cohort (black line) as well as the estimated
  7
    Our results are similar when the set of potential control units consists of 460 counties that are at least as
populous as the smallest of our ten control cities (16,469 beneficiaries at baseline); 89 counties with baseline
populations of 50,000–100,000; or the 300 CZs that are closest in log number of beneficiaries to the city of
New Orleans.
  8
    The synthetic control method fails to converge for four of the county permutations. These are thus
omitted from the sample, leaving us with 152 permutations where New Orleans is not the treated county.



                                                      A-8
“effects” when assigning each of the other counties/CZs to be the treated unit. The post-2005
New Orleans is an outlier, both with respect to the initial mortality increase in 2005 and the
subsequent mortality decreases. Specifically, the 2005 treatment effect is always the largest
for New Orleans, the true treated unit. In each year between 2006 and 2013, the estimated
change in mortality for New Orleans is smaller than 141–152 of the other 152 counties for
which we estimate a placebo treatment effect and 368–399 of the other 400 CZs. The implied
p-values thus generally fall between 0 (in cases where the New Orleans mortality change is
literally the largest/smallest) and 0.080 (the year when New Orleans has the 33rd smallest
mortality change in the sample of CZs). The magnitudes of the estimated treatment effects
in 2006–2013 are slightly larger than in our main regression event study, ranging from −0.31
percentage points to −0.93 percentage points.
    Using the estimated change in the mortality rate in each period and the empirical survival
probability of each county’s/CZ’s cohort, we calculate the implied change in cumulative
mortality by 2013 (equation (3)). We plot the density of these estimates in Appendix Figure
A.12. The red line indicates where the true treatment effect (i.e., that of New Orleans) falls
in the distribution. We estimate that Hurricane Katrina caused 2013 cumulative mortality
among victims initially living in New Orleans to decline by −2.13 (−2.30) percentage points
when using CZs (counties) as synthetic controls. Only five counties and three CZs have
larger falls in the 2013 cumulative mortality rate than New Orleans, implying p-values of
0.039 and 0.010, respectively.


A.3     The Importance of Rebuilding in New Orleans
In this section, we briefly consider whether improvements in New Orleans following Hurricane
Katrina help explain the aggregate mortality improvements we estimate. There are two key
challenges for directly testing how the hurricane affected mortality among individuals who
remained in New Orleans. First, because the decision to move is observed only for individuals
who survived the initial shock of the hurricane, we cannot estimate stayer-specific difference-
in-differences mortality effects using pre-Katrina as a reference period. Second, differences in
mortality levels between stayers and movers are also unlikely to be informative of the relative
effect of staying in New Orleans since, as we show in the paper, the decision regarding whether
to leave or stay was highly correlated with observable predictors of mortality risk.
    New Orleans infrastructure was devastated following Hurricane Katrina, however, and
therefore it is likely that any health improvements accruing to New Orleans stayers would
have developed over time during rebuilding. To empirically test this intuition, we restrict the
sample to individuals from the 2004 cohort who survived until at least the beginning of 2006.


                                              A-9
We then estimate equation (2) with only individuals who were still living in their baseline
CZ as of March 2006 (“stayers”). Because survival until 2006 is necessary for inclusion, the
reference category is 2006. Figure A.14a plots the results, which show that stayers’ mortality
did not improve over time relative to 2006.9 This pattern suggests it is unlikely that the
cohort-level mortality declines among hurricane victims reflect health improvements from
remaining in New Orleans.




  9
      Appendix Figure A.14b shows the results of an analogous exercise for movers.


                                                   A-10
Appendix Figures and Tables

                    Figure A.1: New Orleans Hurricane Katrina flood map




Notes: The figure shows the location of New Orleans (top panel) and Hurricane Katrina flood depth
estimates at a resolution of five meters (bottom panel). Flood data come from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

                                                 A-11
Figure A.2: Capacity and utilization of the New Orleans health care system following Hurricane Katrina
                                                                      (a) Hospital beds                                                                                (b) Hospital employees




                                                                                                                                     17000
                  3500




                                                                                                                                 11000 13000 15000
                  3000




                                                                                                                      Number of hospital employees
 Number of hospital beds
   2000        2500




                                                                                                                        9000
                  1500




                                                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                                                   Hurricane Katrina


                                                                                                                                     7000
                  1000




                                                                                                                                     5000
                                                            45000




                                   1997   1999                          2001       2003     2005   2007     2009                                     1997      1999       2001   2003     2005   2007   2009



                                                      (c) Medicare discharges                                                                                      (d) New Orleans population
                                                                   35000
                                            Number of Medicare discharges
                  45000




                                                                                                                                     500
                                                                                                                                     450
                           35000
  Number of Medicare discharges




                                                       25000




                                                                                                                                         400
                                                                                                                       Population, thousands
             25000




                                                                                                                                350
                                            15000




                                                                                                                      300
 15000




                                                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                                                   Hurricane Katrina
                                                                                                                                     250
                  5000




                                                            5000




                                                                                                                                     200




                                   1997   1999                          2001       2003     2005   2007     2009                                     1997      1999       2001   2003     2005   2007   2009
                                                                            1997          1999       2001          2003                                     2005          2007          2009

                                                                                                    New Orleans                                              Control city average

Notes: The figure shows the number of hospital beds (panel (a)), the number of hospital employees (panel (b)), and the
number of Medicare discharges (panel (c)) in New Orleans and the ten control cities we use for our baseline
difference-in-differences analysis. Panel (d) shows the New Orleans population. The vertical dashed red lines indicate the
year of Hurricane Katrina (2005). Sources: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Hospital 2552-96 Cost Report Data
file; Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                                                                                                   A-12
                            Figure A.3: New Orleans and control cities




                                                                                ● Detroit
                                                                       ● Gary
                                                                                                 ● Newark

                                                                                             ● Baltimore
                                                               ● St   Louis
                                                                                            ● Richmond
                                                                                              ● Portsmouth

                                                               ● Memphis

                                                                       ● Birmingham
                                                               ● Jackson


                                                                New Orleans




Notes: The figure shows the location of New Orleans and each of the ten control cities used to construct
comparison cohorts for identifying the effects of Hurricane Katrina on Medicare beneficiaries initially
residing in New Orleans.




                                                  A-13
                   Figure A.4: Cohort annual adjusted mortality rates for New Orleans versus other areas


                        10
Annual mortality rate




                         8




                         6




                         4
                                                           Hurricane Katrina




                             1999    2001       2003     2005         2007         2009    2011       2013
                                    New Orleans County          Control Counties          Commuting Zones

Notes: The figure shows annual death rates for the 1999 Medicare cohort, by initial region of residence,
after adjusting for all combinations of beneficiaries’ current age (in one-year bins), race, and sex and
adding the overall mean mortality rate to the results. Mortality rates for the New Orleans county cohort
are plotted in black, and mortality rates for the ten control county cohorts are plotted in blue. The light
gray lines plot mortality rates for each US commuting zone cohort with at least 1,000 beneficiaries, except
for the New Orleans commuting zone.




                                                           A-14
                                  Figure A.5: Mortality rates by regional cohort mortality rank in 1999–2005

                             9
                                             Regions ranked by cohort
                                              mortality in 1999-2005                                                1.28
                             8
 Annual mortality rate




                             7


                             6


                             5                                                                     New Orleans (rank: 7)
                                  1.23                                                             Rank 1-21, excl. NOLA
                                                                                                   Rank 22-101 (N=80)
                             4                                                                     Rank 102-301 (N=200)
                                                                                                   Rank 302-381 (N=80)
                                                          Hurricane Katrina
                                                                                                   Rank 382-401 (N=20)

                                     1999       2001        2003         2005        2007   2009     2011       2013

                                                             (a) Annual mortality rates

                             65                                                                                     2.35
                                             Regions ranked by cohort
                                              mortality in 1999-2005
                             55
 Cumulative mortality rate




                             45


                             35


                             25                                                                    New Orleans (rank: 7)
                                                                                                   Rank 1-21, excl. NOLA
                                                                                                   Rank 22-101 (N=80)
                             15
                                                                                                   Rank 102-301 (N=200)
                                                          Hurricane Katrina                        Rank 302-381 (N=80)
                              5                                                                    Rank 382-401 (N=20)

                                     1999       2001        2003         2005        2007   2009     2011       2013

                                                           (b) Cumulative mortality rates
Notes: The 400 commuting zones closest to New Orleans county in 1999 Medicare population are ranked
and grouped by the average mortality rate of their 1999 cohort over the period 1999–2005. New Orleans
county is reported as its own group (solid black line). The next 20 highest mortality regions—those of rank
1–21, excluding New Orleans—correspond to the dashed blue line. Panel (a) shows average mortality across
cohorts in each group, by year. Panel (b) shows cumulative mortality across cohorts in each group, by year.

                                                                              A-15
                                        Figure A.6: Long-run relocation effects of Hurricane Katrina (1999 Medicare cohort)
                                        50
Change in leaving (percentage points)




                                        40



                                        30



                                        20



                                        10

                                                                               Hurricane Katrina

                                         0
                                             1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Notes: The figure shows estimates of changes in the probability that an individual is living outside of their
1999 CZ of residence. The black line plots estimates from equation (2), where the dependent variable is a
relocation indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was living in his or her 1999 CZ of residence in that year
and is equal to one if the beneficiary was living in a different CZ. The gray shaded areas represent 95
percent confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code.
Coefficients and confidence intervals have been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points.
Appendix Table A.5 reports numerical values of these point estimates and their standard errors.




                                                                               A-16
                                                                 Figure A.7: Annual mortality event studies with demographic controls

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)
                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Baseline controls                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Baseline controls            Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex                                                                                -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex-year

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                        (a) 1992 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex controls                               (b) 1992 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex-year controls

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)
                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Baseline controls                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Baseline controls            Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex                                                                                -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex-year

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                        (c) 1999 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex controls                               (d) 1999 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex-year controls

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Baseline controls                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Baseline controls            Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex                                                                                -2.0           Baseline + age-race-sex-year

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                        (e) 2004 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex controls                                 (f) 2004 Medicare cohort: age-race-sex-year controls
Notes: The black lines plot difference-in-differences event study estimates from equation (2) but is modified to include
demographic controls. Panels in the left column control for all combinations of baseline age (one-year bins), race, and sex.
Panels in the right column further control for age-race-sex effects by year. The gray shaded areas represent 95 percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. For reference, the dashed
lines show the baseline estimates reported in Figures 3 and 4.




                                                                                                                    A-17
                                                                          Figure A.8: Survival analysis of Hurricane Katrina

                                   1.20                                                                                                            1.20
 Mortality change (hazard ratio)




                                                                                                                 Mortality change (hazard ratio)
                                   1.15                                                                                                            1.15

                                   1.10                                                                                                            1.10

                                   1.05                                                                                                            1.05

                                   1.00                                                                                                            1.00

                                   0.95                                                                                                            0.95

                                                                                                                                                   0.90
                                   0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hurricane Katrina
                                                                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                0.85
                                   0.85

                                          '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12                                               '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                     (a) No demographic controls (1992 cohort)                                                                     (b) Baseline age-race-sex controls (1992 cohort)

                                   1.20                                                                                                            1.20
 Mortality change (hazard ratio)




                                                                                                                 Mortality change (hazard ratio)
                                   1.15                                                                                                            1.15

                                   1.10                                                                                                            1.10

                                   1.05                                                                                                            1.05

                                   1.00                                                                                                            1.00

                                   0.95                                                                                                            0.95

                                   0.90                                                                                                            0.90
                                                                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                                               Hurricane Katrina
                                   0.85                                                                                                            0.85

                                          '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12                                               '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                     (c) No demographic controls (1999 cohort)                                                                     (d) Baseline age-race-sex controls (1999 cohort)

                                   1.20                                                                                                            1.20
 Mortality change (hazard ratio)




                                                                                                                 Mortality change (hazard ratio)




                                   1.15                                                                                                            1.15

                                   1.10                                                                                                            1.10

                                   1.05                                                                                                            1.05

                                   1.00                                                                                                            1.00

                                   0.95                                                                                                            0.95

                                   0.90                                                                                                            0.90
                                                                  Hurricane Katrina                                                                                               Hurricane Katrina
                                   0.85                                                                                                            0.85

                                          '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12                                               '92   '94   '96   '98     '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10   '12

                                     (e) No demographic controls (2004 cohort)                                                                     (f) Baseline age-race-sex controls (2004 cohort)
Notes: Each panel reports results from a discrete time (annual) survival analysis of Hurricane Katrina. We fit proportional
hazard models that include interactions of year and New Orleans fixed effects, allowing the hazard rate to vary arbitrarily
over time for New Orleans and control counties. The panels report estimated hazard ratios (exponentiated coefficients) for
the year and New Orleans interactions using 2004 as the reference year, analogous to the difference-in-differences estimates
reported in Figures 3–4. Proportional hazard models with no other controls (reported in the left column) are equivalent to
the linearly additive hazard model in equation (2) with no demographic controls. Proportional hazard models that also
control for all combinations of baseline age (one-year bins), race, and sex are reported in the right column. The gray shaded
areas represent 95 percent confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code.
Estimates are provided for the 1992, 1999, and 2004 Medicare cohorts, as indicated in the caption to each panel.

                                                                                                              A-18
             Figure A.9: Long-run mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina using the United States
                                 (except New Orleans) as the control group

                       2
                       1
 (percentage points)
   Mortality change




                       0
                       -1
                       -2
                       -3
                                                                                                       -3.27
                       -4
                                                                           Hurricane Katrina
                       -5
                         1992   1994   1996   1998   2000    2002   2004    2006      2008     2010   2012
                                                (a) 1992 Medicare cohort

                       2
                       1
 (percentage points)
   Mortality change




                       0
                       -1
                       -2
                       -3                                                                              -2.46

                       -4
                                                                           Hurricane Katrina
                       -5
                         1992   1994   1996   1998   2000    2002   2004    2006      2008     2010   2012
                                                (b) 1999 Medicare cohort

                       2
                       1
 (percentage points)
   Mortality change




                       0
                       -1
                       -2
                                                                                                       -2.32
                       -3
                       -4
                                                                           Hurricane Katrina
                       -5
                         1992   1994   1996   1998   2000    2002   2004    2006      2008     2010   2012
                                                (c) 2004 Medicare cohort
Notes: The black lines plot difference-in-differences event study estimates from equation (2) for the
Medicare cohort indicated above each panel. “Treated” beneficiaries are those initially living in New
Orleans, and “control” beneficiaries are those initially living in any other part of the United States. The
dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given calendar year and is equal
to zero if a beneficiary survived that year. The dashed blue line tracks the implied changes in cumulative
mortality probability (equation (3)). The shaded areas represent 95 percent confidence intervals based on
standard errors that are clustered by a beneficiary’s baseline ZIP code. Coefficients and confidence
intervals have been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points.



                                                            A-19
                                                                 Figure A.10: Annual mortality event studies by baseline demographics

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)
                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Age 65 or older at baseline        Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Age 65 or older at baseline       Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Under age 65 at baseline                                                                               -2.0           Under age 65 at baseline

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12

                                                      (a) Baseline age (1992 cohort)                                                                                        (b) Baseline age (2004 cohort)

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)
                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Black                              Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Black                             Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Other                                                                                                  -2.0           Other

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12

                                                           (c) Race (1992 cohort)                                                                                                (d) Race (2004 cohort)

                                        1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                                                                                                       Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0                                                                                                                   1.0

                                        0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0.0                                                                                                                   0.0

                                        -0.5                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                        -1.0                                                                                                                  -1.0

                                        -1.5                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                                       Male                               Hurricane Katrina                                                                  Male                              Hurricane Katrina
                                        -2.0           Female                                                                                                 -2.0           Female

                                               '92   '94   '96    '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12                                                    '92   '94   '96   '98   '00   '02   '04   '06   '08   '10     '12

                                                            (e) Sex (1992 cohort)                                                                                                 (f) Sex (2004 cohort)
Notes: Each panel reports difference-in-differences event study estimates from equation (2), but they are estimated
separately by the baseline demographic group indicated by the legend. Estimates are provided for both the 1992 and 2004
Medicare cohorts, as indicated in the caption to each panel.




                                                                                                                    A-20
                                 Figure A.11: Annual mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina, synthetic control method


                                        1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0


                                        -0.5
                                                                     Hurricane Katrina

                                        -1.0


                                               1999      2001        2003           2005         2007        2009        2011       2013
                                                                 New Orleans County                 Control Counties (N = 152)

                                                (a) Control units: Counties with 50,000 or more beneficiaries at baseline


                                        1.5
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0


                                        -0.5
                                                                     Hurricane Katrina

                                        -1.0


                                               1999      2001        2003           2005         2007        2009        2011       2013
                                                             New Orleans County                 Control Commuting Zones (N = 400)

                               (b) Control units: Commuting zones closest to New Orleans county in baseline population
Notes: The black lines plot the effect of Hurricane Katrina on the annual mortality rate of the New
Orleans cohort, estimated using the synthetic control method. The gray lines plot the “effect” of a 2005
event for each non-New Orleans county/commuting zone in the sample, also estimated using the synthetic
control method. Estimates have been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points.



                                                                                         A-21
Figure A.12: Cumulative mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina, synthetic control method

           0.4



           0.3

                           New Orleans
 Density




           0.2



           0.1
                           N = 5 (3.3%)                  N = 147 (96.1%)


           0.0

                 -4           -3         -2         -1         0            1          2           3   4
                                    Effect on 2013 cumulative mortality rate (percentage points)

                      (a) Control units: Counties with 50,000 or more beneficiaries at baseline

           0.4



           0.3

                            New Orleans
 Density




           0.2



           0.1

                             N = 3 (0.7%)                N = 397 (99.0%)

           0.0

                 -4           -3         -2         -1         0            1          2           3   4
                                    Effect on 2013 cumulative mortality rate (percentage points)

 (b) Control units: 400 commuting zones closest to New Orleans county in baseline population
Notes: The black lines plot the density of the effects of a 2005 event on the 2013 cumulative mortality rates
of regions in our sample, estimated using the synthetic control method. The red line indicates where the
New Orleans county effect falls in that distribution. Text labels describe how many control regions have a
cumulative mortality effect that is less or greater than the cumulative mortality effect in New Orleans.



                                                           A-22
                                 Figure A.13: Movers’ realized mortality by ex ante predicted mortality

                        25
                                                                                                                                   22.2

                        20
Annual mortality rate




                                                                                                                            16.0
                        15
                                                                                                                     12.0
                                                                                                              10.6
                        10                                                                              9.0
                                                                                                  7.6
                                                                                            6.3
                                                                                  5.1 5.7
                         5                                                  4.5
                                                                    3.9 4.0
                                            2.2 1.9   2.7 3.0 2.8
                                     1.5
                             0.7 0.9
                         0
                             1     2    37  4 8  5    6
                                                    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                        Ventile of baseline predicted mortality
Notes: The figure shows realized annual mortality in 2006–2013 among Hurricane Katrina movers by
ventile of ex ante predicted mortality. The mortality prediction model, described in Section 5.3.1, is
estimated using the 2004 control county cohorts over the period 2006–2013. The fitted model is then used
to generate out-of-sample mortality predictions for individuals in the 2004 New Orleans cohort, providing a
time-invariant index of an individual’s ex ante mortality risk over the period 2006–2013.




                                                                      A-23
                                           Figure A.14: Post-Katrina changes in stayers’ and movers’ mortality over time

                                        2.5


                                        2.0
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.5


                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0


                                        -0.5
                                                  Hurricane Katrina
                                        -1.0
                                               2005       2006        2007       2008      2009         2010   2011   2012   2013

                                                                             (a) Post-Katrina stayers

                                        2.5


                                        2.0
 Mortality change (percentage points)




                                        1.5


                                        1.0


                                        0.5


                                        0.0


                                        -0.5
                                                  Hurricane Katrina
                                        -1.0
                                               2005       2006        2007       2008      2009         2010   2011   2012   2013

                                                                             (b) Post-Katrina movers
Notes: The figure shows estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimating equation (2) over
the period 2006–2013, using 2006 as the reference year. Panel (a) shows results estimated for the sample of
stayers, i.e., beneficiaries who, as of March 2006, were living in their baseline (2004) CZ of residence. Panel
(b) shows results estimated for the sample of movers, i.e., beneficiaries who, as of March 2006, were living
outside of their baseline (2004) CZ of residence. The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to
zero if a beneficiary is alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a
given year. Standard errors are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. Coefficients and confidence
intervals have been scaled by 100 to reflect changes in percentage points.



                                                                                        A-24
               Table A.1: Annual mortality rates, New Orleans and control cohorts

                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
                       1992 Cohorts                   1999 Cohorts                   2004 Cohorts
                                 Control                         Control                        Control
                New Orleans       cities      New Orleans         cities      New Orleans        cities

 1992               5.07           4.92
 1993               5.44           5.32
 1994               5.45           5.46
 1995               5.72           5.75
 1996               5.90           5.94
 1997               6.15           6.15
 1998               6.64           6.46
 1999               7.09           6.93            5.48           5.25
 2000               7.06           7.14            5.45           5.43
 2001               7.37           7.39            5.71           5.59
 2002               7.80           7.74            6.04           5.79
 2003               8.10           7.97            6.25           5.93
 2004               8.10           8.00            6.23           5.96            5.14            4.84
 2005              9.67            8.44            7.34           6.22            5.92            5.06
 2006              8.38            8.61            6.26           6.36            5.19            5.14
 2007              8.28            9.02            6.24           6.64            5.16            5.34
 2008              8.77            9.51            6.48           6.93            5.20            5.56
 2009              8.91            9.54            6.56           6.93            5.29            5.57
 2010              9.72            10.10           7.23           7.35            5.78            5.89
 2011              9.93            10.55           7.17           7.59            5.76            6.04
 2012              10.59           11.10           7.91           7.97            6.21            6.27
 2013              10.70           11.69           8.15           8.37            6.43            6.62
 Cohort size       71,433        973,938          67,649         967,062         65,457         941,685


Notes: The table reports the annual mortality rate (in percentage points) of the cohort specified at the top
of each column.




                                                   A-25
                    Table A.2: Top 20 destinations for New Orleans movers

                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
                                   Number of          Percent of        Dest. mort.     Dest. Medicare
                                    movers             movers              rate            spending

 Harris, Texas                        3,754              14.18             5.27              14,399
 East Baton Rouge, Louisiana          2,552              9.64              5.55              12,210
 Dallas, Texas                        1,211               4.58             5.32              13,509
 Bexar, Texas                          604               2.28              5.17              12,045
 Tarrant, Texas                        554               2.09              5.46              13,030
 Lafayette, Louisiana                  435               1.64              5.35              12,062
 Fulton, Georgia                       429               1.62              5.36              10,909
 Tangipahoa, Louisiana                 403               1.52              5.66              15,246
 DeKalb, Georgia                       391               1.48              5.13              10,592
 Travis, Texas                         365                1.38             5.01              11,757
 Cobb, Georgia                         316               1.19               5.1              10,844
 Ascension, Louisiana                  314               1.19              5.28              12,981
 Caddo, Louisiana                      311               1.18              5.95              13,227
 Shelby, Tennessee                     302               1.14              5.64              11,429
 Los Angeles, California               292                1.1              4.93              14,495
 St. Landry, Louisiana                 286               1.08              5.53              13,327
 Rapides, Louisiana                    282               1.07              5.49              12,014
 Hinds, Mississippi                    266               1.01              5.35              11,604
 Fort Bend, Texas                      264                 1               4.64              12,701
 Gwinnett, Georgia                     214                0.81             4.86              10,061
 Total                               13,545              51.18


Notes: The table reports the number and percent of movers to each of the top 20 destination counties for
New Orleans migrants as well as the destination mortality rate and per-beneficiary Medicare spending.
Percentages are relative to the total number of movers.




                                                  A-26
                         Table A.3: Weekly mortality values for Figure 2

                              (1)                           (2)                            (3)
                   Deaths per thousand (New         Deaths per thousand         Effect on death rate per
 Event week                Orleans)                      (control)                  thousand people

 −8                            0.96                          1.25                        −0.29*
                                                                                         (0.15)
 −7                            1.41                          1.27                         0.14
                                                                                         (0.24)
 −6                            0.95                          1.21                        −0.25*
                                                                                         (0.13)
 −5                            1.31                          1.42                        −0.11
                                                                                         (0.15)
 −4                            1.24                          1.25                        −0.02
                                                                                         (0.12)
 −3                            1.26                          1.27                        −0.01
                                                                                         (0.15)
 −2                            1.59                          1.32                         0.27
                                                                                         (0.17)
 −1                            1.66                          1.27                        0.39**
                                                                                         (0.16)
 0                             7.37                          1.37                        6.01***
                                                                                          (0.68)
 1                             1.92                          1.26                        0.66***
                                                                                          (0.15)
 2                             2.11                          1.34                         0.76**
                                                                                          (0.32)
 3                             1.70                          1.30                          0.41*
                                                                                          (0.22)
 4                             1.79                          1.44                         0.36**
                                                                                          (0.18)
 5                             1.65                          1.24                         0.41**
                                                                                          (0.19)
 6                             1.58                          1.31                           0.27
                                                                                          (0.22)
 7                             1.46                          1.29                           0.17
                                                                                          (0.26)
 8                             1.83                          1.33                         0.50**
                                                                                          (0.22)
 9                             1.80                          1.46                          0.34*
                                                                                          (0.20)
 10                            1.43                          1.32                           0.11
                                                                                          (0.18)
 Dep. var. mean                                                                           1.39
 Observations               4,356,235                     61,734,576                   66,090,811


Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report raw weekly mortality rates for the 2004 New Orleans and control city
cohorts, respectively. Column (3) reports estimates of equation (1). Estimates prior to eight weeks before
Hurricane Katrina and more than ten weeks after Hurricane Katrina are omitted for space, but estimates
for all weeks are plotted in Figure 2. Mortality rates have been scaled by 1,000, implying that each
coefficient corresponds to the change in the number of deaths per thousand people. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   A-27
          Table A.4: Point estimates and cumulative survival statistics for Figure 3

                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                  Effect on                    Cumulative
                                                   annual        Effect on     survival to    Effect on
                                                  mortality     cumulative      beginning     Pr(leaving
                                                    rate         mortality       of year      2004 CZ)

 2005                                             0.56***        0.56***         100.00        48.3***
                                                   (0.16)         (0.16)                        (3.5)
 2006                                              −0.25           0.29           94.86        46.8***
                                                   (0.17)         (0.28)                        (3.9)
 2007                                             −0.48***        −0.16           89.24        42.0***
                                                   (0.13)         (0.36)                        (3.5)
 2008                                             −0.67***        −0.71*          84.61        35.8***
                                                   (0.12)         (0.42)                        (2.9)
 2009                                             −0.58***       −1.14**          80.24        33.1***
                                                   (0.15)         (0.48)                        (2.7)
 2010                                             −0.42***       −1.39***         76.07        30.5***
                                                   (0.11)         (0.51)                        (2.6)
 2011                                             −0.59***       −1.73***         72.05        28.4***
                                                   (0.18)         (0.57)                        (2.4)
 2012                                             −0.37**        −1.88***         67.89        26.6***
                                                   (0.17)         (0.62)                        (2.3)
 2013                                             −0.50***       −2.07***         63.98        25.1***
                                                   (0.18)         (0.67)                        (2.2)
 Dep. var. mean                                      5.55                                        10.4
 New Orleans individuals surviving until 2005                                    65,457
 Observations                                     7,987,100      7,987,100                    7,982,773


Notes: Columns (1), (2), and (4) report estimates of equations (2) and (3). Column (3) reports the
empirical survival of the 2004 New Orleans cohort. All regressions include baseline ZIP code and year fixed
effects. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been scaled
by 100. Standard errors are clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. Outcome variables are indicated at
top of each column. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                  A-28
              Table A.5: Point estimates for Figure 4 and Appendix Figure A.6

                               (1)                           (2)                         (3)
                   Effect on annual mortality    Effect on annual mortality   Effect on Pr(leaving 2004
                       rate (1992 cohort)            rate (1999 cohort)           CZ) (1999 cohort)

 1992                          0.08
                              (0.18)
 1993                          0.05
                              (0.17)
 1994                         −0.08
                              (0.20)
 1995                         −0.10
                              (0.18)
 1996                         −0.12
                              (0.17)
 1997                         −0.08
                              (0.16)
 1998                          0.09
                              (0.16)
 1999                          0.08                        −0.03                         1.01
                              (0.17)                       (0.19)                       (0.70)
 2000                         −0.17                        −0.23                         1.00*
                              (0.19)                       (0.17)                       (0.53)
 2001                         −0.10                        −0.14                        0.88**
                              (0.18)                       (0.13)                       (0.41)
 2002                         −0.04                        −0.02                         0.57
                              (0.17)                       (0.14)                       (0.35)
 2003                          0.04                         0.05                          0.44
                              (0.19)                       (0.19)                       (0.30)
 2005                       1.13***                       0.84***                      42.92***
                             (0.25)                        (0.22)                       (3.14)
 2006                        −0.33                         −0.37                       42.69***
                             (0.23)                        (0.23)                       (3.61)
 2007                       −0.84***                     −0.68***                      38.61***
                             (0.23)                        (0.18)                       (3.36)
 2008                       −0.84***                     −0.73***                      33.23***
                             (0.23)                        (0.16)                       (2.89)
 2009                       −0.73***                     −0.65***                      30.76***
                             (0.25)                        (0.20)                       (2.73)
 2010                        −0.48                       −0.40**                       28.36***
                             (0.30)                        (0.16)                       (2.59)
 2011                       −0.72**                      −0.71***                      26.49***
                             (0.34)                        (0.27)                       (2.49)
 2012                        −0.61                         −0.35                       24.92***
                             (0.49)                        (0.28)                       (2.43)
 2013                       −1.08**                      −0.50**                       23.42***
                             (0.43)                        (0.25)                       (2.30)
 Dep. var. mean               0.07                          0.06                         0.13
 Observations              12,446,594                    10,470,951                   10,463,469


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (2) from the main text. The dependent variable is indicated
at the top of each column. All regressions include ZIP code and year fixed effects. Coefficients, standard
errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been scaled by 100. Standard errors are
clustered by beneficiary baseline ZIP code. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.



                                                  A-29
                                   Table A.6: Heterogeneous mortality effects of Hurricane Katrina (2004 Medicare cohort)

                                                   (1)                   (2)                 (3)                (4)                  (5)                 (6)                  (7)
                                                                    Difference-in-differences estimates
                                                         Short-run (2005)                      Long run (2006–2013)
                                                                                                              NOLA x                               Mean mortality
                                                                   NOLA x 2005 x          NOLA x           (2006–2013) x        Percent var=1        if var=1 in
        Baseline var                         NOLA x 2005               var              (2006–2013)             var            in NOLA, 2004        NOLA, 2004           Observations


        All                                      0.56***                                 −0.48***                                   100.0                                  7,987,100
                                                  (0.16)                                  (0.12)
        Experienced 2+ feet of flooding            0.29                  0.48             −0.42*                0.04                56.5                 5.1               7,183,178
                                                  (0.22)                (0.31)            (0.23)               (0.31)
        Below median income                      0.83***               −0.58*             −0.13              −0.61**                49.9                 5.6               7,183,178
                                                  (0.25)                (0.31)            (0.17)               (0.25)
        64 or younger at baseline                0.76***              −0.85**            −0.45***               0.10                22.3                 3.0               7,987,100
                                                  (0.19)                (0.34)            (0.16)               (0.27)
        75 or older at baseline                    0.06                1.29***           −0.45***              −0.02                40.7                 8.2               7,987,100
                                                  (0.15)                (0.37)            (0.09)               (0.25)
        Black                                    1.02***               −0.76*             −0.21                −0.30                60.5                 5.0               7,987,100
                                                  (0.32)                (0.42)            (0.19)               (0.26)
        Male                                      0.42**                0.33*            −0.41**               −0.16                43.0                 5.5               7,987,100
                                                  (0.19)                (0.19)            (0.16)               (0.22)
        End-stage renal disease                  0.58***                −0.09            −0.40***              −2.10                 2.1                 19.7              7,987,100
                                                  (0.17)                (1.40)            (0.12)               (1.45)
A-30




        Heart disease and stroke                 0.69***                −0.03            −0.88***              −0.24                64.8                 7.8               5,788,235
                                                  (0.25)                (0.36)            (0.18)               (0.36)
        Respiratory disease                       0.37**                1.39**           −1.15***               0.06                12.8                 12.0              6,300,486
                                                  (0.19)                (0.59)            (0.19)               (0.58)
        Blood and kidney disease                 1.07***              −0.88***           −0.63***            −1.01***               46.2                 8.7               5,788,235
                                                  (0.19)                (0.28)            (0.14)               (0.32)
        Cancer                                   0.52***                 0.58            −1.12***               0.02                 6.8                 12.8              6,300,486
                                                  (0.19)                (1.19)            (0.19)               (0.73)
        Diabetes                                 0.70***                −0.03            −0.86***             −0.48*                27.4                 8.8               5,788,235
                                                  (0.21)                (0.29)            (0.16)               (0.27)
        Musculoskeletal                           0.43*                  0.92            −1.23***             0.84**                28.6                 6.5               5,788,235
                                                  (0.26)                (0.56)            (0.19)               (0.35)
        Alzheimer’s/dementia                     0.51***              3.09***            −0.92***              −0.85                12.4                 19.9              5,256,708
                                                  (0.18)                (1.08)            (0.16)               (0.96)
        Other chronic condition                   0.53**                 0.18            −1.43***             0.98***               39.9                 4.5               6,300,486
                                                  (0.23)                (0.31)            (0.21)               (0.25)


       Notes: Each row reports summary statistics along with short-run (2005) and long-run (2006–2013) mortality effects estimated from the difference-in-differences model given by
       equation (5) where the effect may vary by the individual baseline characteristic, var, specified by the row. Observations are at the individual-year level and include all
       Medicare beneficiaries living in New Orleans or one of the ten control cities in 2004 and who were alive at the beginning of the year of observation. The outcome in each
       regression is a mortality indicator for whether an individual died that year. All regressions control for baseline ZIP code and calendar year fixed effects. For characteristics
       that vary within the control cities, regressions further include interactions between the characteristic and calendar year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by baseline ZIP
       code are reported in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
        Table A.7: Correlation between predicted mortality and leaving New Orleans

                                       (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)

 Predicted mortality                −0.62***      −0.31***       −0.47***       −0.46***       −0.40***
                                     (0.13)        (0.09)         (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.10)
 Alzheimer’s/dementia dropped          No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes
                                                                                 Two-way
 Chronic conditions predictors        None         Grouped       Grouped       interactions   Individual
 Baseline spending predictors         None         Ventiles       Ventiles       Ventiles      Centiles

 Dep. var. mean                      45.32          45.79           45.88        45.88           45.88
 Observations                        58,403         26,906         24,560        24,560         24,560


Notes: The table reports shows the relationship between ex ante predicted mortality and leaving New
Orleans in 2005–2006 among the 2004 New Orleans cohort. The estimating equation is the same as
equation (7), except the dependent variable is a relocation indicator equal to one if a 2004 New Orleans
beneficiary was alive but not residing in the New Orleans commuting zone as of March 2006 and is equal to
zero if she or he was alive and residing in New Orleans commuting zone as of March 2006. All regressions
control for baseline ZIP code fixed effects. Both predicted mortality and the moving decision are expressed
in percentage points. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                  A-31
          Table A.8: Predictors of leaving New Orleans and of destination mortality

                                         (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                Whether moved                     Local mortality rate

 Black                                21.70***    21.38***    20.02***     −0.001       −0.011       −0.012
                                        (6.74)      (6.37)      (6.08)     (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)
 Male                                 −3.68***    −3.91***    −3.93***    0.016***       0.007        0.007
                                        (0.62)      (0.67)      (0.66)     (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.007)
 64 and younger                       12.33***    12.53***    12.30***    −0.014*      −0.016*      −0.015*
                                        (1.29)      (1.41)      (1.32)     (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.009)
 75 and older                            0.00       −1.04       −0.73      −0.003       −0.012       −0.013
                                        (0.55)      (0.78)      (0.83)     (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.010)
 Below median income                   4.52***     6.45***     5.37***      0.007        0.012       0.014*
                                        (0.86)      (1.18)      (0.97)     (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.008)
 Katrina flood level, feet             2.54***     2.53***      1.16**      0.000       −0.001       −0.001
                                        (0.73)      (0.83)      (0.56)     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
 End-stage renal disease                 0.76       −2.42       −1.61      0.026*       −0.007       −0.007
                                        (1.25)      (2.19)      (2.12)     (0.015)      (0.019)      (0.019)
 2004 medical spending, thousands                 0.06***     0.05***                    0.000        0.000
                                                    (0.02)      (0.02)                  (0.000)      (0.000)
 Alzheimer’s/dementia                                1.14        1.47                  0.044***     0.042***
                                                    (1.95)      (2.12)                  (0.016)      (0.016)
 Respiratory disease                              3.49***     3.34***                   −0.009       −0.009
                                                    (1.09)      (1.05)                  (0.011)      (0.011)
 Heart disease and stroke                            1.09        1.00                    0.005        0.006
                                                    (0.67)      (0.65)                  (0.007)      (0.008)
 Blood and kidney disease                           −0.62       −0.42                   −0.004       −0.004
                                                    (0.81)      (0.82)                  (0.008)      (0.008)
 Diabetes                                            0.42        0.26                    0.010        0.010
                                                    (0.68)      (0.69)                  (0.009)      (0.009)
 Musculoskeletal                                    −0.01       −0.10                   −0.011       −0.009
                                                    (0.66)      (0.64)                  (0.009)      (0.008)
 Cancer                                           −3.51***    −3.53***                 −0.024*      −0.024*
                                                    (1.00)      (1.01)                  (0.013)      (0.013)
 Other                                               0.79        1.29*                  −0.006       −0.007
                                                    (0.71)      (0.68)                  (0.007)      (0.007)
 Baseline zip code fixed effects         No          No          Yes        No            No          Yes
 Dep. var. mean                        44.97        45.35        45.35      5.403         5.399       5.399
 p-value of joint F-test               <0.001      <0.001       <0.001     0.008          0.047       0.047
 Observations                          51,104      23,362       23,362     22,981        10,594      10,594


Notes: The table reports how relocation of survivors (columns (1)–(3)) and local mortality in movers’
destinations (columns (4)–(6)) relate to baseline (2004) characteristics of the 2004 New Orleans cohort.
Local mortality and relocation are expressed in percentage points. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   A-32
                       Table A.9: Predictors of returning to New Orleans

                                             (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)     (6)
                                            Returned by March of 2007     Returned by December 31, 2010

 Mean death rate in 2006 county (MDR)        0.48       0.55      0.66      0.04     0.21     1.54
                                            (1.33)     (1.63)    (2.26)    (2.38)   (2.69)   (3.61)
 Predicted mortality (PM)                              −0.37*** −0.29               −0.54*** 0.68
                                                       (0.07)    (0.87)             (0.12)   (1.76)
 PM x MDR                                                        −1.39                      −22.56
                                                                (15.70)                     (31.77)
 Dep. var. mean                              20.43      18.50    18.50     43.18     41.08     41.08
 Observations                               26,467     12,319   12,319    21,300     9,671     9,671
 R-squared                                    0.00       0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00


Notes: The table reports how returning to New Orleans among the movers sample relates to local
mortality in movers’ initial (2006) destinations. The dependent variable is specified at the top of each
column. Predicted mortality, destination mortality, and the decision to return are expressed in percentage
points. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                     A-33
 Table A.10: Migrant mortality over time, by destination mortality (New Orleans movers)

                                         (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)

 Mean death rate x (2006–2007)         1.36***        1.28***        1.26***         1.27**         1.23**
                                        (0.43)         (0.40)         (0.40)         (0.54)         (0.54)
 Mean death rate x (2008–2013)         0.63**         0.64***        0.68***        0.89***         0.97***
                                       (0.31)          (0.24)         (0.24)         (0.33)          (0.34)
 Set of fixed effects                     A              B              C               C              C
 Chronic conditions controls             No             No              No             Gr.          All int.

 Dep. var. mean                          5.55           5.55           5.54           6.11           6.10
 Observations                          175,936        175,936        175,821         80,084         80,075
 R-squared                              0.00           0.04            0.05           0.09           0.09


Notes: The table reports estimates of a version of equation (6), augmented to allow for separate effects in
the post-Katrina periods 2006–2007 and 2008–2013. The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal
to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died
in a given year. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been
scaled by 100. Controls are as follows: A includes baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects; B also includes
fixed effects for each age (one-year bins), race, and sex combination. C additionally controls for
age-race-sex effects by year. Gr. means that indicators for eight groups of chronic conditions are included;
All int. means that indicators for each possible interaction of the eight groups of chronic conditions are
included. All specifications that include chronic condition controls also include fixed effects for centiles of
baseline Medicare spending. Standard errors are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-34
 Table A.11: Migrant mortality by cause of death, by destination mortality (New Orleans
                                        movers)

                                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                                   Other
                                                                                  internal       External
                                     All causes    Cardiovascular Cancer           causes         causes

 Mean death rate in 2006 county       1.39***         0.40**          0.08         0.86***         0.021
                                       (0.32)         (0.17)         (0.12)         (0.22)        (0.035)
 Dep. var. mean                         5.28           1.97          1.11           1.96           0.133
 Observations                          75,215         75,215        75,215         75,215         75,215


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6) for specific causes of death. The dependent variable is
an indicator equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year from the cause of death specified in the
column and is equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year or died that year from
a different cause. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have
been scaled by 100. All specifications include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of
year, age (one-year bins), race, and sex. Standard errors are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006 county.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   A-35
  Table A.12: Migrant mortality, by own-group and other-group mortality (New Orleans
                                        movers)

                                         (1)                       (2)                        (3)

 Own-gender mortality                   0.48
                                       (0.32)
 Other-gender mortality                 0.37
                                       (0.31)
 Own-race mortality                                              0.27**
                                                                 (0.13)
 Other-race mortality                                             0.15
                                                                 (0.12)
 Own-age-group mortality                                                                   0.49***
                                                                                            (0.16)
 Other-age-group mortality                                                                   0.17
                                                                                            (0.14)
 Dep. var. mean                         5.54                       5.55                      5.54
 Observations                         175,821                    175,770                   175,821
 R-squared                              0.05                       0.05                      0.05


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6) augmented to include both own- and other-group
mortality rates. Race groups are black or not black. Age groups are (1) 64 or younger and (2) 65 or older.
The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire
calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year. Coefficients, standard errors (in
parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been scaled by 100. Controls include fixed effects for
baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age (one-year bins), race, and sex. Standard errors are
clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   A-36
 Table A.13: Migrant mortality, by more and less local mortality measures (New Orleans
                                       movers)

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

 2006 ZIP code mortality                              0.37***                        0.28***
                                                       (0.11)                         (0.10)
 2006 county mortality                 0.86***                                        0.57**         0.57*
                                        (0.23)                                        (0.23)         (0.30)
 2006 commuting zone mortality                                        1.03***                         0.46
                                                                       (0.30)                        (0.40)
 Dep. var. mean                          5.54           5.54            5.54           5.54           5.54
 Observations                          175,821        175,245         175,821        175,245        175,821
 R-squared                               0.05           0.05           0.05            0.05          0.05


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6) with mortality rates calculated at the ZIP, county, or
commuting zone level. The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was
alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year. Coefficients,
standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been scaled by 100. Controls
include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age (one-year bins), race, and sex.
Standard errors are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                     A-37
Table A.14: Cumulative migrant mortality by destination mortality (New Orleans movers)

                                        (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Mean death rate in 2006 county      4.01***      3.31***      3.52**      3.52***      3.50**      3.58**
                                      (1.49)       (1.06)      (1.40)       (1.33)      (1.49)      (1.40)
 Set of fixed effects                   A            B           B            B           B            B
 Alzheimer’s/dementia dropped           No          No           No          No          Yes          Yes
 Chronic conditions controls            No          No          Gr.        All int.      Gr.        All int.

 Dep. var. mean                        36.91       36.92        39.94       39.77        36.74       36.64
 Observations                         26,461      26,451       12,313      12,254       11,258      11,227
 R-squared                              0.01       0.19         0.24         0.29        0.21         0.26


Notes: The table reports estimates of the correlation between movers’ probability of dying before the end
of 2013 and the average mortality rate in their 2006 destination. The dependent variable is a mortality
indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive at the end of 2013 and is equal to one if the beneficiary
died prior to that date. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean
have been scaled by 100. Controls are as follows: A includes baseline ZIP code fixed effects; B also includes
fixed effects for each age (one-year bins), race, and sex combination. Gr. means that indicators for eight
groups of chronic conditions are included; All int. means that indicators for each possible interaction of the
eight groups of chronic conditions are included. All specifications that include chronic condition controls
also include fixed effects for centiles of baseline Medicare spending. Standard errors are clustered by a
beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-38
 Table A.15: Migrant mortality by destination mortality (2005–2007 New Orleans movers)

                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)

 Mean death rate in 2007 county         0.73**        0.61***        0.63***         0.71**        0.84***
                                        (0.31)         (0.22)         (0.22)         (0.30)         (0.31)

 Set of fixed effects                    A              B               C             C               C
 Chronic conditions controls             No             No              No            Gr.          All int.
 Dep. var. mean                          5.92           5.92           5.91           6.43           6.41
 Observations                          129,669        129,667        129,581         60,102         60,052
 R-squared                              0.00            0.04           0.06           0.09           0.10


Notes: The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the
entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year. Coefficients, standard errors
(in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been scaled by 100. Controls are as follows: A
includes baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects; B also includes fixed effects for each age (one-year bins),
race, and sex combination. C additionally controls for age-race-sex effects by year. Gr. means that
indicators for eight groups of chronic conditions are included; All int. means that indicators for each
possible interaction of the eight groups of chronic conditions are included. All specifications that include
chronic condition controls also include fixed effects for centiles of baseline Medicare spending. Standard
errors are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2007 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-39
       Table A.16: Migrant mortality by destination mortality (New Orleans movers)

                          Chronic condition
 Specification                controls                       Estimate                        Obs.

 All 2006 movers              Individual                     0.961***                       80,084
                                                              (0.303)
 All 2007 movers              Individual                     0.816***                       60,058
                                                              (0.300)
 Distance controls               None                        1.000***                       175,821
                                                              (0.249)
 Distance controls           Interactions                    1.104***                       80,075
                                                              (0.321)
 Distance controls             Grouped                       1.054***                       80,084
                                                              (0.325)
 No Houston/B.R.                 None                        0.932***                       118,929
                                                              (0.252)
 No Houston/B.R.             Interactions                    1.124***                       54,079
                                                              (0.331)
 No Houston/B.R.               Grouped                       1.047***                       54,142
                                                              (0.336)


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6). The dependent variable is a mortality indicator equal
to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died
in a given year. Coefficients, standard errors (in parentheses), and the dependent variable mean have been
scaled by 100. All specifications include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age
(one-year bins), race, and sex. All specifications that include chronic condition controls also include fixed
effects for centiles of baseline Medicare spending. Specifications with distance controls additionally include
indicators for deciles of distance between the centroids of New Orleans and of the destination county.
Standard errors are clustered by a beneficiary’s destination county in the year of the move. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-40
                 Table A.17: Summary statistics for destination characteristics

                                                      (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                  10th pctile           Median             90th pctile

 Mortality rate                                      0.050                0.053               0.058
 Adjusted mortality rate                            -0.001                0.002               0.008
 Income per capita (1,000s)                          14.31                20.05               25.40
 Poverty rate, 65+ (percent)                         7.342                12.19               19.65
 Income segregation                                  0.017                0.091               0.125
 Median home value (1,000s)                          58.90               87.59                145.3
 Upward income mobility (from p25)                  -0.778               -0.242               0.178
 Upward income mobility (from p75)                  -0.191                0.039               0.236
 Urban population share                              0.469                0.928               0.991
 Crime rate (per 1,000)                              4.566                8.551               16.64
 Social capital index                               -1.869               -1.001               0.028
 Local gov. spending per capita (1,000s)             1.585               2.343                3.226
 Percent exercising                                  65.62                73.48               78.50
 Percent obese                                       17.48               21.00                27.03
 Percent smoking                                     17.85                20.65               26.72
 Medicare spending per beneficiary (1,000s)          10.39               12.20                14.39
 Physicians (per 1,000)                              0.848                2.975               4.637
 Hospital beds (per 1,000)                          1.455                 3.902               6.304
 Hospital quality index                              0.723               0.766                0.819
 PM 2.5 concentrations (µg/m3 )                      9.020                11.04               12.62
 Hot days/year (90◦ F+)                                0                  0.239               5.451


Notes: The table shows the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the given characteristic, as measured in the
sample of New Orleans movers in 2006.




                                                  A-41
    Table A.18: Migrant mortality by destination characteristics (New Orleans movers)

                                             (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                                              Local          Predicted
                                                                           mortality rate   mortality rate
                                            Died indicator × 100              × 100            × 100

 Mortality rate                            0.76***          0.67***              .                -0.05
                                            (0.22)            (0.18)                             (0.15)
                                           [75137]          [175821]                            [75286]
 Percent smoking                           0.70***            0.42**           0.34***             0.05
                                            (0.23)            (0.19)            (0.06)           (0.18)
                                           [69327]          [160990]           [24209]          [69474]
 Adjusted mortality rate                  0.60***           0.49***           0.53***             -0.18
                                            (0.18)            (0.15)            (0.03)           (0.16)
                                           [75137]          [175821]           [26467]          [75286]
 Percent obese                             0.60***            0.40**           0.35***            -0.12
                                            (0.20)            (0.16)            (0.06)           (0.14)
                                           [69327]          [160990]           [24209]          [69474]
 Hospital beds per capita                     0.22             0.13           0.14***           -0.17**
                                            (0.22)            (0.13)            (0.03)           (0.08)
                                           [74808]          [175095]           [26355]          [74957]
 Hot days/year (90◦ F+)                       0.10              0.06           -0.03**            -0.06
                                            (0.08)            (0.06)            (0.01)           (0.07)
                                           [75113]          [175739]           [26455]          [75262]
 Physicians per capita                       -0.05              0.02           -0.13**            -0.08
                                            (0.23)            (0.16)            (0.05)           (0.12)
                                           [74808]          [175095]           [26355]          [74957]
 Hospital quality index                      -0.08             -0.05             -0.01             0.11
                                            (0.19)            (0.16)            (0.04)           (0.14)
                                           [66817]          [154840]           [23286]          [66960]
 Medicare spending per beneficiary           -0.21             -0.04              0.09            -0.15
                                            (0.19)            (0.15)            (0.09)           (0.24)
                                           [75137]          [175821]           [26467]          [75286]
 Percent exercising                        -0.56**             -0.32          -0.48***             0.01
                                            (0.23)            (0.20)            (0.04)           (0.16)
                                           [69217]          [160775]           [24178]          [69365]
 PM 2.5 concentrations                    -0.65***           -0.31**             -0.05          -0.44**
                                            (0.17)            (0.14)            (0.06)           (0.19)
                                           [69333]          [161096]           [24243]          [69489]


Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report estimates of equation (6) with the independent variable listed in each
row. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary
was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year.
Controls in columns (1) and (2) include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age
(one-year bins), race, and sex. Column (1) additionally controls for indicators for each possible
combination of eight chronic condition groups and indicators for centiles of baseline Medicare spending.
Column (3) shows the correlation between the local characteristic specified in the row and the mean death
rate in movers’ 2006 county, with one observation per mover. Column (4) shows the correlation between
the local characteristic specified in the row and the movers’ predicted mortality, using a model of mortality
that includes demographic characteristics, all two-way interactions of eight baseline chronic condition
group indicators, and ventiles of baseline spending. Individuals with Alzheimer’s/dementia at baseline are
excluded from columns (1) and (4). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006
county. The number of observations is in square brackets. Coefficients and standard errors in columns have
been scaled by 100 and by the difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the relevant local
characteristic. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.



                                                     A-42
    Table A.19: Migrant mortality by destination characteristics (New Orleans movers)

                                              (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)
                                                                              Local           Predicted
                                                                           mortality rate    mortality rate
                                              Died indicator × 100            × 100             × 100

 Social capital index                        0.44**           0.29**           0.16***             0.26
                                             (0.18)            (0.13)           (0.05)           (0.19)
                                            [75116]          [175774]          [26460]          [75265]
 Crime rate                                    0.31              0.29          0.32***             0.24
                                             (0.27)            (0.22)           (0.05)           (0.17)
                                            [72813]          [170173]          [25598]          [72954]
 Poverty rate, 65+                             0.28              0.14          0.40***             0.03
                                             (0.24)            (0.18)           (0.04)           (0.13)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]
 Upward income mobility (from p75)             0.05             -0.04          0.20***           -0.33*
                                             (0.19)            (0.15)           (0.06)           (0.17)
                                            [75005]          [175507]          [26415]          [75154]
 Upward income mobility (from p25)            -0.01              0.03         -0.22***            0.04
                                             (0.26)            (0.18)           (0.05)           (0.20)
                                            [75005]          [175507]          [26415]          [75154]
 Income segregation                           -0.25             -0.00          -0.17**           -0.35*
                                             (0.22)            (0.18)           (0.08)           (0.17)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]
 Local gov. spending per capita             -0.29**             -0.12         -0.18***             0.04
                                             (0.14)            (0.11)           (0.05)           (0.12)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]
 Urban population share                     -0.46**             -0.15         -0.27***            -0.22
                                             (0.19)            (0.15)           (0.03)           (0.16)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]
 Median home value                         -0.49***          -0.35***         -0.36***          0.40***
                                             (0.15)            (0.13)           (0.04)           (0.13)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]
 Income per capita                         -0.60***           -0.41**         -0.45***             0.07
                                             (0.20)            (0.16)           (0.04)           (0.14)
                                            [75137]          [175821]          [26467]          [75286]


Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report estimates of equation (6) with the independent variable listed in each
row. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is a mortality indicator equal to zero if a beneficiary
was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary died in a given year.
Controls in columns (1) and (2) include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age
(one-year bins), race, and sex. Column (1) additionally controls for indicators for each possible
combination of eight chronic condition groups and indicators for centiles of baseline Medicare spending.
Column (3) shows the correlation between the local characteristic specified in the row and the mean death
rate in movers’ 2006 county, with one observation per mover. Column (4) shows the correlation between
the local characteristic specified in the row and the movers’ predicted mortality, using a model of mortality
that includes demographic characteristics, all two-way interactions of eight baseline chronic condition
group indicators, and ventiles of baseline spending. Individuals with Alzheimer’s/dementia at baseline are
excluded from columns (1) and (4). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006
county. The number of observations is in square brackets. Coefficients and standard errors in columns have
been scaled by 100 and by the difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the relevant local
characteristic. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-43
    Table A.20: Migrant spending, by destination spending (New Orleans fee-for-service
                                        movers)

                                                (1)          (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

 Average medical spending in 2006 county      0.93***    0.87***   0.87***    0.76***    0.66***   0.61***
                                               (0.11)     (0.10)    (0.10)     (0.13)     (0.13)    (0.11)
 Set of fixed effects                            A           B        C          C          C          C
 Alzheimer’s/dementia dropped                   No           No       No        No         Yes        Yes
 Chronic conditions controls                    No           No       No        Gr.        Gr.      All int.

 Dep. var. mean                                14,616     14,616    14,620    15,969     15,357     15,353
 Observations                                 101,675    101,675   101,544    67,694     63,184     63,178
 R-squared                                      0.01       0.03      0.04      0.16       0.17       0.20


Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (6) with local spending as the independent variable. The
dependent variable is the total spending by a beneficiary in a calendar year. Sets of fixed effects are as
follows: A includes baseline ZIP code and year fixed effects; B also includes fixed effects for each age
(one-year bins), race, and sex combination. C additionally controls for age-race-sex effects by year. Gr.
means that indicators for eight groups of chronic conditions are included; All int. means that indicators for
each possible interaction of the eight groups of chronic conditions are included. All specifications that
include chronic condition controls also include fixed effects for centiles of baseline Medicare spending.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by a beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.10.




                                                      A-44
             Table A.21: Migrant mortality by multiple destination characteristics

                                           (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)

 Mortality rate                          0.57*     0.59**     0.75**    0.57**    0.59**    0.66**     -0.39
                                         (0.31)    (0.30)     (0.37)    (0.28)    (0.29)    (0.26)
 Percent smoking                          0.48                                                         0.01
                                         (0.30)
 Percent obese                                       0.32                                              -0.13
                                                    (0.25)
 Percent exercising                                            -0.07                                   0.15
                                                              (0.33)
 Median home value                                                       -0.25                         0.06
                                                                        (0.18)
 Median household income, 65+                                                      -0.24               0.14
                                                                                  (0.25)
 Urban population share                                                                      -0.19     -0.16
                                                                                            (0.21)
 Pct. of 2006–2013 decline explained     60.78     76.29      85.23     66.24     74.13     63.44
 Dep. var. mean                           5.47      5.47       5.47      5.48      5.48      5.48
 Observations                            69,332    69,332     69,222    75,142    75,142    75,142


Notes: Columns (1)–(7) report estimates of equation (6). The dependent variable is a mortality indicator
equal to zero if a beneficiary was alive during the entire calendar year and is equal to one if the beneficiary
died in a given year. Controls include fixed effects for baseline ZIP code and all combinations of year, age
(one-year bins), race, and sex. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) have been scaled by 100
and by the difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the relevant local characteristic. The
dependent variable mean has been scaled by 100. Column (8) reports the mean change in the given local
characteristic for New Orleans beneficiaries who survived until the beginning of 2006, as a share of the
difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the relevant local characteristic. Standard errors are
clustered by each beneficiary’s 2006 county. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                    A-45
