                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SORTING OR STEERING:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF HOUSING DISCRIMINATION

                                         Peter Christensen
                                        Christopher Timmins

                                         Working Paper 24826
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24826


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                              July 2018, Revised October 2019




  We thank Spencer Banzhaf, Kelly Bishop, Don Fullerton, Ludovica Gazze, Lu Han, Kelly
  Maguire, David Molitor, Steve Ross, Kerry Smith, Matthew Turner, Randy Walsh, Ann
  Wolverton, John Yinger and seminar participants at the Wharton School, University of Arizona,
  University of Pittsburgh, Simon Fraser University, Washington University in St. Louis, 2019
  meetings of the American Economic Association, the 2018 meetings of the Association of Urban
  Economics, the 2018 China Meetings of the Econometrics Society, and the 2018 meetings of the
  Southern Economic Association for excellent comments. This project makes use of data from an
  experiment conducted by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Urban
  Institute in 2012 (Turner et al., 2013). Thanks to research assistants in the University of Illinois
  Big Data and Environmental Economics and Policy (BDEEP) Group and the Duke
  Environmental Justice Lab for excellent work. We acknowledge generous support from the
  National Center for Supercomputing Applications. All errors are our own. The views expressed
  herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2018 by Peter Christensen and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
  not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sorting or Steering: Experimental Evidence on the Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination
Peter Christensen and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 24826
July 2018, Revised October 2019
JEL No. Q51,Q53,R31

                                           ABSTRACT

Housing discrimination is illegal. However, paired-tester audit experiments have revealed
evidence of discrimination in the interactions between potential buyers and real estate agents,
raising concern about whether certain groups are systematically excluded from the beneficial
effects of healthy neighborhoods. Using data from HUD's most recent Housing Discrimination
Study and micro-level data on key attributes of neighborhoods in 28 US cities, we find strong
evidence of discrimination in the characteristics of neighborhoods towards which individuals are
steered. Conditional upon the characteristics of the house suggested by the audit tester, minorities
are significantly more likely to be steered towards neighborhoods with less economic opportunity
and greater exposures to crime and pollution. We find that holding location preferences or income
constant, discriminatory steering alone can explain a disproportionate number of minority
households found in high poverty neighborhoods in the United States and could be an important
contributor to the gap in intergenerational income mobility found between black-white
households. The steering effect is also large enough to fully explain the differential found in
proximity to Superfund sites among African American mothers. These results have important
implications for the analysis of neighborhood effects and establish discrimination as a mechanism
underlying observed correlations between race and pollution in the environmental justice
literature.


Peter Christensen
Agriculture and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
431 Mumford Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
pchrist@illinois.edu

Christopher Timmins
Department of Economics
Duke University
209 Social Sciences Building
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
christopher.timmins@duke.edu

A HDS 2012 data and documentation are publicly available here
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/hsg_discrimination.html
A data and programs used in this paper will be made available here
https://github.com/peterchristensen/Sorting-or-Steering
1     Introduction
The choice of residential location is a critical economic decision for households in the
United States. It affects the neighborhood with which one interacts on a daily basis,
which can have important implications both in the short-run and long-run. Impacts can
even accumulate across generations. Over the past decade, a growing body of evidence
has found neighborhood poverty (Chyn, 2018, Chetty and Hendren, 2018a, Chetty et al.,
2016, Kling et al., 2007), employment (Bayer et al., 2008), school quality (Chetty et al.,
2011), violent crime (Kling et al., 2005), and health outcomes from pollution exposures
(Currie et al., 2015) to be important, elevating concern about whether certain groups
are systematically excluded from beneficial neighborhood effects (Chetty et al., 2018).
A large body of observational research has also documented that patterns of residential
sorting are strongly correlated with economic disparities and pollution exposures between
racial groups in the United States (Alexander and Currie, 2017, Currie, 2011, Mohai et al.,
2009). However, it has been challenging to disentangle the effect of discrimination from
preference-based sorting in evaluating these persistent disparities.
    This paper experimentally evaluates the effect of racial discrimination on neighbor-
hood choice using experimental evidence from a nation-wide paired-actor study that was
conducted by the Urban Institute in conjunction with the Department of Housing and Ur-
ban Development (Turner et al., 2013). The 2012 Housing Discrimination Study utilized
a matched-pair block randomized design that simulates the housing search process for a
matched pair of “testers” who are assigned attributes that make them equally qualified
to purchase a particular house or rent a particular unit. Paired testers are matched to
an advertised listing and randomly assigned to a real estate agent; different aspects of
their search experience are then documented. According to evidence from 3 prior HUD
audit studies beginning in 1997 and findings from the 2012 audit reported by Turner
et al. (2013), incidence of the most blatant forms of housing discrimination has declined
dramatically in the period following the Fair Housing Act (FHA) of 1968, but it is less
clear that the same is true of more subtle forms of discrimination.1
    With respect to location choice, prior studies of discrimination have described the pro-
cess of steering buyers into same-race neighborhoods and exacerbating historical racial
segregation in the housing market (Galster and Godfrey, 2005, Ondrich et al., 2003). The
steering of buyers into same-race neighborhoods persisted in the 2012 experiment that
we analyze (Turner et al., 2013). However, from the perspective of a minority buyer’s
preferences and welfare, the implications of locating in a same-race neighborhood are
ambiguous. The question of whether discriminatory steering constrains the access of mi-

1
 Housing discrimination is illegal according to the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which was amended in
1988. Blatant forms of discrimination include denial of appointments with a housing provider or refusal
to show an advertised house. Less blatant forms include disparities in the number of houses shown or in
the condition of the houses that are recommended.

                                                  3
nority buyers to neighborhood amenities such as high quality schools, safe spaces, and
clean air remains untested, limiting evaluation of the impacts of discrimination that may
operate through neighborhood effects channels.2 Understanding the origins of dispari-
ties in neighborhood exposures requires disentangling the effect of discrimination from
preferences and income constraints that also underlie the sorting patterns of minority
households (Logan, 2011). By experimentally isolating differences in the characteristics
of neighborhoods that are shown to white versus minority buyers during a housing search,
this paper provides direct evidence that discrimination could be a root cause of adverse
neighborhood effects in minority populations. To our knowledge, this paper also provides
the first experimental test of the “racial discrimination thesis” of environmental injustice,
which posits that housing discrimination could contribute to the race-gap in pollution
exposures in the US (Crowder and Downey, 2010).
    Our results indicate that even holding income and preferences constant, systematic
differences in the homes shown to minority versus white testers impart a number of critical
disadvantages. Minority testers are (relative to their white counterparts) recommended
homes in neighborhoods with higher poverty rates, fewer college educated families, and
fewer skilled workers. Important for the analysis of environmental injustice, they are also
steered towards neighborhoods with higher concentrations of Superfund sites and releases
from the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI). Disparities are present for African American,
Hispanic/LatinX, and Asian households and are consistent across specifications, though
they are stronger in the case of African American testers and become more pronounced
when tester pairs signal preferences for the neighborhood characteristic in question. In
addition, African American testers are more likely to be recommended houses in neighbor-
hoods with higher assault rates. While only statistically significant for African Americans
with children, all minority groups are also more likely to be recommended houses in neigh-
borhoods with lower quality schools. Consistent with prior evidence on segregation-based
steering, we find that minority testers are less likely to be recommended houses in white
neighborhoods. However, our evidence suggests that segregation-based steering (i.e., di-
rected by persistent differences in neighborhood racial composition) cannot explain the
disparities in pollution exposures resulting from discrimination.
    We find that the differences in steering are magnified for minority families and par-
ticularly for mothers, which is important for understanding and interpreting long-run
outcomes affecting minority children. We interpret our results on families in light of
recent evidence that suggests that access to low poverty neighborhoods may be impor-
tant for narrowing the black-white gap in intergenerational income mobility (Chetty and



2
 Much of the literature on housing market discrimination precedes the recent empirical work on neigh-
borhood effects and long-run damages of pollution exposures. Turner et al. (2013) provide a test of
steering into higher poverty census tracts that is discussed in Appendix D.

                                                 4
Hendren, 2018a).3 When interpreted together with the results on the long-run effects, we
estimate a $2,488 per year permanent income reduction for an African American adult
who was raised in a neighborhood chosen as a result of discriminatory steering. In re-
cent work, Chetty et al. (2018) find that black-white gaps in income mobility are smaller
in neighborhoods with lower poverty rates and intact families, suggesting that discrim-
inatory steering may be relevant for understanding persistent black-white gaps within
neighborhoods. The effect on African American mothers is large enough to fully account
for higher rates of sorting among African American mothers into homes near Superfund
sites, as has been found in previous research on in utero pollution exposures (Currie,
2011).
    A final analysis examines the interaction between discrimination and buyer prefer-
ences. We make use of a unique feature of the 2012 HDS design where the preferences of
buyers are conveyed via the characteristics of a listing that is presented in a first meeting
with a real estate agent. Similar to a design first introduced by Ondrich et al. (2003)
to examine discriminatory behavior in real estate marketing efforts, we examine hetero-
geneity in steering behavior as a function of the implied preferences for key attributes
of neighborhoods. We find that real estate agents tend to discount the neighborhood
preferences of African American clients relative to white buyers, which may be impor-
tant for explaining the adverse constraints that minority buyers face in a housing search.
We also find that steering effects are often stronger for African American buyers who
express interest in higher priced homes and in white neighborhoods. This suggests that
housing discrimination could be a relevant factor for understanding constraints to upward
mobility that specifically affect African American households (Chetty et al., 2018).
    This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses empirical findings on neighbor-
hood effects and linkages to housing discrimination. Section 3 provides a background on
housing discrimination audit designs and the 2012 Housing Discrimination Study (HDS),
which is the source of experimental data in this study. Section 4 describes our empirical
design, data, and sample balance. Section 5 reports results that characterize the effects of
discriminatory constraints on access to advantaged neighborhoods and discusses specific
implications for children. Section 6 concludes.


2     Housing Discrimination and Neighborhood Effects
If housing market discrimination constrains a household’s choice set during a search,
then discriminatory behavior will impact the likelihood that minority households locate

3
 Graham (2018) illustrates why understanding sorting behavior is important for identifying/interpreting
outcomes associated with neighborhood exposures and re-location programs. The findings reported in
the present study indicate that discriminatory constraints likely also affect the empirical identification
of neighborhood effects.

                                                    5
in disadvantaged neighborhoods. A large body of evidence suggests that such constraints
could impact labor market outcomes, educational attainment, criminal activity, physical
safety and environmental health.


2.1     Poverty, School Quality, Skill, and Violence
Much of the experimental evidence on neighborhood effects has come from programs that
provide re-location assistance to residents in disadvantaged neighborhoods. The “Mov-
ing to Opportunity” (MTO) program is the largest such program in the United States,
providing housing vouchers to public housing residents that can be used to secure a resi-
dence in a neighborhood with a lower than 10% poverty rate.4 The MTO experiment has
demonstrated that the poverty level of a neighborhood is a key determinant of long-run
outcomes such as mental and physical health (Ludwig et al., 2013, Kling et al., 2007),
earnings (Chetty et al., 2016), economic self-sufficiency (Clampet-Lundquist and Massey,
2008), and participation in violent crime (Kling et al., 2005).5 Housing assistance pro-
grams that do not significantly improve the neighborhood characteristics of participants
do not result in positive effects on outcomes, suggesting that the neighborhood effects
themselves may matter more than the subsidy and related assistance provided by these
programs (van Dijk, 2018, Jacob et al., 2014).
    The effects of high poverty neighborhoods revealed by the MTO experiments likely
capture a set of mechanisms that have been independently shown to have effects on
human capital formation, including crime/public safety (Sharkey, 2010, Sampson et al.,
1997), school quality (Chetty et al., 2011), and neighborhood peer effects that can impact
college attendance and job referrals (Carrell et al., 2009, Bayer et al., 2008). The available
evidence indicates that discrimination may be particularly important for households who
face constraints before pregnancies or while raising young children. Research that follows
children in moves across the US indicates that child exposure to high levels of poverty
and low levels of adult skill/college attendance is highly correlated with intergenerational
income mobility (Chetty and Hendren, 2018a,b).


2.2     Pollution: Chemical Toxics, Superfund Releases and PM2.5
A separate but related literature demonstrates that exposure to local pollutants can
significantly impact health outcomes (Almond et al., 2018, Almond and Currie, 2011).
This evidence indicates that exposures at critical developmental stages (pre- and post-

4
  A second treatment group in these studies was randomized to receive a Section 8 voucher with no
constraints on use and a third treatment group simply retained access to public housing.
5
  Several studies also find null effects of MTO treatment. For instance, Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006) look
four to seven years after the MTO treatment and find little to no evidence of impacts on test scores for
children treated by MTO. Kling et al. (2007) similarly find little evidence of impacts on physical health
or economic outcomes of adults.

                                                   6
natal) are especially important, again highlighting the importance of residential location
choices of (prospective) families. Households living in close proximity to toxic plants are
shown to have a lower incidence of gestation and lower birth weights (Currie et al., 2015,
2009).6 In a cohort study in Florida, Persico et al. (2016) find that children conceived
to mothers living in close proximity (within 2 miles) of an untreated Superfund site are
more likely to repeat a grade (+7.4 pp), to be suspended from school (6.6 pp), and
have lower test scores (-0.06 std dev) than siblings who were conceived after clean-up.
Children conceived to mothers living in even closer proximity (within 1 mile) are 10
percentage points more likely to be diagnosed with a cognitive disability. Exposures
to small particulate matter have also been shown to have important effects on infant
mortality and test scores (Sanders, 2012, Chay and Greenstone, 2003).7


2.3     Race-Gaps in Neighborhood Effects: Sorting or Steering?
Several papers have also posited that differences in household location decisions can
contribute to persistent forms of racial inequality in the United States (Currie, 2011).
Using the universe of health records of children born in New Jersey between 2006 and
2010, Alexander and Currie (2017) find that the two-fold differential in asthma rates
between African American and other racial groups disappears when the sample is split to
examine differences within versus outside majority African American zip codes. Chetty
et al. (2018) find that the income mobility gap between black and white children who
grow up in the same neighborhood are the smallest for those who grow up in low-poverty
neighborhoods.
    Graham (2018) shows that identification of neighborhood effects, particularly when
evaluated in the context of racial inequality, must address potential biases arising from
sorting and matching behavior. Housing discrimination itself could have non-negligible
effects on household sorting behavior, highlighting the need for research designs that
can isolate tests of discriminatory constraints from observed sorting behavior. Models
of preference-based sorting that examine differences in the location choices of households

6
  Currie et al. (2015) find that pollution levels from nearby toxic plants have important effects on infant
health, which correspond to a 3% increase in the incidence of low birth weight within 1 mile of a plant.
In prior research at the county level, Currie and Schmieder (2009) demonstrate that fugitive emissions
of toxic pollutants such as cadmium and toluene have important impacts on infant birth weight. In a
study of twins, Black et al. (2007) find that a 7.5 percent increase in birth weight results in a 1.8 percent
increase in earnings among men and a 1 percentage point increase in high school completion among
women.
7
  Chay and Greenstone (2003) show that a 1% reduction in exposures to Total Suspended Particulates
during the recession of 1980-1981 resulted in a 0.35% effect in infant mortality while Sanders (2012)
finds that a one standard deviation decrease in particulate matter exposure results in a reduction in
high school test scores equal to 2% of a standard deviation. Instrumenting for changes in pollution
using county-level changes in manufacturing employment, that number rises to 6%. Local exposure to
PM2.5 has also been shown to have large effects on the contemporaneous productivity in outdoor workers
(Chang et al., 2016).

                                                     7
have often overlooked housing market discrimination because it cannot be easily identified
from observational data in housing markets (Bayer et al., 2007, Calabrese et al., 2006,
Holmes and Sieg, 2015). It is commonly assumed that the disparities in neighborhood
effects discussed above are the result of location choices of households. For instance,
Currie (2011) provides evidence that mothers who are most likely to live within the
vicinity of a Superfund site after cleanup are more likely to be white and college educated.
Similarly, white mothers are less likely to reside within the vicinity of a plant that emits
toxic pollutants after emissions are disclosed. While these estimates suggest differential
patterns of sorting in response to changes in the level or information about pollution
exposures, it is not clear whether all households in these samples had access to the same
choices during their search.


3     Measuring Discrimination with an HDS Audit
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development has conducted four
major, multi-city audit studies that are designed to measure the incidence of discrimina-
tion against African American, Hispanic, and Asian and Native American minority testers
(relative to a white control) in the context of a rental housing or real estate search. The
first such study was conducted in 1977, with successive iterations occurring in 1989, 2000,
and 2012. Audit studies have similarly been used to study bargaining at car dealerships
(Ayres and Siegelman, 1995), gender discrimination in hiring at restaurants (Neumark
et al., 1996), and the combined effects of race and criminal record on hiring (Pager, 2003).
Bertrand and Duflo (2017) summarize the growing literature that uses field experiment
techniques for detecting discrimination, focusing on the difference between audit and cor-
respondence studies. Audit studies typically employ a matched-pair randomized design,
where a pair of actors or “testers”, differing only in the characteristic of interest (e.g.,
race), is sent into the field to carry out an economic activity. In a correspondence study,
fictitious applicants correspond only by mail or internet.
    Audit studies are designed to fully simulate engagements between individuals in a
market, often involving a series of in-person interactions and involving a full represen-
tation of racial identity. As a result, they provide a more complete characterization
of discriminatory behavior as it operates in many markets. However, this also makes
them much more expensive to implement at powered scales (and therefore less common).
Siegelman and Heckman (1993) and Heckman (1998) describe other limitations of audit
studies – for instance, it is unlikely that testers will be identical in all respects except for
the attribute of interest. Testers are cognizant of their roles and may act in such a way
as to try to sway the results towards or against finding evidence of discrimination. The
investigator retains more control in a correspondence study, as testers do not actually
exist and their attributes can therefore be more easily controlled.

                                               8
    Since the HDS research design focuses on discrimination that occurs at the point of
initial contact with the real estate agent – i.e., the point at which recommendations are
given and the choice set is narrowed – the results of HDS analyses describe one particular
form of housing market discrimination that could be compounded by other forms of
discrimination – e.g., at the financing8 or purchasing stage (Aaronson et al., 2017, Zhao
et al., 2006, Ondrich et al., 2003, 1998, Yinger, 1995). Prior literature has included
arguments in favor of and against the reliable extension of inferences from partial audit
studies to estimate the full extent of compounded impacts, though it is generally agreed
that the direct results of the HDS provide a lower bound.9
    Within the economics literature, HDS audits have primarily been utilized to study
the persistence of discriminatory behavior and examine underlying behavioral mecha-
nisms such as animus-based versus statistical discrimination (Guryan and Charles, 2013,
Dymski, 2006, Zhao et al., 2006, Ondrich et al., 2003, 1998). The consistency of the
HUD design (especially 1989, 2000, 2012) allows for comparisons of discriminatory be-
havior over time, with results generally indicating a decline in exclusionary practices
over the past five decades (Turner et al., 2013, 2002, Page, 1995, Yinger, 1986).10 An
initial evaluation of discriminatory behavior using the HDS 2012 data documents a re-
duction in the number of tests that disadvantage African Americans on some measure
from 0.04 in the 2000 audit to 0 in 2012. The fraction for Hispanic testers fell from 0.05
to 0.02 Turner et al. (2013). Differences in the number of units inspected by African
American testers also fell in the 2012 audit relative to 2000. All differences were substan-
tially smaller than those documented in 1989, providing evidence of a downward trend
in certain discriminatory types of practices. According to the comparative work done
across HDS studies, the single persistent form of discrimination in the housing market is
“discriminatory steering” of minority testers into minority neighborhoods (Dymski, 2006,
Galster and Godfrey, 2005, Yinger, 1995). Turner et al. (2013) find that minority buy-
ers did not have a more difficult time securing an appointment with a real estate agent

8
   There is a large body of evidence that documents the presence of discrimination in mortgage and other
 lending markets (Dymski, 2006). It is possible (indeed likely, based on prior evidence) that discrimination
 also occurs in the mortgage lending industry. Official government guidance for mortgage lenders in the
 1930’s suggested that neighborhoods with a high percentage of people of color constituted risky loans,
 drawing a red line around those areas and steering funds away (Aaronson et al., 2017). If minority home
 buyers were steered towards those neighborhoods, red-lining would make home-ownership more difficult,
 or at least more expensive.
 9
   Yinger (1997) builds on the analysis of Courant (1978) to develop a full model of housing search, where
 discrimination affects the surplus that homebuyers receive through five separate mechanisms: (1) the
 number of houses shown, (2) the amount of assistance and encouragement received, (3) assistance in the
 loan application process, (4) loan approval, and (5) physical moving costs. Calibrating the model, he
 finds that these mechanisms collectively result in a $4,000 lower expected surplus for black homebuyers
 from the housing search process.
10
   Using data from a paired-tester audit study in Boston in 1981 that considered white and black renters,
 Yinger (1986) finds that black renters are informed about 30% fewer rental units than their white
 counterparts, who are also invited to inspect 57% more apartments. Page (1995) finds that black and
 Hispanic testers are shown 80% to 90%, respectively, of the number of units shown to white testers.

                                                     9
in 2012, but documented evidence of steering for African American and Asian testers.
Both groups received recommendations that were, on average, in census tracts with a
lower share of white households. These studies provide important motivation for research
on the relationship between steering behavior and the specific channels through which
neighborhood choice can affect long-run outcomes. Using data from the same 2012 ex-
periment, the present study begins with a re-analysis of the evidence on neighborhood
racial composition and then examines an expanded set of hypotheses that directly link
discrimination to neighborhood effects channels.


Implementation of the 2012 Housing Discrimination
Study (HDS)
The 2012 Housing Discrimination Study was conducted in 28 metropolitan areas, with
sampling designed to represent the racial/ethnic composition of the national housing
market based on the geographic distribution of each minority group as documented in
the 2010 US population census. The 2012 HDS utilized a matched-pair block randomized
design, where recruitment and assignment were conducted in each of the 28 metropolitan
area field offices. Testers were blind-matched to a partner based on their age and gender.
They were both then provided with a profile of characteristics to use throughout the study:
income, assets, debt levels, family circumstances, job characteristics, education levels, and
housing preferences. The design involved randomly sampling the distribution of rental
and real estate advertisements available for the market at the time of the study. After each
draw of a listing and corresponding local real estate office or rental housing provider, a
pair of testers was randomly assigned and underwent a housing search process.11 Income,
asset and debt levels were assigned to make testers unambiguously well-qualified for the
advertised listing.12 Housing preferences and family/job characteristics were assigned to
match the characteristics of the advertisement.
    The matched-pair block randomized design employed by HDS 2012 contains a number
of advantages and also some limitations for studying the relationship between discrim-
inatory steering versus steering into disadvantaged neighborhoods. The audit does not
measure the observed incomes and preferences of buyers who are making choices in a
market, but rather controls these parameters in a housing search process using scripted
profiles and preferences.13 The matched design also eliminates noise in the behavior of
agents that might arise as a result of heterogeneity in the advertisements, providers, and
11
   Testers met independently with a local test coordinator to review test protocols and receive an assigned
 listing/office.
12
   2012 HDS documentation states that the assignment of qualifications errs on the side of making minority
 testers slightly better qualified than their white counterparts for an advertised listing.
13
   Buyers are instructed to express zero geographic preference aside from that which might be inferred
 from their interest in the advertised listing.

                                                    10
characteristics that are assigned to testers of different races. Given the matched-pair
block randomized design, within-trial differences in the selection of homes recommended
to testers of different races reduce to:

                                     Γ∗i |(trialf , zirace ) →
                                                             − Γ̃i                             (1)

where Γ∗i denotes the set of available homes that match the income and preferences of
tester i and Γ̃i denotes the set of homes recommended to a tester i. In this study, the
null hypothesis of a test of differences in the recommended sets (Γ̃) will take the general
form:
                                   H0 : Γ̃i − Γ̃j |trialf = 0                           (2)

    In the HDS design, testers are instructed to limit all discussion about housing pref-
erences or neighborhood preferences to what is conveyed by the advertised listing that
they have been assigned. The advertised listing therefore provides a key indicator of the
tester’s optimal choice, and from the real estate agent’s perspective, is the best indicator
of the tester’s preferences for a given neighborhood characteristic. All preferences are set
equal for tester pairs (i = minority, j = white) within a given trial f . However, it is not
necessarily the case that real estate agents will interpret information about preferences
equally for all groups. Ondrich et al. (2003) find that real estate agents tend to make
recommendations that are at odds with housing preferences of minority buyers. In the
present study, the characteristics of the advertised house and surrounding neighborhood
provide us with control over the information about the tester’s preferences and allow us to
test for differential treatment to equivalent neighborhood preferences. This is important,
because the effects of choice set constraints on buyers ultimately depend on preferences.
More generally, this information allows us to test whether buyers with certain types of
housing preferences are more likely to face discriminatory constraints.


4     Empirical Design
Our baseline specification tests for differences in the neighborhood attributes of homes
recommended to minority testers relative to their paired white counterparts:

                 Ai,k,f = ψ1 Racei + ψ2 Trialf + Ã0i,k,f ψ3 + W0i,k,f ψ4 + νi,k,f             (3)

where Ai,k,f is the attribute of interest of house k shown to tester i in trial f . Race is an
indicator of the self-identified race of tester i. Trial is a vector of fixed effects that controls
for differences across trials, absorbing differences across tester pairs, housing providers,
and markets. Ãi,k,f controls for the corresponding attribute of the advertised home (and
possibly other attributes of that home) that tester i brings to the appointment and is the

                                                  11
primary piece of information that a real estate agent can use to infer the preferences of
that tester. Wi,k ,f is a vector of controls containing characteristics of the actor who is
serving as a tester,14 characteristics that are assigned to the tester,15 and characteristics
of the search.16 Wi,k ,f also includes a control for the housing market (defined as an MSA
in the HDS) where a trial/search takes place.


4.1      Data from the HDS Audit
The HUD buyer audit results in data on the locations and attributes of advertised listings
(assigned to buyers) and a set of listings that are recommended to a buyer. Figure 2
illustrates the search process for trials in Chicago and in Los Angeles, each involving a
white and a paired Asian tester. In both of these cases, the housing search process yielded
two independent sets of listings that were recommended to the testers. In each map, the
black point references the location of the advertised listing that was requested by each
tester. Red points indicate houses recommended to the white tester, and blue points
indicate houses recommended to the Asian tester. Green points indicate houses that
were recommended to both testers. The maps illustrate that recommended properties
for both testers tend to fall in a relatively tight geographic zone, suggesting that the
common advertised house orients the recommendation set. We find that 33% of the
recommendation sets in the 2012 HDS audit fall within a single census tract, suggesting
that high-resolution neighborhood data may be important for detecting differences in
heterogeneous neighborhoods. Second, while all of the recommended properties fall within
relatively close proximity to one another, they do exhibit some spatial clustering by race.
Third, we note that there may be overlap in recommended houses. In Los Angeles,
5 out of 23 total recommendations are shared between the two testers. However, this
varies substantially across trials. The white and Asian tester share just one common
recommendation out of 15 total recommended houses in Chicago.
    The full sample of properties from the buyer study contains 6,962 advertised listings
and 21,496 recommendations. Basic characteristics and price information are taken from
the HUD study data files. The HUD data files also contain extensive data on the true and
assigned characteristics of testers, the timing and sequence of appointments, characteris-
tics of the agents and representatives, and the quality of interactions between testers and
agents during the study. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on the general characteris-
14
   Actor Characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of
 test, total number of homes recommended to tester, educational attainment of tester, and current lease
 assigned to tester.
15
   Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
 ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job,
 and reason tester can afford down payment.
16
   Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment
 (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, and avail-
 ability of advertised home as stated by agent.

                                                    12
tics of testers recruited into in the sample. The average age of testers in the study is 41
and about two-thirds of them are female. Home-owners and renters are well-represented
among those working as testers, though the majority are renters at the time of their
participation in the study. The median tester in the sample has a bachelor’s degree and
more than half of the sample earns less than $30,000 per year in personal income.
     Table 2 reports characteristics of the advertised listings that are assigned to testers as
part of the study. These advertised listings are presented to real estate agents to initiate
a search in the first stage of a trial. They are not representative of the set of all homes.
More than 70% of the listings assigned to testers are single-family homes. The remaining
listings are primarily for town-homes (13%) and some multi-family buildings (10.4%).
The average list price of advertised homes in the sample is just over $300,000. The
racial composition of the census block group of an advertised listing has, on average, 67%
White, 9% African American, 7% Asian, and 15% Hispanic (and 2% other). On average,
advertised listings are in neighborhoods where 9% of the households have incomes at or
below the poverty line, 50% have at least one member with a college degree, and 47%
have a member that is in a high skilled job.


4.2     Data on Neighborhood Characteristics
We geocode the addresses of advertised and recommended homes reported in the 2012
HDS and merge them with contemporaneous data at the census block group level from
the American Community Survey (ACS). The 2008-2012 5-year moving average ACS
provides data on: (1) the share of households at or below the poverty line, (2) the
share of households with at least one member with a college degree, and (3) the share
of households with at least one member who is employed in a high skilled occupation
(defined as management, business, science, and arts occupations). We also obtain ACS
data on the share of white, African American, Asian, and Hispanic households at the
census block group level.
    Advertised and recommended homes are also merged with information about local
pollution exposures/sources from monitoring programs conducted by the US Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA). For each home in the sample, we create measures of:
(1) the number of Superfund sites within a 5 km radius using the exact location and extent
of sites throughout the United States,17 (2) the risk of exposure (in 2012) to industrial
chemical releases from facilities monitored by the EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory,18 and




17
   The exact location and extent of Superfund sites is identified using data pro-
 cessed by the Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center at Columbia University:
 http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/superfund/sets/browse
18
   https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-01/documents/rsei methodology v2.3.6.pdf

                                              13
(3) particulate matter (PM2.5) concentrations taken from satellite data.19
    Finally, we merge information about crime (count of violent assaults)20 and school
quality (“GreatSchools” ratings)21 that are scraped from the platform of a major online
real estate service. We scraped data for each property using the addresses of houses
listed in the HUD study and both measures relate to the property-level characteristic of
the home. The GreatSchool rating measures the quality of the school that a home is
districted for or, in cases of no location-based assignment, takes the average of nearby
schools. Data collection for these variables was conducted in December 2017 and measures
relate to the time of collection. Neighborhood and district-level data for 2012 were not
available for HDS markets. Differences in these outcomes therefore reflect school ratings
and neighborhood assault counts 5 years after a housing search was conducted.


4.3      Balance Tests
Tables 3 and 4 report the results of balance tests for within-tester pairs, including (1)
true characteristics of testers (i.e., actor characteristics), (2) characteristics assigned to
testers, and (3) characteristics of advertised homes. Tests for balance suggest that paired
actors are not perfectly equivalent in all real-life dimensions, but do not reveal strongly
significant differences in characteristics. African American actors have a lower likeli-
hood of being homeowners than their white tester counterpart (15% lower, significant at
p<10%). The number of African American testers with personal incomes in the $20,000-
29,999 range is lower than their white counterparts (21% lower, significant at p<5%), but
is higher in both the $10,000-19,999 and the $30,000-39,999 ranges. Similar differences
in bin matching are also present for other groups. Hispanic actors tend to have a lower
probability of having a bachelor’s degree (25% lower, significant at p<10%), but a higher
probability of having an associate’s or a graduate/professional degree (non-significant).
Asian actors are more likely than their counterparts to have a high school diploma (12%
higher, significant at p<10%).
    The HUD design intentionally constructs assignment profiles that err on the side
of providing minority testers with slightly higher qualifications. For example, minority
testers in all groups have been employed for 1-2 years longer and have lived for 1-2 years
longer at their current address than their white counterparts. All actor and assigned

19
   PM2.5 can be an important factor in mortality from cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Satellite
 data are taken from Van Donkelaar et al. (2016), who use Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) retrievals from
 the NASA MODIS, MISR, and SeaWiFS to recover ground-level PM2.5 concentration. Data have a grid
 cell resolution of 0.01 degree.
20
   Assault counts are drawn from multiple sources, including CrimeReports.com, EveryBlock.com and
 SpotCrime.com.
21
   GreatSchools is a private ratings service that combines information on test scores, student
 progress, and “other factors that make a big difference in how children experience school” to
 generate a score on a 1-10 scale. Details on the GreatSchools rating system can be found at
 https://www.greatschools.org/gk/ratings. District boundaries are provided by Boundaries by Maponics.

                                                   14
characteristics are included as controls in the tests for discrimination. Balance tests
reveal that advertisements for single-family homes are assigned at slightly higher rates
and multi-family advertisements at slightly lower rates to Asian testers. There is no
evidence of differences in the pollution levels, block group characteristics, or listing prices
of homes assigned within tester pairs.


5     Results
This section reports the results of a series of tests of hypotheses that arise from the model
discussed above. Specifically, we test for effects of the tester’s race on choice set size and
composition while also exploring the role of the information provided by the tester in the
form of the advertised house.


5.1    Are Minority Buyers Given Fewer Choices in a Search?
A first-order question regarding the effect of housing discrimination concerns the effect of
real estate agent behavior on the number of recommendations provided to the minority
tester relative to a white counterpart. A simple model of housing search presented in
Appendix A illustrates that the expected utility of a buyer’s choice set will be unam-
biguously lower when fewer homes are offered as available choices. In their evaluation of
the HDS 2012 experimental data, Turner et al. (2013) do not find evidence of significant
differences in the number of trials where African American or Hispanic/LatinX are told
that a homes is available, relative to a white tester. To ensure consistency with the pri-
mary results reported in the sections that follow, we test alternative specifications of the
same hypothesis:
                          h                 i h                 i
                      H0 : #(Γ∗j ) − #(Γ̃j ) − #(Γ∗i ) − #(Γ̃i ) = 0

where i = minority, j = white. Noting that #(Γ∗i ) = #(Γ∗j ) under the assumptions of
the audit experiment, this hypothesis simplifies to:

                                  H0 : #(Γ̃i ) − #(Γ̃j ) = 0

    Table 5 reports estimates from two variants of this test. A row in the table presents
estimates of differences between a minority tester and a white tester, where minority is
defined as self-identified as African American, Hispanic, or Asian. The first two columns
test for differences in the total number of recommendations provided to minority testers
relative to the white tester in the same trial, whereas the third and fourth columns test
for differences in the availability (communicated by the agent) of the advertised home.
Columns 2 and 4 add controls for differences that may be due to a buyer’s implied


                                              15
preference for price and neighborhood characteristics using the listing price and racial
composition of the neighborhood where the advertised listing is located. While point
estimates indicate that African American and, to a lesser extent, Asian buyers receive
fewer recommendations than their white counterparts. These findings are consistent with
estimates reported by Turner et al. (2013), who find that African Americans are shown
.5 fewer homes than a white tester and no difference for Hispanic testers. None of the
differences are statistically significant in our model, which includes additional controls
and clusters standard errors by trial. We find no significant difference in the likelihood of
the advertised home being available. This is important, as refusing to suggest a property
or making a claim that a particular property is unavailable is a more blatant form of
discrimination that had been prevalent in previous HDS studies. While differences may
still exist, they are not statistically significant in this sample. This test does not, however,
imply anything about differences in the quality of the houses or neighborhoods that are
being recommended.


5.2     Are Minority Buyers Steered into Minority Neighborhoods?
We begin our discussion of steering by examining the channel that has been the focus
of research in prior decades (Yinger, 1995, Galster and Godfrey, 2005) as well as results
from the 2012 audit in the Turner et al. (2013) report. In particular, we consider the
extent to which the racial composition of neighborhoods differs for homes recommended
to minority testers relative to a white counterpart.
                                                          P
                                                                  %whitek
                                  P
                                    k∈Γ̃i   %whitek       k∈Γ˜j
                           H0 :                       −
                                       #(Γ̃i )                #(Γ̃j )
where again, i = minority, j = white. Table 6 reports estimates of differences in the
share of white households in the block group of a home recommended in a trial. Columns
I - V introduce additional controls for attributes of the advertised house, which capture
the implied preferences of the testers for housing price and neighborhood characteristics,
such as neighborhood racial composition and the share of households below the poverty
line. In each case, homes recommended to African Americans contain a lower share of
white households than those recommended to their white counterparts. This difference
of -0.042 – approximately 6% of the white comparison mean of 0.6952 – does not change
when we control for the neighborhood racial composition, poverty rate, or price of the
advertised listing that a tester presents to their agent.22 These estimates confirm the find-
ing documented in prior studies on steering and segregation, providing strong evidence
22
 In Appendix C, we report results of tests that examine steering into neighborhoods by the share of
households from each of the three minority groups in the HDS study. These results demonstrate that
African American testers are more likely to be steered towards neighborhoods with a higher share of
African American households, but evidence of steering into same-race neighborhoods is not as evident
for the other groups.

                                                 16
that a tester’s race directly influences the racial composition of the neighborhoods that
define his choice set. This occurs in the absence of any explicit information about prefer-
ences for demographic or other neighborhood characteristics and is directly attributable
to a buyer’s race. The effect persists irrespective of information about neighborhood
preferences implied by an advertised listing presented to an agent.
    Point estimates in Table 6 suggest a stronger steering effect for African American
buyers away from white neighborhoods (4.16% [0.166]) than was reported in the initial
report of findings from the 2012 audit (1.8% [0.8]) (Turner et al., 2013). Differences may
result from the specification of tests, since the characteristics of recommendation sets are
aggregated by tester in the HDS report. They could also result from differences in the
level of geographic variation in the data on racial composition. Whereas the present study
makes use of data on racial composition and other neighborhood characteristics measured
at the census block group level, previously reported estimates relied on data at the census
tract level. As described above, housing recommendation sets in the 2012 HDS were
highly localized. Appendix D examines the effects of neighborhood measures at different
levels of geographic aggregation by replicating our tests using census block group and
tract measures. We find smaller differences when we use census tract data. Estimates of
tester-mean differences with census tract data indicate that the African American testers
receive recommendations for homes in tracts with a 2.8% [0.87] smaller share of white
households than a white tester, which is slightly larger than by not different from the
1.8% [0.8] difference reported in Turner et al. (2013). These comparisons highlight the
potential importance of heterogeneity at fine neighborhood scales in audit studies, since
real estate agents may engage clients in a highly localized search. Census tract measures
provide zero variation in the one-third of housing searches conducted within a single
census tract in the HDS 2012. Comparisons reported in Appendix D provide evidence
of substantial within-tract heterogeneity in the sample of major metropolitan housing
markets.
    While steering into same-race neighborhoods certainly provides evidence of discrimi-
natory behavior that could exacerbate segregation, the ultimate effects on the outcomes
of buyer households are not obvious. Recent literature suggests that exposure to within-
group social models may have important (positive) effects on economic mobility and
such recommendations could conform with homophily preferences of minority homebuy-
ers (Chetty et al., 2018). As a result, while discriminatory steering itself is illegal, it is
not clear whether increasing access to minority neighborhoods and restricting access to
white neighborhoods will generate advantage or disadvantage for a minority household.
Digging deeper, the estimates presented in Table 7 indicate that the results found in Ta-
ble 6 are primarily driven by steering of African American buyers away from high income
white neighborhoods. The steering effect is strong in high income white neighborhoods
and is present for the minority group as a whole. It persists when we control for the

                                             17
listed price, the neighborhood racial composition, and the poverty rate of the advertised
listing. These differences become much smaller for African American testers in medium-
income white neighborhoods and disappear for the group of minority testers as a whole.
The effect actually reverses for low-income white neighborhoods, such that Hispanic and
Asian testers are more likely than their white counterparts (with the same income) to
receive recommendations in a low-income white neighborhood.


5.3      Are Minorities Disadvantaged by Neighborhood Steering?
This section presents the core tests of our study, which build on the existing body of
evidence on discriminatory steering to analyze a set of key neighborhood characteris-
tics that have been shown to have important effects on short- and long-run economic
outcomes. When interpreted in the context of the literature on neighborhood effects,
these tests reveal the specific channels through which discriminatory steering can con-
strain to certain types of neighborhoods to affect the lives of buyer households. Revealed
preference evidence indicates that buyers have clear preferences for these characteristics.
We therefore assume that the average buyer in the sample of HUD markets will have
preferences for these neighborhood attributes and that discriminatory constraints along
these dimensions will have a non-trivial impact on expected utility. We test for the ef-
fect of discriminatory behavior on recommendations of homes with each of the following
neighborhood characteristics described above.
                                                                P
                                                                        Xk
                                            P
                                              k∈Γ̃i   Xk        k∈Γ˜j
                                     H0 :                   −
                                             #(Γ̃i )            #(Γ̃j )
where X = ( poverty rate, %high skill, %college, elementary school quality, assaults, air
toxics, particulate matter). The two panels of Table 8 present core results from tests
of differences between the homes recommended to minority versus white testers along
key neighborhood dimensions. Differences are reported in levels, with the mean value of
the comparison group (white tester) reported at the bottom of the table. All estimates
include controls for characteristics of advertised homes, and for tests that use census
block and pollution variables we report sharpened q-values using a Hochberg adjustment
to control for the family-wise false discovery rate (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).23 We
find substantial disparities in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority
testers relative to their white counterparts. The first panel of Table 8 shows that minority
testers (as a whole) are recommended homes in census block groups with higher poverty
rates (1.25%) and fewer high skilled neighbors (-2.28%).24 Considering the average values
23
   Hochberg-adjusted p-values are provided for tests of differences between minority and white testers
 (census block and pollution variables) at the bottom of Table 8. Standard test statistics are reported for
 assault counts and school ratings.
24
   High skill is share of census block group employed in American Community Survey defined Management,
 business, science, and arts occupations.

                                                       18
of these neighborhood attributes in the white tester comparison group (8.2% and 48.2%),
these impacts are substantial (especially poverty). We do not find statistically significant
differences in the percentage of college educated residents in neighborhoods recommended
to minorities when considered as a whole.
    Below the estimates of differences between white testers and minorities, we report
differences by racial group using a specification that includes terms for each. Overall, these
estimates indicate that African American testers are shown homes that are in census block
groups characterized by higher poverty rates (+1.24%), lower shares of skilled workers
(-2.72%), and lower shares of college educated neighbors (-3.04%), although the result for
poverty is not statistically significant. In their initial evaluation of steering using the 2012
HDS audit data, Turner et al. (2013) find smaller (0.2% [0.2]) differences for steering into
high poverty neighborhoods using measurements at the census tract level. Appendix D
discusses a replication of that test with the tract-level poverty measure, which indicates
that differences become smaller in magnitude (0.27% [0.32]) when evaluated using tester-
mean recommendations and the census tract measure. This mirrors the finding in racial
composition in the previous section. We note that while the tract and block-group poverty
rates are nearly identical in the average trial (8.5% vs. 8.6%), the within-trial standard
deviation is much smaller for the tract-level measure (3.79% vs. 5.02%).
    The disparities between white and Hispanic testers are even larger in terms of the
poverty rate and high-skill neighbors but smaller and insignificant for college share. Dif-
ferences between white and Asian testers are markedly lower and are not significant along
any of the dimensions of neighborhood capital that we study. Column 4 of the first panel
describes school quality as measured by the “GreatSchools” index. While the houses rec-
ommended to every minority group reflect a lower school quality than that of the houses
recommended to their paired white testers, none of these differences are statistically sig-
nificant. We note, however, that our sample size is approximately halved owing to data
loss when merging HUD house addresses with information scraped from the online realty
platform.
    The second panel of Table 8 focuses on neighborhood disamenities – assaults and three
measures of pollution exposure – proximity to Superfund sites, air toxics (as measured by
the EPA’s RSEI model), and PM2.5, an important criteria pollutant with substantial long
run health effects. Considering all minority groups as a whole, we observe statistically
significant differences in the proximity to Superfund sites and air toxics relative to the
houses recommended to white testers. The difference in assaults is positive, although
not statistically significant. However, considering only African Americans, we find the
difference in assaults to be positive and statistically significant. The magnitude of that
difference (+23.80) is large compared to the average in the white tester comparison group
(80.43). The same is true for Superfund proximity (a difference of +0.12 relative to an
average of 0.35) and air toxicity (a difference of +915.45 relative to an average of 5,079.6).

                                              19
Asians show similar statistically significant differences for Superfund proximity and air
toxics. Point estimates for Hispanics are positive, but estimates are smaller in magnitude
and statistically insignificant.
    In contrast to air toxics, results with respect to particulate matter suggest very lit-
tle difference across testers. The average value of particulate matter in the sample of
advertised houses is 9.283. Asian testers do exhibit a statistically significant difference
with their white counterparts of -0.1283, but this difference is very small in magnitude.
None of the other race groups exhibit statistically significant differences within tester
pairs. We suspect that this is due to an important difference between particulate matter
and air toxics. In particular, spatial variation in particulate matter concentrations occurs
over large geographies, whereas air toxics can vary from neighborhood to neighborhood.
Because real estate agents do tend to recommend houses within relatively small buffers
around the advertised house to both testers within a pair, the scope for steering with
respect to particulate matter is far lower than that with respect to air toxics.
    These estimates indicate that minority buyers are steered toward neighborhoods that
could disadvantage them in multiple dimensions. Furthermore, these differences do not
appear to be affected by the preferences that minority buyers communicate regarding
these very same neighborhood characteristics, the racial composition of neighborhoods,
or home price. Appendix F reports estimates with/without these controls. We do not find
evidence that differences reported in Table 8 are driven by a steering process where real
estate agents discount the financial credentials of minority testers and simply steer them
towards lower income neighborhoods where housing is more affordable. Table E.1 presents
results of tests for differences in home prices, which suggest no significant differences in
the listing price of homes recommended to each group. We perform an additional test to
rule out this potential mechanism in Appendix Table F.1.
    It is also possible that minorities are steered away from high amenity neighborhoods
as a result of historical/existing segregation, which could either bias the assumptions
of real estate agents about buyer preferences or could induce steering irrespective of
buyer preferences. Table 7 suggests a more complicated picture, demonstrating that
steering does not occur solely into same-race neighborhoods and but rather depends on
the interaction between race and neighborhood income. In order to more directly test the
effects of prior segregation steering behavior, we estimate the main effects from Table 8
including additional controls for the lagged racial composition of each block group from
the 2000 Census. Appendix Table F.2 reports the results from these tests, which indicate
that differences remain even controlling for these historical patterns. Differences in the
poverty level, skill level, and level of college attainment of neighborhoods recommended
to African American households can be partially but not fully explained by lagged racial
composition of neighborhoods. The historical racial composition of neighborhoods does
not appear to explain differences in neighborhood assaults or exposures to Superfund or

                                            20
chemical toxics.


5.4      Are Children Disadvantaged by Neighborhood Steering?
Much of the literature indicates that the social and physical characteristics of neighbor-
hoods have the strongest effects on children. While children are not directly subject to
discriminatory steering, they will be affected if real estate agents tend to discriminate
against minority families. We make use of the comprehensive identity profiles developed
in the 2012 HDS to test for differences within the subsample of tester groups (37%) who
are assigned an identity of mother.25 Results reported in Table 9 indicate the differences
are magnified for this group. In particular, we find that minority mothers are steered into
neighborhoods with a +4.81% higher poverty rate than white mothers and that this differ-
ence is particularly stark for African American (+5.23%) and Hispanic (+5.60%) mothers.
The average poverty rate in the white comparison group is only 7.67%, meaning that these
effects are quite large in percentage terms – i.e., 62.7% to 73.0% increases relative to the
control mean. Differences in the skill level and share of college educated households in
neighborhoods recommended to African American and Hispanic/LatinX mothers are also
much larger than the differences for the average tester. Homes recommended to African
American mothers have a 40% higher incidence in nearby assaults (+33), a 51% higher
number of nearby Superfund sites (+0.18), and a 38% higher (+2,269.92) level of expo-
sure to air toxics than white mothers compared to the control means. The exception
is for elementary school quality – we find some evidence that homes recommended to
Hispanic/LatinX mothers have higher school quality (+0.84).
    In order to better understand how these findings relate to disparities in ultimate
exposures to neighborhood attributes, we construct a comparison between differences in
homes recommended to white versus African American mothers and differences in location
choices within 2 km of Superfund sites (that had not been cleaned up in 2011). Using
this definition of exposures to Superfund sites, Currie (2011) finds a 43% difference in
the exposures of African American mothers relative to white mothers.26 Using the HDS
data, our test indicates that African American mothers are 42.5% more likely than their
white counterpart to receive a recommendation within 2 km of a Superfund site.27 These
estimates indicate that the differences from discriminatory steering are almost exactly




25
   Results on in utero pollution exposures suggest that expecting mothers may also be an important group,
 though this is not a tester profile in the 2012 HDS.
26
   Currie (2011) reports that 1.74% of all mothers live within 2 km of a Superfund site and that African
 American mothers are +0.77 percentage points more likely to live within 2 km of a site.
27
   In our HDS sample of cities with large minority populations, 24% of homes recommended to the sample
 of mothers fall within 2 km of a Superfund site. The test for African American mothers indicates a 10
 percentage point higher likelihood than a paired white mother. Estimate is significant at p<.1.

                                                   21
as large as the resulting differences in maternal exposures.28 Currie (2011) discusses
the disparity in exposures as possibly resulting from educational differences between the
groups, which could result in different locational choices in the wake of Superfund cleanups
or publicly disclosed emissions of toxic chemicals. The present findings from the HDS
suggest that housing discrimination could also explain these differences.29

Potential Effects of Steering on Child Exposure to Poverty

In order to gain traction on the importance of discriminatory steering for child exposure to
poverty, we consider the results on maternal steering in the context of long-run effects of
the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experimental voucher program. The MTO program
provided vouchers for residents living in neighborhoods with a poverty rate of greater
than 40% to obtain subsidies in neighborhoods with poverty rates of less than 10%.
Chetty et al. (2016) find that for children under 13, the treatment was responsible for a
17 percentage point (intent to treat) or 36 percentage point (treatment on the treated)
reduction in neighborhood poverty and subsequent impacts of this poverty reduction on
income, college education, employment, marriage and fertility later in life. Chyn (2018)
also finds large effects on later life employment and earnings for children in a non-volunteer
sample who were moved out of housing projects in high poverty neighborhoods. We test
for differences in steering into low poverty block groups (as defined by MTO) for tester
pairs who present an advertised listing that falls in a low poverty census block group.30
    Column 1 of Table 10 reports the estimates from this test, which indicate that African
American testers are 11.8% and Hispanic/LatinX testers are 15.9% less likely than their
white tester pair to be shown a home in a low poverty neighborhood when they demon-
strate interest in such a neighborhood. The more relevant comparison given the findings
in Chetty et al. (2016) involves a test for differences between minority and white testers
who have families (according to their scripted roles). The results of this test, reported in
Column 2, indicate that African American tester families are 17.3% less likely to receive
recommendations in low poverty neighborhoods. Hispanic/LatinX testers with families
are 19.9% less likely. Column 3 reports estimates from tests of differences between mi-
28
   We construct a similar test of differences in air toxics using our RSEI measure. On average, homes
 recommended to mothers in the HDS study have a RSEI level of 5313.1. Homes recommended to
 African American mothers have levels that are 2268.9 higher (estimate is significant at p<.1) than their
 white counterpart, indicating a 42.6% disparity in exposures.
29
   For buyers who may lack sufficient information about pollution exposures, adverse welfare impacts from
 discriminatory constraints are likely to come directly from the short and long-run outcomes associated
 with exposures themselves. Indeed, we expect that some buyers may be more and others less informed
 about pollution exposures, school quality, or public safety in the neighborhoods where they are searching.
30
   Another interesting question concerns the incidence of steering for buyers who present preferences for
 housing in high poverty neighborhoods. However, only 1% of recommended homes in the HDS sample are
 in neighborhoods with poverty rates of greater than 40%, making it difficult to draw an exact comparison
 with a statistically powered test for the high poverty neighborhoods. We focus instead on steering away
 from low poverty neighborhoods. We define a MTO-consistent measure as a recommended home in a
 census block group where the share of families living below the poverty line is less than 10%.

                                                    22
nority and white testers that are assigned the role of mother. We find that the differences
are particularly magnified from this group: white mothers are nearly twice as likely to
be shown homes in low poverty neighborhoods as African American or Hispanic/LatinX
mothers that demonstrate equivalent interest.
    In more recent work on income mobility gaps between race groups, Chetty et al.
(2018) find that neighborhoods with low poverty rates (defined as <10%) and high rates
of father presence among black families (defined as >50%) are associated with smaller
racial gaps and better outcomes for black boys (the study documents persistent gaps
between race groups within census tracts). The authors document that whereas 63% of
white children currently grow up in these kinds of advantaged neighborhoods, fewer than
5% of black children are exposed to the same. Columns 4-6 of Table 10 test for differences
in these neighborhoods and reveal differences that are highly similar to those reported
for low poverty neighborhoods discussed above. Assuming that the recommendations
of real estate agents affect buyer decisions, these results indicate that the impacts of
discriminatory steering will likely result in statistically and economically significant long-
run and intergenerational impacts within minority families. By reducing the access of
minority families to low poverty neighborhoods where they experience higher income
mobility and a higher likelihood of convergence with white counterparts, discrimination
could simultaneously contribute to the within-neighborhood race gap.31

Potential Effects of Steering on Income Mobility

In more recent work, Chetty and Hendren (2018a) use a large panel of data on the adult
outcomes of child movers to examine the effects of accumulated exposure to neighbor-
hoods32 on intergenerational income mobility. Their findings suggest that there is no
critical age at which exposure as a child affects their outcomes as an adult, but rather
that the incomes of children who move converge to the cohort-specific incomes of per-
manent residents of their destination.33 Importantly, Chetty and Hendren (2018a) argue

31
   We isolate the effect of housing discrimination occurring in a single stage of the housing search process
 and is likely a lower bound on the overall effect of discriminatory behavior on choices related to a
 given search. Yinger (1997) discusses the total effect of discrimination on the surplus from a housing
 search, including differences in assistance and encouragement, assistance with a loan application, and
 loan approval. The effects of discriminatory steering into higher poverty neighborhoods estimated in this
 study could be also be compounded by differences in information provided by a real estate agent about
 neighborhood conditions, differences in recommendations regarding an initial offer, or differences during
 the process of negotiations.
32
   Neighborhoods are defined in this paper using the definition of “commute zones,” which are designed to
 delineate the geographic boundaries of local economies, particularly improving their delineation in rural
 areas of the United States. The present study defines neighborhoods that are relevant for a housing
 search using census block groups within urban areas.
33
   Analysis in Chetty and Hendren (2018a) is based on the rank of an individual in the income in the
 income distribution, so the estimate above is interpreted as the following: a move into a neighborhood
 where permanent resident incomes are 1 percentile higher (at a given level of parental income) increases
 a child’s income rank in adulthood by approximately 0.04 percentiles.

                                                     23
that the effects of exposure to lower/higher income families are due to exposure alone,
irrespective of the income or sorting behavior of a child’s family.
    In Table 11, we test for differences in the median family income reported in census
blocks recommended to minority versus white testers. We find large differences for African
American testers, who receive recommendations for homes that are located in neighbor-
hoods where families have or 7.3% lower median incomes than those recommended to
white testers. This difference is magnified for African American families (10.8% lower)
and especially for mothers (25.1% lower). As an illustration, we consider a family who
moves a child at age 9 from the average neighborhood census block group in 2012 HDS
sample. The median income of families living in these neighborhoods is $101,609, which
ranks in the 83rd percentile of the national family income distribution of families with
children of age 9 in the national of commuting zones in 2012 (Chetty and Hendren, 2018a).
If this family were moving to a new neighborhood with the exact same family income
level (lateral move), our results suggest that an African American family would be shown
homes in the 78th percentile. At age 30, the effect of exposure due to steering alone
would reduce the minority child’s household income from the 62nd to the 60th percentile,
amounting to a (permanent) reduction of approximately $2,488 per year.34


5.5     Is Discriminatory Steering Affected by Buyer Preferences?
Implied Preferences for Neighborhood Characteristics

In an actual housing search, interactions between discriminatory behavior and buyer
preferences may have important impacts on location decisions and on the neighborhood
effects that result. The incorporation of the buyer’s individual preferences by a real estate
agent will result in a ceteris paribus increase in that buyer’s expected utility from housing
search. The 2012 HDS allows us to test the extent to which information about individual
preferences for neighborhood characteristics is incorporated into the recommendations of
real estate agents and, in particular, how this differs by tester race. We define a tester’s
implied preference for a given neighborhood characteristic using the corresponding value




34
 This estimate uses the results reported in Figure 4 of Chetty and Hendren (2018a) to estimate the
relationship between parent household income and child household income. y = 30 + .384 ∗ x. The
household income distribution of parents is taken from the cohort at age 9 in Online Data Table 6 (78th
percentile is $89,700-91,900 and 83rd percentile is $101,600-104,400. According to the effect of 4% per
year of exposure reported in Chetty and Hendren (2018a), a child who is exposed from age 9 to 23 would
pick up 56% of the observed difference between permanent resident incomes. The household income
distribution of children at age 30 is taken from the cohort with children at age 2 (61st percentile is
$50,000-51,400, so 61.87th is approximated as 51,218. 59th percentile is $47,400-48,700, so 59.95th is
approximated as 48,730). http://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/data/index.html#movers.

                                                  24
from the advertised house that the tester presented to the real estate agent.35
    Each of the columns in Table 12 describes the difference in recommendations as a
function of the strength in the implied preferences. We see first that the recommendation
sets of white buyers, the omitted racial group, exhibit a strong positive and statistically
significant relationship between each recommended house attribute and their preference
for that attribute expressed through their advertised house. For African Americans, this
relationship is significantly weakened for every neighborhood attribute with the exception
of Superfund proximity. Hispanic testers have a significantly weaker relationship in the
case of high skill, school quality and air toxics, and Asian testers have a weaker rela-
tionship in the case of assaults and all of the pollution variables. In the case of poverty,
high skill and college education, recommendations for Asian testers exhibit a stronger
relationship than their white counterpart, and the same is true in the case of assaults for
Hispanic testers. The general finding is that particularly for African Americans, individ-
ual preferences for key neighborhood attributes appear to be discounted by real estate
agents.
    We also explore heterogeneity in discriminatory steering among buyers who present
preferences for larger homes, higher priced homes, and homes in neighborhoods with
larger shares of each of the minority groups represented in the study (interested readers
can refer to Appendix G). We find that African American testers who present preferences
for larger homes in higher priced neighborhoods with a higher percentage of white house-
holds face greater constraints36 , though this is not the case for all outcomes or for the
other minority groups. The fact that discriminatory constraints facing African American
buyers appear to be magnified in searches for larger or more expensive homes suggests
that housing discrimination may disproportionately constrain upwardly mobile African
American households. Targeted experimental research on housing and other forms of dis-
crimination could be important for understanding disparities in intergenerational income
mobility that appear to persist for African American households but not other minority
groups (Chetty et al., 2018)


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we find strong evidence that contact with real estate agents differentially
constrains the choice sets of minority buyers relative to a white counterpart. Building on
prior literature, we show that while discrimination does not appear to have a significant

35
   For example, a tester who presents an advertised listing in a low poverty neighborhood has implied a
 preference for that low level of poverty. Note that income and other preferences are held constant by
 the matched-paired design. This design is similar to Ondrich et al. (2003), who find that real estate
 agents tend make recommendations that are at odds with the preferences that minority buyers imply for
 housing characteristics.
36
   These preferences are positively, though not perfectly correlated.

                                                  25
effect on the number of recommendations a minority buyer receives, it does have strong
impacts on the quality of the neighborhoods that constitute the recommended set. The
implications of these constraints are clear – the constraints imposed by real estate agents
in the search process provide all minority groups with houses to choose from that are
worse in at least one (and typically many) dimensions. Though adverse neighborhood
characteristics such as toxics exposures and neighborhood poverty rates can be correlated
with each other, the operate through discrete channels that may interact or compound
the ultimate effects on inequality.
    These findings have implications for several literatures in economics. First, they are
important for studies of “neighborhood effects”, which analyze the ways in which neigh-
borhood attributes affect short and long-run (even multi-generational) outcomes in the
dimensions of poverty, employment, schooling, criminal activity and public safety, and
environmental health. Prior research has demonstrated that residential location choices
can affect short- and long-run outcomes. In light of prior results, we interpret the steer-
ing behavior identified in this paper as likely to affect the neighborhood attributes in
the household’s choice set, and ultimately their house purchase decision, in ways that
disadvantage them. Housing discrimination could contribute to root causes of inequality
by constraining location choices and producing disparities in neighborhood effects.
    Second, our results demonstrate that minority homebuyers and renters may not be
“free to choose” in the housing market, and that their observed behavior may not ac-
curately reveal their preferences. If households’ choice sets are distorted by the recom-
mendations provided by real estate agents, this can have important implications for the
interpretation revealed preference studies are used to allocate public goods. Our results
suggest that what might appear to be weak preferences for environmental quality on the
part of minorities may actually result from a set of options that were disproportionately
lower in environmental quality than were those given to similar white buyers. This sug-
gests a potential source of bias in non-market valuation studies that assume that buyers
are making choices in the absence of such constraints. This method has become standard
in cost-benefit analyses and evaluation of environmental policies in the US and plays a
critical role in determining how governments allocate scarce funds to the provision of
public services across communities.
    Finally, our results provide evidence that even holding income disparities or differences
in preferences constant, housing discrimination could play an important role in determin-
ing observed spatial correlations between race, income, and local disamenities. This has
particularly important implications considering pollution, and policies relating to envi-
ronmental justice. Under an executive order signed by Bill Clinton in 1994, the federal
government is obligated to consider the distributional impacts of its policies with respect
to pollution and disadvantaged groups. Understanding the origins of existing inequities
has been the topic of a large and growing literature (Graham, 2018, Banzhaf et al., 2018).

                                             26
Discrimination has largely been overlooked in that literature. The results of the present
study suggest that this may be an important oversight. The steering mechanism has
important implications for the interpretation of long-run outcomes of neighborhood res-
idence or relocation programs, as well as the development of fair housing laws as they
relate to public expenditures on pollution abatement and public goods.
    While we are able to identify the differential impacts of real estate agents on the
housing search processes of white and minority buyers, we note that the HUD audit data
do not allow for direct tests of the behavioral mechanisms underlying these effects. We
find that the differential constraints imposed by agents occur irrespective of preferences
demonstrated by testers in the form of their “choice” of advertised house, though we
cannot disentangle mechanisms based on statistical discrimination from others based on,
for example, racial animus. We also note that the magnitude of the impact of housing
discrimination ultimately depends on the information, preferences, and behavior of buyers
in the context of discrimination. Therefore, obtaining precise estimates of welfare effects
would require an experiment that examines discriminatory behavior within the context of
real preferences of individuals making decisions in a housing market. This is not possible
with the HDS 2012 data, since the sampling design randomly draws advertisements from
the set of naturally occurring listings rather than according to the preferences of real
buyers. It is important to note that a minority buyer will nonetheless experience different
outcomes than a white buyer with the exact same preferences.
    We propose an expanded research agenda in the economics of housing discrimination,
including complementary experimental designs that are capable of more directly testing
the behavioral mechanisms underlying discriminatory steering as in Knowles et al. (2001),
List (2004), and Charles and Guryan (2008). We highlight that an important avenue for
experimental research involves the design of a research methodology that combines ex-
perimental identification of discriminatory behavior with individual preferences that are
representative of decisions being made in the housing market. These could be used to
obtain precise estimates of welfare effects. The results in the current study suggest that
real estate agents may discount and even work in opposition to the preferences of African
American buyers when making recommendations. An important remaining question is
the extent to which the constraints from discriminatory steering may be overcome by
tenacity – buyers with a sufficiently high marginal utility for certain housing character-
istics may choose to absorb additional search costs in order to expand their choice set.
Unfortunately, studying this aspect is not possible in the audit study context. Neither is a
study of the mortgage lending process, where we might expect the sorts of discriminatory
effects we identify here to be amplified.




                                            27
References
Aaronson, D., Hartley, D. A., and Mazumder, B. (2017). The Effects of the 1930s HOLC
  ’Redlining’ Maps. Working Paper Series WP-2017-12, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Alexander, D. and Currie, J. (2017). Is it Who You Are or Where You Live? Residential
  Segregation and Racial Gaps in Childhood Asthma. Journal of Health Economics,
  55:186–200.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011). Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 25(3):153–72.

Almond, D., Currie, J., and Duque, V. (2018). Childhood circumstances and adult
  outcomes: Act ii. Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4):1360–1446.

Ayres, I. and Siegelman, P. (1995). Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a
 New Car. The American Economic Review, 85(3):304–321.

Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2018). Environmental Justice: The Economics of
  Race, Place and Pollution. Forthcoming: Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., and McMillan, R. (2007). A Unified Framework for Measuring
  Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):588–
  638.

Bayer, P., Ross, S. L., and Topa, G. (2008). Place of Work and Place of Residence:
  Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy,
  116(6):1150–1196.

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
  and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
  Series B (Methodological), 57(1):289–300.

Bertrand, M. and Duflo, E. (2017). Field Experiments on Discrimination. In Handbook
  of Economic Field Experiments, volume 1, pages 309–393. Elsevier.

Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., and Salvanes, K. G. (2007). From the Cradle to the Labor
  Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(1):409–439.

Calabrese, S., Epple, D., Romer, T., and Sieg, H. (2006). Local public good provision:
  Voting, peer effects, and mobility. Journal of Public Economics, 90(6-7):959–981.

Carrell, S. E., Fullerton, R. L., and West, J. E. (2009). Does your cohort matter? Mea-
  suring peer effects in college achievement. Journal of Labor Economics, 27(3):439–464.

Chang, T., Graff Zivin, J., Gross, T., and Neidell, M. (2016). Particulate Pollution and
  the Productivity of Pear Packers. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  8(3):141–69.

Charles, K. K. and Guryan, J. (2008). Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
  Beckerâs The Economics of Discrimination. Journal of Political Economy, 116(5):773–
  809.

                                           28
Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2003). The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
  Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):1121–1167.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D. W., and Yagan, D.
  (2011). How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from
  Project STAR. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4):1593–1660.

Chetty, R. and Hendren, N. (2018a). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenera-
  tional Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  133(3):1107–1162.

Chetty, R. and Hendren, N. (2018b). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
  Mobility II: County-level estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3):1163–
  1228.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R., and Porter, S. R. (2018). Race and Economic
  Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Working Paper No. w24441.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., and Katz, L. F. (2016). The Effects of Exposure to Better
  Neighborhoods on Children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experi-
  ment. American Economic Review, 106(4):855–902.

Chyn, E. (2018). Moved to opportunity: The Long-Run Effect of Public Housing Demo-
  lition on Labor Market Outcomes of Children. American Economic Review.

Clampet-Lundquist, S. and Massey, D. S. (2008). Neighborhood Effects on Economic Self-
  Sufficiency: A reconsideration of the Moving to Opportunity experiment. American
  Journal of Sociology, 114(1):107–143.

Courant, P. N. (1978). Racial Prejudice in a Search Model of the Urban Housing Market.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 5(3):329–345.

Crowder, K. and Downey, L. (2010). Interneighborhood migration, race, and environ-
  mental hazards: Modeling microlevel processes of environmental inequality. American
  Journal of Sociology, 115(4):1110–1149.

Currie, J. (2011). Inequality at Birth: Some causes and consequences. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 101(3):1–22.

Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., and Walker, R. (2015). Environmental Health
  Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings.
  American Economic Review, 105(2):678–709.

Currie, J., Neidell, M., and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Air Pollution and Infant Health:
  Lessons from New Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 28(3):688–703.

Currie, J. and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Fetal Exposures to Toxic Releases and Infant
  Health. American Economic Review, 99(2):177–83.

Dymski, G. A. (2006). Discrimination in the Credit and Housing Markets: Findings and
 Challenges. Handbook on the Economics of Discrimination, pages 215–259.

                                          29
Galster, G. and Godfrey, E. (2005). By Words and Deeds: Racial Steering by Real Estate
 Agents in the US in 2000. Journal of the American Planning Association, 71(3):251–
 268.

Graham, B. S. (2018). Identifying and Estimating Neighborhood Effects. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 56(2):450–500.

Guryan, J. and Charles, K. K. (2013). Taste-Based or Statistical Discrimination: The
 Economics of Discrimination Returns to Its Roots. The Economic Journal, 123(572).

Heckman, J. J. (1998). Detecting Discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  12(2):101–116.

Holmes, T. J. and Sieg, H. (2015). Structural estimation in urban economics. In Handbook
  of regional and urban economics, volume 5, pages 69–114. Elsevier.

Jacob, B. A., Kapustin, M., and Ludwig, J. (2014). The impact of housing assistance on
  child outcomes: Evidence from a randomized housing lottery. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 130(1):465–506.

Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., and Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neigh-
  borhood Effects. Econometrica, 75(1):83–119.

Kling, J. R., Ludwig, J., and Katz, L. F. (2005). Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
  Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1):87–130.

Knowles, J., Persico, N., and Todd, P. (2001). Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches:
 Theory and Evidence. Journal of Political Economy, 109(1):203–229.

List, J. A. (2004). The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
  from the Field. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):49–89.

Logan, J. R. (2011). Separate and unequal: The neighborhood gap for Blacks, Hispanics
  and Asians in Metropolitan America. Project US2010 Report, pages 1–22.

Ludwig, J., Duncan, G. J., Gennetian, L. A., Katz, L. F., Kessler, R. C., Kling, J. R.,
  and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2013). Long-term neighborhood effects on low-income families:
  Evidence from moving to opportunity. American Economic Review, 103(3):226–31.

Mohai, P., Pellow, D., and Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental Justice. Annual Review
 of Environment and Resources, 34:405–430.

Neumark, D., Bank, R. J., and Van Nort, K. D. (1996). Sex Discrimination in Restaurant
  Hiring: An audit study. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3):915–941.

Ondrich, J., Ross, S., and Yinger, J. (2003). Now You See It, Now You Don’t: Why
 Do Real Estate Agents Withhold Available Houses from Black Customers? Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 85(4):854–873.

Ondrich, J., Stricker, A., and Yinger, J. (1998). Do Real Estate Brokers Choose to Dis-
 criminate? Evidence from the 1989 Housing Discrimination Study. Southern Economic
 Journal, pages 880–901.

                                          30
Page, M. (1995). Racial and Ethnic Discrimination in Urban Housing Markets: Evidence
  from a recent audit study. Journal of Urban Economics, 38(2):183–206.

Pager, D. (2003). The Mark of a Criminal Record. American Journal of Sociology,
  108(5):937–975.

Persico, C., Figlio, D., and Roth, J. (2016). Inequality Before Birth: The Developmental
  Consequences of Environmental Toxicants. National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Working paper No. w22263.

Sampson, R. J., Raudenbush, S. W., and Earls, F. (1997). Neighborhoods and Violent
  Crime: A multilevel study of collective efficacy. Science, 277(5328):918–924.

Sanbonmatsu, L., Kling, J. R., Duncan, G. J., and Brooks-Gunn, J. (2006). Neighbor-
  hoods and Academic Achievement Results from the Moving to Opportunity Experi-
  ment. Journal of Human Resources, 41(4):649–691.

Sanders, N. J. (2012). What Doesnât Kill You Makes You Weaker: Prenatal pollution
  exposure and educational outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, 47(3):826–850.

Sharkey, P. (2010). The Acute Effect of Local Homicides on Children’s Cognitive Perfor-
  mance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(26):11733–11738.

Siegelman, P. and Heckman, J. (1993). The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Meth-
  ods and Findings. Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
  America, Washington, 187:258.

Turner, M. A., Ross, S. L., Galster, G. C., and Yinger, J. (2002). Discrimination in
  Metropolitan Housing Markets: National Results from Phase I HDS 2000. Washington,
  DC: US Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Turner, M. A., Santos, R., Levy, D. K., Wissoker, D., Aranda, C., and Pitingolo, R.
  (2013). Housing Discrimination Against Racial and Ethnic Minorities 2012.

van Dijk, W. (2018). The socio-economic consequences of housing assistance. Working
  Paper.

Yinger, J. (1986). Measuring Racial Discrimination with Fair Housing Audits: Caught
  in the Act. The American Economic Review, pages 881–893.

Yinger, J. (1995). Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: The Continuing Costs of Housing
  Discrimination. Russell Sage Foundation.

Yinger, J. (1997). Cash in Your Face: The cost of racial and ethnic discrimination in
  housing. Journal of Urban Economics, 42(3):339–365.

Zhao, B., Ondrich, J., and Yinger, J. (2006). Why Do Real Estate Brokers Continue
  to Discriminate? Evidence from the 2000 Housing Discrimination Study. Journal of
  Urban Economics, 59(3):394–419.




                                          31
                    Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Tester Dataset

                                                    Tester Characteristics
                                                 (True Actors, Not Assigned)

Variable                           All           White      African     Hispanic    Asian
                                  Groups                   American

Age                               40.910         41.485      41.494      42.070    36.398
Percent Male                      0.388          0.415       0.375       0.284     0.420
Percent Rented Home               0.588          0.580       0.630       0.516     0.614
Percent Owned Home                0.305          0.296       0.312       0.421     0.217

Personal Income

Under $10,000                      0.244         0.275        0.241       0.125     0.249
$10,000 - $19,999                  0.164         0.130        0.225       0.114     0.235
$20,000 - $29,999                  0.237         0.293        0.136       0.249     0.184
$30,000 - $39,999                  0.136         0.114        0.152       0.183     0.152
$40,000 - $49,999                  0.096         0.086        0.105       0.117     0.090
$50,000 - $74,999                  0.068         0.062        0.069       0.136     0.022
$75,000 - $99,999                  0.009         0.013        0.008       0.000     0.004
$100,000 or more                   0.003         0.002        0.004       0.011     0.000

Education

Attended High School               0.003         0.000        0.002       0.000     0.018
GED                                0.012         0.021        0.004       0.000     0.000
High School Diploma                0.035         0.020        0.045       0.037     0.079
Attended Vocational School         0.005         0.005        0.000       0.018     0.000
Vocational School Diploma          0.022         0.032        0.006       0.007     0.029
Attended College                   0.162         0.130        0.182       0.308     0.108
Associate’s Degree                 0.078         0.059        0.101       0.136     0.054
Bachelor’s Degree                  0.358         0.404        0.283       0.183     0.484
Attended Graduate School           0.052         0.074        0.020       0.048     0.025
Graduate Degree                    0.243         0.230        0.308       0.253     0.170

                                                   Assigned Characteristics

Monthly Rent                       1, 332        1, 334      1, 392       1, 277    1, 285
Percent Tester Went First          0.516         0.589       0.417        0.454     0.462
Percent Appointment in AM          0.416         0.410       0.425        0.428     0.422
Percent Car Owner                  0.854         0.861       0.796        0.922     0.861
Length of Employment (Years)       4.091         3.345       4.936        5.203     4.507
Years at Residence                 3.650         2.925       4.405        4.766     4.101

Lease Type

Month-to-Month                     0.569         0.558        0.565       0.581     0.620
Lease                              0.431         0.442        0.435       0.419     0.380

                                N = 2,260    N = 1,161      N = 512     N = 286    N = 294




                                            32
                     Table 2. Home and Neighborhood Characteristics

                                                      Characteristics of
                                                      Advertised Homes
Variable                        All        White           African         Hispanic     Asian
                               Groups                     American

Listing Price                  306, 701    302, 935        304, 661        304, 812    328, 761

Building Type
Single family, detached         0.739       0.743           0.738           0.699       0.748
Duplex                          0.017       0.017           0.013           0.018       0.018
Rowhouse or Townhouse           0.134       0.128           0.118           0.158       0.155
Multi-family structure          0.101       0.101           0.125           0.112       0.069
Mobile home                     0.001       0.001           0.000           0.005       0.000

                                                 Pollution Measurements

Superfund Sites                 0.330       0.314           0.340           0.350       0.361
Particulate Matter              9.283       9.378           9.253           9.055       9.293
RSEI                            6, 071      6, 244          7, 860          4, 283      5, 127

                                               Neighborhood Characteristics

Assaults                          93          88              96              95         104
Elem. School Quality            6.207       6.198           6.202           6.169       6.260
Poverty Rate                    0.089       0.088           0.092           0.090       0.086
Percent College Graduate        0.501       0.504           0.501           0.494       0.501
Percent High Skill              0.467       0.467           0.467           0.463       0.472
Percent White                   0.675       0.685           0.684           0.639       0.664
Percent African American        0.090       0.091           0.103           0.082       0.084
Percent Asian                   0.067       0.065           0.061           0.073       0.079
Percent Hispanic                0.148       0.140           0.135           0.185       0.151

                              N = 7,033   N = 3,612      N = 1,213     N = 1,028      N = 1,109




                                          33
      Table 3. Balance Statistics for Testers

                                       Tester Characteristics
                                    (True Actors, Not Assigned)

Variable                        African      Hispanic      Asian
                               American

Age                              -0.874         1.476      -2.060
                                (0.996)       (1.858)     (1.833)
Percent Male                      0.009        0.000        0.000
                                (0.015)       (0.000)     (0.000)
Percent Rented Home               0.138        -0.044      0.083
                                (0.100)       (0.124)     (0.114)
Percent Owned Home              -0.153∗        0.033       -0.111
                                (0.093)       (0.113)     (0.110)

Personal Income

Under $10,000                     -0.012       -0.107      -0.000
                                 (0.097)      (0.116)     (0.125)
$10,000 - $19,999                 0.118        0.012      0.235∗∗
                                 (0.076)      (0.116)     ( 0.102)
$20,000 - $29,999               -0.212∗∗       -0.066      -0.113
                                 (0.086)      (0.151)     (0.107)
$30,000 - $39,999                 0.126       0.147∗       0.008
                                 (0.081)      (0.088)     (0.114)
$40,000 - $49,999                 -0.002        0.011      -0.066
                                 (0.063)      (0.079)     (0.077)
$50,000 - $74,999                 -0.023        0.006      -0.090
                                 (0.057)      (0.065)     (0.080)
$75,000 - $99,999                 -0.028       -0.027      -0.012
                                 (0.022)      (0.041)     (0.018)
$100,000 or more                  0.000        0.030        0.000
                                 (0.000)      (0.046)     (0.000)

Education

Attended High School              0.000        0.000        0.020
                                  0.000        0.000        0.031
GED                               0.011        -0.071      -0.028
                                (0.017)       (0.050)     (0.044)
High School Diploma               0.036        0.041       0.116∗
                                (0.035)       (0.037)     (0.068)
Attended Vocational School       -0.007         0.015       0.000
                                (0.011)       (0.034)     (0.000)
Vocational School Diploma        -0.014        -0.002      -0.012
                                (0.030)       (0.035)     (0.018)
Attended College                  0.100        0.109        0.082
                                (0.080)       (0.138)     (0.103)
Associate’s Degree               -0.017         0.088      -0.016
                                (0.043)       (0.066)     (0.052)
Bachelor’s Degree                -0.161       -0.251∗      -0.032
                                (0.110)       (0.147)     (0.104)
Attended Graduate School         -0.062        -0.043      -0.036
                                (0.054)       (0.075)     (0.032)
Graduate Degree                   0.106        0.114       -0.088
                                (0.107)       (0.120)     ( 0.113)

                                     Assigned Characteristics

Percent Tester Went First         -0.093        -0.231     -0.047
                                 (0.165)       (0.200)    (0.209)
Percent Appointment in AM         0.002         -0.014     0.028
                                 (0.041)       (0.038)    (0.038)
Percent Car Owner                  0.010        0.000      -0.065
                                 (0.015)       (0.000)    (0.058)
Length of Employment (Years)    1.559∗∗∗      2.050∗∗∗   1.444∗∗∗
                                 (0.270)       (0.328)    (0.238)
Years at Residence              1.511∗∗∗      1.898∗∗∗   1.551∗∗∗
                                 (0.288)       (0.301)    (0.203)
Lease Type

Month-to-Month                    0.012        0.072        0.115
                                (0.047)       (0.091)     (0.076)
Lease                            -0.012        -0.072      -0.115
                                (0.047)       (0.091)     (0.076)

                                N = 512       N = 286    N = 294

                               34
            Table 4. Balance Statistics for Homes

                           Characteristics of Advertised Homes

Variable                    African       Hispanic      Asian
                           American

Listing Price                6, 976        -2, 199     10, 907
                           (14, 999)      (14, 224)   (14, 410)
Building Type

Single-family Detached        0.009        0.006        0.029∗
                            (0.014)       (0.018)      (0.016)
Duplex                       -0.001        -0.002       -0.005
                            (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.011)
Rowhouse or Townhouse         0.005        0.007        0.007
                            (0.014)       (0.016)      (0.021)
Multi-family Structure       -0.006        -0.006      -0.030∗
                            (0.011)       (0.013)      (0.017)
Mobile Home                  -0.001        -0.001       -0.000
                            (0.002 )      (0.004)     (0.00001)

                                   Pollution Measurements

Superfund Sites              -0.001        0.017       -0.0003
                            (0.007)       (0.015)      (0.009)
Particulate Matter           -0.010        0.0001       0.015
                            (0.016)       (0.023)      (0.022)
RSEI                           -30          -108          89
                           (74.130)      (148.209)    (203.457)

                              Neighborhood Characteristics

Assaults                    −0.040          0.109      −0.153
                            (0.255)       (1.569)      (0.254)
Elem. School Quality          0.001         0.019        0.025
                            (0.031)       (0.032)      (0.050)
Poverty Rate                 0.0005         0.001       -0.001
                            (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.002)
Percent College Educated     -0.005        -0.003      0.0002
                            (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.003)
Percent High Skill           -0.005        -0.002      0.0004
                            (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.003)
Percent White               -0.0003        -0.007        0.004
                            (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.003)
Percent Black                0.003         0.004        -0.003
                            (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.003)
Percent Asian                -0.001       -0.0002       -0.001
                            (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.001)
Percent Hispanic             -0.002         0.003        0.001
                            (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.002)

                           N = 1,213     N = 1,028    N = 1,109



                              35
   Table 5. Differences in Recommendations and Availability of Advertised Properties

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                              Number of Recommendations       Home Availability
             Racial Minority                     −0.2947           −0.2286               0.0068                0.0052
                                                  (0.4530)          (0.4436)            (0.1714)              (0.1719)
             African American                    −0.5137           −0.4652               0.0928                0.0935
                                                  (0.5747)          (0.5676)            (0.2052)              (0.2050)
             Hispanic                              0.2877            0.3700            −0.0008               −0.0076
                                                  (0.5202)          (0.5101)            (0.2411)              (0.2433)
             Asian                               −0.2464           −0.1809             −0.0507               −0.0496
                                                  (0.6209)          (0.6088)            (0.2153)              (0.2150)
             Other                                 4.0317            3.9882              0.1336                0.1421
                                                  (2.4750)          (2.4891)            (0.6590)              (0.6604)
             Racial Comp Advert Home              N                 Y                   N                      Y
             ln(Price) Advert Home                N                 Y                   N                      Y
             Observations                        21,385            21,363              6,656                  6,629
             Adjusted R2                         0.6315            0.6318             -0.2093                -0.2127
                                                                                 ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                     p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the number of homes recommended and number of available homes recommended
to minority testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority
groups. All regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search
characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test,
educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current
lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason
tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester
appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building. Standard errors are clustered by market
for consistency with sampling design.




                                                             36
            Table 6. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition

                                                            Dep. Variable: White Household Share
                                          I                 II              III             IV                               V
 Racial Minority                        −0.0123           −0.0122            −0.0124           −0.0127                  −0.0127
                                         (0.0122)          (0.0122)           (0.0122)          (0.0121)                 (0.0121)
 African American                       −0.0416∗∗         −0.0415∗∗          −0.0420∗∗         −0.0425∗∗                −0.0427∗∗∗
                                         (0.0166)          (0.0166)           (0.0166)          (0.0165)                 (0.0165)
 Hispanic                                 0.0017            0.0017             0.0016            0.0017                   0.0018
                                         (0.0165)          (0.0165)           (0.0165)          (0.0164)                 (0.0164)
 Asian                                    0.0131            0.0131             0.0131            0.0127                   0.0127
                                         (0.0146)          (0.0146)           (0.0146)          (0.0146)                 (0.0146)
 Other                                    0.0643            0.0643             0.0653            0.0663                   0.0662
                                         (0.0472)          (0.0472)           (0.0469)          (0.0469)                 (0.0469)
 Comparison Mean (White)                 0.6952             0.6952             0.6952               0.6952                  0.6952
 Share White Advert Home                N                  Y                  Y                 Y                        Y
 ln(Price) Advert Home                  N                  N                  Y                 Y                        Y
 Racial Comp Advert Home                N                  N                  N                 Y                        Y
 Poverty Share Advert Home              N                  N                  N                 N                        Y
 Observations                          21,517             21,506             21,488            21,488                   21,488
 Adjusted R2                           0.7791             0.7792             0.7789            0.7788                   0.7788
                                                                                                ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                    p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the racial composition of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative
to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression
specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor
characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment
of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership
status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down
payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of
the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of
advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                             37
   Table 7. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition by Income

                                                     Dep. Variable: White Household Share by Income
                                                        High Inc        Mid Inc         Low Inc
                  Racial Minority                         −0.0264∗∗∗         −0.0035                      0.0173∗∗
                                                           (0.0090)           (0.0085)                   (0.0070)
                  African American                        −0.0337∗∗∗         −0.0185∗                  0.0099
                                                           (0.0116)           (0.0112)                (0.0091)
                  Hispanic                                −0.0146            −0.0037                   0.0204∗∗
                                                           (0.0121)           (0.0112)                (0.0095)
                  Asian                                   −0.0244∗∗            0.0155                  0.0214∗∗
                                                           (0.0107)           (0.0103)                (0.0087)
                  Other                                     0.0582             0.0185                −0.0106
                                                           (0.0390)           (0.0408)                (0.0264)
                  Comparison Mean (White)                   0.2100               0.3388                  0.1464
                  ln(Price) Advert Home                    Y                  Y                       Y
                  Racial Comp Advert Home                  Y                  Y                       Y
                  Poverty Share Advert Home                Y                  Y                       Y
                  Observations                            21,500             21,500                  21,500
                  Adjusted R2                             0.7177             0.7064                  0.6666
                                                                             ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                 p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the racial composition (by income level) of neighborhoods recommended to minority
testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All
regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics.
Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational
attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford
down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time
of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability
of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                               38
                     Table 8. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects

                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                            Poverty Rate            High Skill       College                    Elem School
                                                          ∗∗                    ∗∗
          Racial Minority                         0.0125             −0.0228                  −0.0161                −0.2748
                                                 (0.0060)             (0.0115)                 (0.0113)               (0.2158)
          African American                        0.0124             −0.0272∗                 −0.0304∗∗              −0.3831
                                                 (0.0085)             (0.0151)                 (0.0144)               (0.2951)
          Hispanic                                0.0216∗∗∗          −0.0348∗∗                −0.0184                −0.1728
                                                 (0.0082)             (0.0149)                 (0.0141)               (0.2872)
          Asian                                   0.0005             −0.0059                    0.0023               −0.3578
                                                 (0.0076)             (0.0143)                 (0.0153)               (0.2601)
          Other                                 −0.0272              −0.0021                    0.0050               −0.3279
                                                 (0.0256)             (0.0458)                 (0.0401)               (0.6681)
          Comparison Mean (White)                 0.0818               0.4823                   0.5223                 6.401
          ln(Price) Advert Home                  Y                    Y                        Y                      Y
          Racial Comp Advert Home                Y                    Y                        Y                      Y
          Outcome Advertised Home                Y                    Y                        Y                      Y
          Observations                          21,342               21,342                   21,342                 10,743
          Adjusted R2                           0.5237               0.6937                   0.7560                 0.7468
                                                        Census Block Characteristics
          p-values                                0.037                0.047                    0.15                 DF
          hochberg q-values                       0.094                0.094                    0.15                 DF


                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                              Assaults           Superfund         Toxics                              PM
                                                                               ∗∗∗                         ∗∗
          Racial Minority                        9.4284               0.0997                  787.9887               −0.0448
                                                (7.5721)             (0.0360)                (355.1028)               (0.0580)
          African American                      23.8039∗∗              0.1206∗∗             915.4476∗∗               −0.0228
                                               (11.7093)              (0.0517)            (447.0242)                  (0.0777)
          Hispanic                               1.7870                0.0620               421.2600                   0.0075
                                                (9.4729)              (0.0419)            (586.4115)                  (0.0728)
          Asian                                  5.7019                0.1030∗∗             955.7904∗∗               −0.1283∗
                                                (8.9305)              (0.0522)            (480.9247)                  (0.0704)
          Other                               −10.3010               −0.1229             −664.3224                   −0.0588
                                               (69.1959)              (0.1875)          (1, 726.1620)                 (0.2170)
          Comparison Mean (White)               80.43                 0.3489                 5079.6                    9.414
          ln(Price) Advert Home                 Y                    Y                         Y                      Y
          Racial Comp Advert Home               Y                    Y                         Y                      Y
          Outcome Advertised Home               Y                    Y                         Y                      Y
          Observations                         10,875               21,354                    21,354                 21,354
          Adjusted R2                          0.7954               0.8760                    0.6888                 0.9634
                                                                                     Local Pollutants
          p-values                            DF                      0.0056                    0.026                  0.44
          hochberg p-values                   DF                      0.017                     0.053                  0.44
                                                                                         ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                             p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression specifications
control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics:
tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester;
Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status,
reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment,
current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the
appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of
advertised home as stated by agent. Adjusted p-values use Hochberg adjustment for family-wise false discovery rate. DF
refers to values that are not adjusted as they are from a different family of variables. Standard errors are clustered by
market for consistency with sampling design.



                                                               39
            Table 9. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects (Mothers)

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                           Poverty Rate           High Skill       College               Elem School
          Racial Minority                        0.0481∗∗∗         −0.0254             −0.0341∗                     0.5491
                                                (0.0117)            (0.0169)            (0.0192)                   (0.4069)
          African American                       0.0523∗∗∗         −0.0464∗            −0.0605∗∗                    0.1576
                                                (0.0176)            (0.0267)            (0.0304)                   (0.5639)
          Hispanic                               0.0560∗∗∗         −0.0455∗∗           −0.0361∗                     0.8435∗∗
                                                (0.0144)            (0.0198)            (0.0201)                   (0.4241)
          Asian                                  0.0360∗∗            0.0047            −0.0293                      0.5426
                                                (0.0175)            (0.0236)            (0.0281)                   (0.6429)
          Other                                  0.0092            −0.0403             −0.0354                      0.5679
                                                (0.0372)            (0.0578)            (0.0576)                   (1.0661)
          Comparison Mean (White)                0.0767              0.4742              0.5170                     6.516
          Observations                          7,849               7,849               7,849                   5,647
          Adjusted R2                          0.4633              0.6629              0.7411                  0.6891


                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                               Assaults        Superfund       Toxics                         PM
           Racial Minority                        3.5671             0.1154∗      897.0170                   −0.0601
                                                (17.3998)           (0.0676)     (742.4506)                   (0.1330)
           African American                      33.2016∗∗           0.1795∗    2, 268.9180∗                 −0.0155
                                                (15.2890)           (0.1036)   (1, 245.5460)                  (0.1845)
           Hispanic                             −4.5340              0.0207     1, 178.3650                    0.1472
                                                (20.3963)           (0.0865)     (828.1420)                   (0.1501)
           Asian                                 14.3675             0.0478        648.8790                  −0.1493
                                                (26.7642)           (0.0826)     (995.8417)                   (0.1632)
           Other                                 31.5753           −0.3719      2, 472.9360                    0.5972∗∗
                                                (53.7138)           (0.2733)   (2, 341.9910)                  (0.2862)
           Comparison Mean (White)               82.12              0.3533       5993.9                       9.389
           Observations                          5,615            7,850              7,850                    7,841
           Adjusted R2                          0.8214            0.8528             0.5922                  0.9671
                                                                                 ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                     p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers (mothers) relative
to a white tester (mother). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression specifications control
for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester
income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned
Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for
moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current
lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment
(am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home
as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                             40
                                                         Table 10. Discriminatory Steering: Low Poverty Neighborhoods

                                                                                                             Dependent variable:
                                        Low Poverty       Low Poverty: Families       Low Poverty: Moms        Low Pov/High Dad         Low Pov/High Dad: Families            Low Pov/High Dad: Moms
                                                    ∗∗                        ∗∗                      ∗∗∗                      ∗∗                            ∗∗
     African American                      −0.1179                 −0.1730                    −0.4318                  −0.1175                       −0.1705                                 −0.3958∗∗∗
                                            (0.0522)                (0.0673)                   (0.1494)                 (0.0539)                      (0.0683)                                (0.1526)
     Hispanic                              −0.1585∗∗∗              −0.1986∗∗∗                 −0.4283∗∗∗               −0.1543∗∗∗                    −0.1657∗∗∗                              −0.3358∗∗
                                            (0.0479)                (0.0621)                   (0.1312)                 (0.0483)                      (0.0602)                                (0.1541)
     Asian                                 −0.0437                 −0.0770                    −0.3101∗∗                −0.0419                       −0.0757                                 −0.2618∗
                                            (0.0501)                (0.0701)                   (0.1510)                 (0.0502)                      (0.0709)                                (0.1502)
     Other                                 −0.4417∗∗∗              −0.3749∗                   −1.1073∗∗∗               −0.4343∗∗∗                    −0.2607                                 −0.7678∗
                                            (0.1632)                (0.1950)                   (0.3177)                 (0.1640)                      (0.1878)                                (0.3985)




41
     Comparison Mean (White)                 0.8123                  0.8301                     0.8311                   0.8142                        0.8310                                  0.8325
     Observations                           7,566                   4,643                     2,794                    7,524                         4,639                                    2,790
     Adjusted R2                           0.3967                  0.3959                    0.4248                   0.3954                        0.3941                                   0.4205
                                                                                                                                                                          ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                              p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

     Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses
     all individual minority groups. All regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester
     income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status,
     current lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned
     to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to
     tester, availability of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.
              Table 11. Discriminatory Steering: Median Income in Neighborhood

                                                        Dependent variable: log(Median Income)
                                                     All Testers     Families           Moms
                   African American                     −0.0729∗         −0.1081∗∗                −0.2513∗∗∗
                                                         (0.0376)         (0.0458)                 (0.0859)
                   Hispanic                             −0.0478          −0.0382                  −0.0836
                                                         (0.0347)         (0.0430)                 (0.0657)
                   Asian                                −0.0126          −0.0508                  −0.0814
                                                         (0.0304)         (0.0420)                 (0.0678)
                   Other                                  0.0549           0.1509                   0.0758
                                                         (0.1099)         (0.1222)                 (0.1670)
                   Comparison Mean (White)              11.405            11.407                      11.406
                   Observations                        21,457             6,369                    3,772
                   Adjusted R2                         0.6657            0.6756                   0.6104
                                                                          ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                              p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the median income of households in neighborhoods recommended to minority testers
relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression
specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor
characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment
of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership
status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down
payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of
the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of
advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                             42
Table 12. Discriminatory Steering by Implied Preferences for Neighborhood Attributes

                                                        Dependent variable: Recommended House Attribute
                                                Poverty Rate      High Skill        College         Elem School
African American x Ad House Attribute               −0.0460∗∗∗           −0.0180∗∗           −0.0182∗∗                −0.0783∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0160)             (0.0073)            (0.0072)                 (0.0107)
Hispanic x Ad House Attribute                         0.0176             −0.0186∗∗           −0.0049                  −0.0205∗
                                                     (0.0176)             (0.0077)            (0.0077)                 (0.0118)
Asian x Ad House Attribute                            0.0659∗∗∗            0.0390∗∗∗           0.0157∗∗               −0.0082
                                                     (0.0188)             (0.0074)            (0.0075)                 (0.0106)
Other x Ad House Attribute                          −0.1472∗∗∗           −0.0285             −0.0028                  −0.0529∗
                                                     (0.0440)             (0.0274)            (0.0283)                 (0.0290)
Ad House Attribute                                    0.1746∗∗∗            0.2733∗∗∗           0.3489∗∗∗                0.4343∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0102)             (0.0093)            (0.0089)                 (0.0119)
Comparison Mean (White)                               0.0818              0.4823               0.5223                     6.401
Observations                                        21,342              21,342               21,342                   10,743
Adjusted R2                                         0.3645              0.5777               0.6528                   0.6329


                                                         Dependent variable: Recommended House Attribute
                                                   Assaults        Superfund          Toxics             PM
African American x Ad House Attribute               −0.1315∗∗∗           −0.0287             −0.6713∗∗∗               −0.0044∗
                                                     (0.0201)             (0.0470)            (0.0147)                 (0.0023)
Hispanic x Ad House Attribute                         0.1258∗∗∗            0.0719            −0.4651∗∗∗                 0.0029
                                                     (0.0191)             (0.0743)            (0.0163)                 (0.0024)
Asian x Ad House Attribute                          −0.0635∗∗∗           −0.2831∗∗∗          −0.3830∗∗∗               −0.0125∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0190)             (0.1041)            (0.0327)                 (0.0022)
Other x Ad House Attribute                            0.1026               0.1572            −0.3376∗∗∗                 0.0098
                                                     (0.0732)             (0.2018)            (0.0714)                 (0.0084)
Ad House Attribute                                    0.3020∗∗∗            0.2100∗∗∗           0.6772∗∗∗                0.3336∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0106)             (0.0437)            (0.0147)                 (0.0072)
Comparison Mean (White)                              80.43                0.3489           5079.6                         9.414
Observations                                        10,888              21,354               21,376                   21,354
Adjusted R2                                         0.6650              0.8101               0.5876                   0.9462
                                                                                              ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                  p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white tester
(the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression specifications control
for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester
income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned
Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for
moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current
lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment
(am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home
as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                             43
                         Figure 1. Markets in 2012 HUD Buyer Experiment




Note: Red points indentify the location of 28 markets utilized in 2012 HDS study. See Turner et al. (2013) for detailed
discussion of sampling design and methodology.




                                                         44
                           Figure 2. Trial Maps: Chicago and Los Angeles




Note: Example of listings data for a tester pair from an HDS 2012 trial in Chicago (above) and Los Angeles (below). Black
points identify the advertised listing (Race= 0). Red points identify homes recommended to white tester (Race= 1). Blue
points identify homes recommended to Asian tester (Race= 4). Green points identify homes recommended to both testers
(Race= 5).




                                                          45
Online Appendix
A       Model of Discrimination in Housing Search
In this section, we develop a model of housing search, paying particular attention to
interactions with the real estate broker. A homebuyer with income yi can observe many
attributes of houses (Xk ) along with neighborhood characteristics (Nk ) and price (pk ).37
Each individual will have a vector of preference parameters φi = [αi , βi , γi ] that determine
the utility derived from house k:

                             Ui,k = αi ln(yi − pk ) + Xk0 βi + Nk0 γi + i,k                         (.1)
where
                                            αi = a0 + Zi0 a1 + uai
                                            βi = b0 + Zi0 b1 + ubi
                                            γi = g0 + Zi0 g1 + ugi
Zi is a vector of observable attributes of tester i other than income, and
                                     a           
                                      ui             0
                                       b
                               ū = ui ∼ N
                                                  0, Σ
                                       g
                                      ui             0
where the distribution of individual preference parameters is defined by the underlying
parameter vector θ = [a0 , a1 , b0 , b1 , g0 , g1 , Σ]. i,k is an idiosyncratic shock specific to the
individual and house. Assuming that it is distributed Type I Extreme Value, we have a
closed form solution for the probability that individual i would choose house k:

                                    α ln(yi − pk ) + Xk0 βi + Nk0 γi
                          Z
                   Pi,k =     P i                                0       0
                                                                            dF (ū)                (.2)
                                  l∈Γ∗ (αi ln(yi − pl ) + Xl βi + Nl γi )
                                        i

        Γ∗i
where includes the set of all houses in i’s feasible set (defined by income). The expected
utility from i’s choice set, Γ∗i , is given by:
                                                                         
                                Z
                                                              0      0
                                         X
                      EU ∗ = ln             eαi ln(yi −pl )+Xl βi +Nl γi  dF (ū)    (.3)
                                             l∈Γ∗i

    A buyer i presents information on personal income (yi ) and other observable attributes
(Zi )38 to a real estate agent. We assume that the agent knows the conditional distribution
of preferences from which the tester’s preferences are drawn, F (φ|Zi , yi , θ), and may use
this information in some capacity when selecting a set of recommended homes to show to

37
   We assume a buyer with access to a real estate search tool, which provides information about house
 and neighborhood attributes. Xk may include housing type (house, condominium, townhouse, mobile
 home), total rooms, bathrooms, bedrooms, square footage, lot size, and year built. Nk might include
 crime rate, air pollution and other environmental nuisances, school quality, and characteristics of the
 local population including poverty rate, educational attainment, race and income.
38
   In particular, we focus on race, but a richer model is possible with other financial information and
 borrowing constraints, household characteristics, and current home ownership status. We abstract away
 from those characteristics in this parsimonious model of utility, but they are implicitly included in the
 paired-tester experimental design and empirical tests (being held constant across testers).

                                                Appendix–1
buyer i. Our study focuses on bias in the definition of that set of recommended homes.

                                     Γ∗i |F (φ|Zi , yi , θ) →
                                                            − Γ̃i                         (.4)
The set of recommendations that the agent provides to a buyer i will yield the following
expected utility:
                                                                 
                          Z
                                                      0      0
                                  X
                   EU 0 = ln        eαi ln(yi −pl )+Xl βi +Nl γi  dF (ū)          (.5)
                                          l∈Γ̃i

    Denote the cardinality of the set Γ̃i by #(Γ̃i ). Previous work (Yinger, 1997) has
focused on the number of recommended homes. Indeed, in our model the smaller is ni ,
the smaller will be EU 0 by construction – i.e., more recommendations are always better.
However, the previous equation makes clear that EU 0 will also be lower the more Γ̃i
deviates from individual i’s optimal choice, conditional upon the size of the choice set.
    Given the advertised house “chosen” by the tester (k ∗ ), it is possible that the real
estate agent could update her impressions of the tester’s preferences based in the following
formula:

                                                   P (k ∗ |yi , Zi , φ)g(φ|yi , Zi , θ)
                      h(φ|k ∗ , yi , Zi , θ) =
                                                            P (k ∗ |yi , Zi , θ)
                                          Z
                                 φ̄k∗ =           φh(φ|k ∗ , yi , Zi , θ)dφ

Choosing a recommendation set based on these updated preferences, φ̄k∗ , will unambigu-
ously improve expected utility of the tester, conditional upon the number of recommen-
dations. In the analysis below, we test whether real estate agents incorporate individual
testers’ expressed preferences and whether the tendency to do so differs with tester race.




                                              Appendix–2
B       Racial Composition, Incomes, and Neighborhood
        Characteristics

            Figure B.1. White Share, Incomes and Neighborhood Characteristics




Note: Raw correlations between white share of households in census block group and neighborhood characteristics for all
recommended homes in HDS 2012. Color of points delineates fraction of high income households in census block group.



                                                   Appendix–3
C        Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition
This section replicates estimates of steering by neighborhood racial composition reported
as white shares in Tables 6 and 7 using shares of each minority group.

              Table C.1. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition:
                                      African American Share

                                                       Dep. Variable: African American Household Share
                                           I                II                III              IV                                         V
      Racial Minority                     0.0164∗∗           0.0164∗∗           0.0165∗∗                     0.0166∗∗                     0.0167∗∗
                                         (0.0081)           (0.0081)           (0.0081)                     (0.0081)                     (0.0080)
      African American                    0.0396∗∗∗          0.0397∗∗∗          0.0399∗∗∗                    0.0401∗∗∗                 0.0404∗∗∗
                                         (0.0123)           (0.0123)           (0.0123)                     (0.0124)                  (0.0123)
      Hispanic                            0.0127             0.0127             0.0127                       0.0127                    0.0127
                                         (0.0095)           (0.0095)           (0.0095)                     (0.0095)                  (0.0095)
      Asian                             −0.0065            −0.0065            −0.0064                      −0.0064                   −0.0063
                                         (0.0105)           (0.0105)           (0.0105)                     (0.0105)                  (0.0105)
      Other                             −0.0045            −0.0045            −0.0049                      −0.0054                   −0.0052
                                         (0.0337)           (0.0337)           (0.0336)                     (0.0336)                  (0.0336)

      Share Black Advert Home            N                 Y                  Y                             Y                         Y
      ln(Price) Advert Home              N                 N                  Y                             Y                         Y
      Racial Comp Advert Home            N                 N                  N                             Y                         Y
      Poverty Share Advert Home          N                 N                  N                             N                         Y
      Observations                      21,517            21,506             21,488                        21,488                    21,488
      Adjusted R2                       0.7736            0.7738             0.7724                        0.7724                    0.7724
                                                                                                            ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                p<0.1;         p<0.05;         p<0.01




    Table C.2. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition by Income:
                                  African American Share

                                                 Dep. Variable: African American Household Share by Income
                                                    High Inc           Mid Inc              Low Inc
                   Racial Minority                      0.0020             0.0098∗∗                         0.0051
                                                       (0.0013)           (0.0041)                         (0.0046)
                   African American                     0.0052∗∗∗          0.0176∗∗∗                        0.0178∗∗∗
                                                       (0.0018)           (0.0068)                         (0.0065)
                   Hispanic                             0.0005             0.0069                           0.0055
                                                       (0.0017)           (0.0046)                         (0.0055)
                   Asian                                0.0000             0.0030                         −0.0094
                                                       (0.0017)           (0.0047)                         (0.0063)
                   Other                                0.0013           −0.0084                            0.0019
                                                       (0.0054)           (0.0170)                         (0.0202)
                   ln(Price) Advert Home               Y                  Y                                Y
                   Racial Comp Advert Home             Y                  Y                                Y
                   Poverty Share Advert Home           Y                  Y                                Y
                   Observations                       21,500             21,500                           21,500
                   Adjusted R2                        0.7297             0.7625                           0.6704
                                                                                      ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                          p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01


Note: Coefficients report differences in the racial composition (by income) of neighborhoods recommended to minority
testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All
regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics.
Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational
attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford
down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time
of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability
of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                        Appendix–4
            Table C.3. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition:
                                         Hispanic Share

                                                            Dep. Variable: Hispanic Household Share
                                                  I             II             III           IV                                    V
             Racial Minority                     0.0038         0.0039            0.0040                0.0039                 0.0038
                                                (0.0079)       (0.0079)          (0.0079)              (0.0079)               (0.0079)
             African American                    0.0152         0.0152            0.0154                 0.0153                0.0151
                                                (0.0115)       (0.0115)          (0.0114)               (0.0115)              (0.0115)
             Hispanic                          −0.0010        −0.0009           −0.0008                −0.0009               −0.0009
                                                (0.0102)       (0.0102)          (0.0102)               (0.0102)              (0.0102)
             Asian                             −0.0073        −0.0073           −0.0073                −0.0074               −0.0074
                                                (0.0098)       (0.0098)          (0.0098)               (0.0098)              (0.0098)
             Other                             −0.0323        −0.0322           −0.0327                −0.0325               −0.0326
                                                (0.0305)       (0.0305)          (0.0305)               (0.0305)              (0.0304)
             Share Hispanic Advert Home         N              Y                 Y                     Y                      Y
             ln(Price) Advert Home              N              N                 Y                     Y                      Y
             Racial Comp Advert Home            N              N                 N                     Y                      Y
             Poverty Share Advert Home          N              N                 N                     N                      Y
             Observations                      21,517         21,506            21,488                21,488                 21,488
             Adjusted R2                       0.8452         0.8451            0.8452                0.8452                 0.8452
                                                                                                ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                    p<0.1;         p<0.05;         p<0.01




    Table C.4. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition by Income:
                                       Hispanic Share

                                                        Dep. Var: Hispanic Household Share by Income
                                                         High Inc       Mid Inc          Low Inc
                         Racial Minority                     0.0016       −0.0012                      0.0030
                                                            (0.0019)       (0.0044)                   (0.0048)
                         African American                    0.0054∗        0.0039                     0.0055
                                                            (0.0029)       (0.0054)                   (0.0081)
                         Hispanic                          −0.0017        −0.0049                      0.0050
                                                            (0.0026)       (0.0063)                   (0.0063)
                         Asian                             −0.0011        −0.0043                    −0.0022
                                                            (0.0027)       (0.0056)                   (0.0052)
                         Other                             −0.0165∗       −0.0113                    −0.0054
                                                            (0.0085)       (0.0193)                   (0.0114)
                         ln(Price) Advert Home              Y              Y                          Y
                         Racial Comp Advert Home            Y              Y                          Y
                         Poverty Share Advert Home          Y              Y                          Y
                         Observations                      21,500         21,500                     21,500
                         Adjusted R2                       0.6518         0.8330                     0.7123
                                                                           ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                               p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01


Note: Coefficients report differences in the racial composition (by income) of neighborhoods recommended to minority
testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All
regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics.
Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational
attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford
down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time
of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability
of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                        Appendix–5
            Table C.5. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition:
                                           Asian Share

                                                               Dep. Variable: Asian Household Share
                                                 I               II             III           IV                                    V
             Racial Minority                   −0.0087         −0.0087           −0.0087               −0.0085                −0.0085
                                                (0.0059)        (0.0058)          (0.0058)              (0.0058)               (0.0058)
             African American                  −0.0144∗        −0.0143∗          −0.0143∗              −0.0142∗               −0.0142∗
                                                (0.0075)        (0.0074)          (0.0074)              (0.0074)               (0.0074)
             Hispanic                          −0.0143∗        −0.0146∗          −0.0147∗              −0.0145∗               −0.0145∗
                                                (0.0086)        (0.0085)          (0.0085)              (0.0085)               (0.0085)
             Asian                               0.0014          0.0014            0.0015                0.0016                 0.0016
                                                (0.0072)        (0.0072)          (0.0072)              (0.0072)               (0.0072)
             Other                             −0.0224         −0.0228           −0.0228               −0.0228                −0.0229
                                                (0.0178)        (0.0179)          (0.0179)              (0.0179)               (0.0179)
             Share Asian Advert Home            N               Y                 Y                     Y                      Y
             ln(Price) Advert Home              N               N                 Y                     Y                      Y
             Racial Comp Advert Home            N               N                 N                     Y                      Y
             Poverty Share Advert Home          N               N                 N                     N                      Y
             Observations                      21,517          21,506            21,488                21,488                 21,488
             Adjusted R2                       0.7438          0.7438            0.7438                0.7438                 0.7437
                                                                                                 ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                     p<0.1;         p<0.05;         p<0.01




    Table C.6. Differential Steering and Neighborhood Racial Composition by Income:
                                        Asian Share

                                                        Dep. Variable: Asian Household Share by Income
                                                         High Inc       Mid Inc           Low Inc
                         Racial Minority                    −0.0021        −0.0036                    −0.0023
                                                             (0.0021)       (0.0030)                   (0.0024)
                         African American                   −0.0033        −0.0068∗                   −0.0040
                                                             (0.0026)       (0.0036)                   (0.0033)
                         Hispanic                           −0.0034        −0.0047                    −0.0055∗
                                                             (0.0033)       (0.0046)                   (0.0032)
                         Asian                                0.0013       −0.0002                      0.0010
                                                             (0.0026)       (0.0037)                   (0.0030)
                         Other                                0.0060       −0.0118                    −0.0189∗
                                                             (0.0064)       (0.0126)                   (0.0103)
                         ln(Price) Advert Home               Y              Y                          Y
                         Racial Comp Advert Home             Y              Y                          Y
                         Poverty Share Advert Home           Y              Y                          Y
                         Observations                       21,500         21,500                     21,500
                         Adjusted R2                        0.6869         0.7234                     0.6256
                                                                             ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                         Note:                                                   p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01


Note: Coefficients report differences in the racial composition (by income) of neighborhoods recommended to minority
testers relative to a white tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All
regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics.
Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational
attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford
down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time
of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability
of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                           Appendix–6
D      Steering and Neighborhood Poverty:
       Census Block Group vs Census Tract Measures
This section explores differences in steering into high poverty neighborhoods reported in
the present study versus differences documented by Turner et al. (2013) in the initial
HDS 2012 report. Replication code is not available for the steering-into-poverty tests or
racial composition test from the HDS 2012 report. We therefore construct tests that are
as similar as possible to the description provided in Turner et al. (2013) using publicly
available data files that contain census tract measures of poverty rates and white shares
used by the authors.
    Table D.1 reports estimates of differences for African Americans relative to white
testers, which are the main results in the present paper that are in the prior report. We
compare results on white shares and poverty rates using the primary specification with
block group measures used in the present study (Column 1), comparable specifications
with/without controls that use census tract measures (Columns 2-3), and specifications
that aggregate recommendations by tester and also use census tract measures (Columns
4-5). The tests reported in the final two columns are the most similar to those reported
in Turner et al. (2013), though we note some difference in sample sizes that we cannot
explain and stress that this is an approximate and not an exact replication. We note a
substantial number of null values in RHGEO dataset, which contains the census tract
data used in Turner et al. (2013). This constraints the total sample size relative to the
tester dataset that is merged with block group measures.
    Both sets of results indicate that the power and the magnitude of effects diminishes
as a result of aggregation of neighborhood measures (census tract) and by tester. The
choice of controls also affects estimate magnitudes, but less so. The most important effect
appears to be the use of census block group versus census tract measures, which increase
the estimates of differences in white neighborhoods shares by up to one third in the test
of white shares and by up to about half in the test of poverty rates. Smaller estimates of
differences when using tract-level measures could be especially important given the fact
that housing recommendations in the HDS 2012 were highly localized: 33% of housing
recommendations in the audit occur within a single census tract. Figure 2 illustrates the
geographic range of a housing search for two trials in the 2012 HDS.
    We note that estimates of differences become even smaller and tests less powered
when we aggregate to the level of a tester recommendation set and compare differences
in means. We find a difference of 2.8% [0.87] for differences in white shares when the
test is constructed in this way, which is larger but not statistically different from the the
1.8% [0.8] difference reported in Turner et al. (2013). For differences in poverty rates, we
estimate insignificant differences of for homes in tracts with a .27% [0.29] smaller share of
white households than a white tester, which is very similar to the difference of .2% [0.2]
that is documented in the report. Variation in poverty rates between block groups appears
to be particularly diminished when using census tract measures. For instance, while the
tract-level poverty rate (8.5%) is similar to the average block group-level poverty rate
(8.6%) for the average home in the HDS sample, the standard deviation of neighborhood
poverty rates for the set of homes within a given trial is substantially smaller when
using the tract-level measure of poverty: 3.79% at the tract level vs. 5.02% at the block
group level. The standard deviation of block group-level poverty rates within the average
census tract where recommendations are made in the study also appears to be quite


                                        Appendix–7
large: 3%. When considering that the average neighborhood level poverty rate is 8.6%39 ,
it becomes clear that using tract-level measures may mask considerable heterogeneity in
the neighborhoods that testers are steered into.

                              Table D.2. Differential Steering and White Share

                                                                  Dep. Variable: White Share
                                        Block Gr          Tract             Tract        Tester Mean               Tester Mean
           African American              −0.0430∗∗∗      −0.0315∗           −0.0358∗∗        −0.0280∗∗∗                  −0.0294∗∗
                                          (0.0166)        (0.0166)           (0.0164)         (0.0087)                    (0.0135)
           Poverty Rate Advert Home       Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           Racial Comp Advert Home        Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           ln(Price) Advert Home          Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           Observations                  21,458          15,270            14,342             498                         480
           Adjusted R2                   0.7788          0.8320            0.8293            0.7598                      0.7492
                                                                  Dep. Variable: Poverty Rate
                                        Block Gr          Tract             Tract         Tester-Tract             Tester-Tract
           African American                0.0159∗         0.0093            0.0077               0.0027                   0.0027
                                          (0.0088)        (0.0076)          (0.0075)             (0.0032)                 (0.0029)
           Poverty Rate Advert Home       Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           Racial Comp Advert Home        Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           ln(Price) Advert Home          Y               N                 Y                 N                           Y
           Observations                  20,133          15,269            14,341             498                         480
           Adjusted R2                   0.5310          0.5877            0.5926            0.6721                      0.7071
                                                                                             ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
           Note:                                                                                 p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01


Note: Coefficients report differences in the poverty rates in neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to
a white tester (the omitted category). Columns 1-3 report estimates from main specifications that measure outcomes at
the block group level, whereas columns 4-6 report estimates from tests that measure poverty rates at the census Tract
level (data come from (Turner et al., 2013). All regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics,
assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender
of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members,
current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence,
length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search
Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended
building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors
are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




39
     The average neighborhood level poverty rate is 8.5% when measured at the tract level.

                                                      Appendix–8
E        Discriminatory Steering and Home Price
This section provides a test of differences in the prices of homes recommended to minority
testers relative to a white counterpart. We do not find any evidence that minority testers
receive recommendations for lower priced homes relative to their white paired testers
or fewer recommendations. Looking at point estimates alone, it appears that homes
recommended to Hispanic/LatinX buyers may be moderately less expensive than those
recommended to their white counterparts, but that African American and Asian buyers
receive recommendations that may somewhat more expensive on average. Along with
the tests of differences within tight intervals of price reported in Column 3 of Table
F.1, we take these findings as evidence that the primary results on steering that are
documented in this paper are not explained by steering of minority buyers into more
affordable neighborhoods.

                          Table E.1. Discriminatory Steering and Home Price

                                                              Dependent variable: log(Price)
                                                             1             2                3
                   Racial Minority                        −0.0057             −0.0046                 0.0043
                                                           (0.1155)            (0.1164)              (0.1099)
                   African American                         0.0659              0.0648                0.0823
                                                           (0.1790)            (0.1792)              (0.1737)
                   Hispanic                               −0.1657             −0.1622               −0.1594
                                                           (0.1106)            (0.1114)              (0.1024)
                   Asian                                    0.0597              0.0598                0.0621
                                                           (0.1070)            (0.1075)              (0.1003)
                   Other                                  −0.2234             −0.2189               −0.2554
                                                           (0.2791)            (0.2766)              (0.2781)
                   Racial Comp Advert Home                 N                   Y                     Y
                   ln(Price) Advert Home                   N                   N                     Y
                   Observations                           21,785              21,774                21,761
                   Adjusted R2                            0.7228              0.7226                0.7245
                                                                        ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                            p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the listing prices of homes recommended to minority testers relative to a white tester
(the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression specifications control
for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester
income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned
Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for
moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current
lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment
(am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home
as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                      Appendix–9
F           Steering and Neighborhood Effects: Controls
This section compares three alternate specifications for the main tests reported in Table
8. The first column under each attribute reports estimates from specifications that drop
controls for the attributes of advertised homes (buyer preferences). Column 2 reports
estimates from the preferred specification in the paper. Estimates do not change when
the implied preferences of buyers are added as controls, indicating that these do not
appear to affect differences in recommendations made to minority buyers relative to a
white counterpart. Column 3 adds a control for the average level of the particular neigh-
borhood attribute being considered among recommended homes within a tight interval
of price (within intervals of $20,000). Reported estimates of differences do not change
with the addition of this control, suggesting that minorities are steered into homes with
worse attributes than others at a similar price point and that the neighborhood steer-
ing behavior documented in this study is not explained by differential steering of buyers
into neighborhoods that are simply more affordable. This evidence is consistent with the
findings reported in Appendix E.

            Table F.1. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects: Robustness

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                          Poverty Rate                                      High Skill                                             College
 Racial Minority             0.0126∗∗          0.0125∗∗      0.0155∗∗       −0.0222∗          −0.0228∗∗        −0.0220∗∗     −0.0161                −0.0161                 −0.0139
                            (0.0061)          (0.0060)      (0.0064)         (0.0116)          (0.0115)         (0.0110)      (0.0113)               (0.0113)                (0.0120)
 African American            0.0122            0.0124        0.0159∗        −0.0271∗          −0.0272∗         −0.0281∗∗     −0.0304∗∗              −0.0304∗∗               −0.0282∗
                            (0.0086)          (0.0085)      (0.0088)         (0.0151)          (0.0151)         (0.0137)      (0.0143)               (0.0144)                (0.0145)
 Hispanic                    0.0217∗∗∗         0.0216∗∗∗     0.0247∗∗∗      −0.0326∗∗         −0.0348∗∗        −0.0294∗∗     −0.0177                −0.0184                 −0.0128
                            (0.0084)          (0.0082)      (0.0087)         (0.0151)          (0.0149)         (0.0141)      (0.0140)               (0.0141)                (0.0146)
 Asian                       0.0009            0.0005        0.0019         −0.0061           −0.0059          −0.0063         0.0017                 0.0023                  0.0044
                            (0.0077)          (0.0076)      (0.0081)         (0.0144)          (0.0143)         (0.0147)      (0.0152)               (0.0153)                (0.0163)
 Other                     −0.0268           −0.0272       −0.0245          −0.0004           −0.0021            0.0035        0.0043                 0.0050                  0.0185
                            (0.0255)          (0.0256)      (0.0254)         (0.0462)          (0.0458)         (0.0453)      (0.0403)               (0.0401)                (0.0438)
 Outcome Advert Home        N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                      Y                      Y
 Racial Comp Advert Home    N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                      Y                      Y
 ln(Price) Advert Home      N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                      Y                      Y
 Outcome by Price Bin       N                 N             Y                N                 N                Y             N                      N                      Y
 Observations              21,364            21,342        20,133           21,364            21,342           20,133        21,364                 21,342                 20,133
 Adjusted R2               0.5224            0.5237        0.5310           0.6936            0.6937           0.7034        0.7558                 0.7560                 0.7664
                                                                                                                                               ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                   p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

                                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                         Superfund Prox                                 Toxic Releases                                             PM
 Racial Minority             0.1006∗∗∗         0.0997∗∗∗     0.1004∗∗∗      805.8466∗∗        787.9887∗∗       786.6876∗∗    −0.0464           −0.0448                −0.0445
                            (0.0362)          (0.0360)      (0.0361)       (356.5548)        (355.1027)       (354.3281)      (0.0581)          (0.0580)               (0.0580)
                                    ∗∗                ∗∗            ∗∗                ∗∗               ∗∗               ∗∗
 African American            0.1233            0.1206        0.1210          946.0394          915.4476         959.5564     −0.0233           −0.0228                −0.0165
                            (0.0518)          (0.0517)      (0.0515)       (452.4100)        (447.0242)       (450.1002)      (0.0778)          (0.0777)               (0.0773)
 Hispanic                    0.0612            0.0620        0.0647          438.9166          421.2600         383.5972       0.0009            0.0075                 0.0058
                            (0.0424)          (0.0419)      (0.0415)       (589.4368)        (586.4115)       (588.9472)      (0.0729)          (0.0728)               (0.0730)
 Asian                       0.1029∗∗          0.1030∗∗      0.1022∗         961.9641∗∗        955.7904∗∗       937.5928∗    −0.1269∗          −0.1283∗               −0.1324∗
                            (0.0524)          (0.0522)      (0.0523)       (486.3646)        (480.9247)       (483.0982)      (0.0706)          (0.0704)               (0.0705)
 Other                     −0.1284           −0.1229       −0.1192        −663.3114         −664.3224        −707.4001       −0.0616           −0.0588                −0.0583
                            (0.1880)          (0.1875)      (0.1874)     (1, 731.3800)     (1, 726.1620)    (1, 734.3390)     (0.2156)          (0.2170)               (0.2173)
 Outcome Advert Home        N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                 Y                      Y
 Racial Comp Advert Home    N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                 Y                      Y
 ln(Price) Advert Home      N                 Y             Y                N                 Y                Y             N                 Y                      Y
 Outcome by Price Bin       N                 N             Y                N                 N                Y             N                 N                      Y
 Observations              21,376            21,354        21,354           21,376            21,354           21,354        21,376            21,354                 21,354
 Adjusted R2               0.8760            0.8760        0.8762           0.6889            0.6888           0.6890        0.9634            0.9634                 0.9634
                                                                                                                                         ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                             p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01


Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category). Racial minority encompasses all individual minority groups. All regression specifications
control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics:
tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester;
Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status,
reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment,
current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the
appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of
advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                           Appendix–10
Table F.2 provides a variant of the main specifications which adds the (lagged) racial com-
position of each census block group as reported in the 2000 Census. Differences in the
poverty level, skill level, and level of college attainment of neighborhoods recommended
to African American households can be partially but not fully explained by lagged racial
composition of neighborhoods. The historical racial composition of neighborhoods does
not appear to explain differences for Hispanic/Latinx buyers or for differences in neigh-
borhood assaults of exposures to Superfund or chemical toxics for any of the groups.

Table F.2. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects: 2000 Racial Composition

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                               Poverty Rate       High Skill     College                 Elem School
                                                             ∗
               Racial Minority                      0.0094          −0.0162             −0.0099             −0.1499
                                                   (0.0053)          (0.0114)            (0.0108)            (0.2038)
               African American                     0.0050          −0.0170             −0.0183             −0.1831
                                                   (0.0074)          (0.0142)            (0.0125)            (0.2772)
               Hispanic                             0.0208∗∗∗       −0.0269∗            −0.0119             −0.0526
                                                   (0.0077)          (0.0144)            (0.0130)            (0.2724)
               Asian                                0.0019          −0.0079             −0.0016             −0.3214
                                                   (0.0069)          (0.0150)            (0.0155)            (0.2469)
               Other                              −0.0100           −0.0318             −0.0264             −0.4248
                                                   (0.0232)          (0.0437)            (0.0375)            (0.6576)
               ln(Price) Advert Home               Y                 Y                   Y                   Y
               Racial Comp Advert Home             Y                 Y                   Y                   Y
               Outcome Advertised Home             Y                 Y                   Y                   Y
               Observations                       21,246            21,246              21,246              10,726
               Adjusted R2                        0.5854            0.7359              0.8005              0.7557
                                                                                ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                    p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01




                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                               Assaults          Superfund         Toxics                         PM
             Racial Minority                      8.5711            0.0986∗∗∗            727.2588∗∗             −0.0423
                                                 (7.8553)          (0.0362)             (364.0121)               (0.0581)
             African American                    24.0199∗∗          0.1155∗∗            849.6192∗               −0.0250
                                                (12.1722)          (0.0519)           (461.6873)                 (0.0789)
             Hispanic                           −0.3235             0.0606              471.9643                  0.0176
                                                 (9.7427)          (0.0418)           (601.2154)                 (0.0724)
             Asian                                5.2815            0.1073∗∗            822.5450∗               −0.1262∗
                                                 (9.2107)          (0.0521)           (498.8224)                 (0.0709)
             Other                             −10.5991           −0.1101            −276.9493                  −0.0535
                                                (67.2045)          (0.1846)         (1, 758.6820)                (0.2130)
             ln(Price) Advert Home               Y                 Y                      Y                      Y
             Racial Comp Advert Home             Y                 Y                      Y                      Y
             Outcome Advertised Home             Y                 Y                      Y                      Y
             Observations                       10,825            21,250                 21,250                 21,250
             Adjusted R2                        0.7975            0.8758                 0.6893                 0.9631
                                                                                    ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                        p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category). Specifications replicate the estimates reported in Table 8 and add controls for the share of
white, African American, Hispanic/LatinX, and Asian households from the 2000 Census. All regression specifications control
for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester
income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned
Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for
moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current
lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment
(am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home
as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                     Appendix–11
G        Discriminatory Steering and Implied Preferences
This section explores interactions between the implied preferences of buyers and discrim-
inatory constraints facing buyers. Table G.1 tests for differences within the sample of
buyers who present an advertised listing that falls above the median price in the audit
($245,000). These results suggest that the differences in poverty rate, skill, and college
attainment may be amplified for African Americans who present these preferences and
may be mitigated for Hispanic/LatinX buyers who present these preferences.

   Table G.1. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects: Above Median Price

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                      Poverty Rate         High Skill      College                         Elem School
                                                     ∗                 ∗                             ∗∗∗
              African American               0.0191           −0.0355                 −0.0497                  −0.5422
                                            (0.0102)           (0.0199)                (0.0182)                 (0.7073)
              Hispanic                       0.0172           −0.0142                 −0.0192                  −1.1563
                                            (0.0112)           (0.0199)                (0.0201)                 (0.8471)
              Asian                          0.0140             0.0106                −0.0155                  −0.9025
                                            (0.0103)           (0.0182)                (0.0185)                 (0.8716)
              Other                        −0.0671              0.0424                  0.0253                 −4.5841
                                            (0.0497)           (0.0827)                (0.0893)                 (4.8830)
              Observations                10,633             10,633                   10,633                    4,814
              Adjusted R2                 0.5599             0.6861                   0.7245                   0.7459
                                                                                  ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                      p<0.1;         p<0.05;         p<0.01




                                                               Dependent variable:
                                           Assaults         Superfund       Toxics                             PM
                African American           −23.2490              0.0559          825.8931                     0.0668
                                            (38.0806)           (0.0793)     (1, 933.0740)                   (0.0995)
                Hispanic                   −48.3694              0.0445       1, 777.9350                     0.0833
                                            (49.2734)           (0.0877)     (2, 128.0520)                   (0.1096)
                Asian                         9.3051             0.0240          913.0304                   −0.1420
                                            (29.0310)           (0.0807)     (1, 965.9850)                   (0.1016)
                Other                       141.5192           −0.6943∗       3, 630.4060                     0.2256
                                           (246.0337)           (0.3877)     (9, 469.7310)                   (0.4876)
                Observations                 5,199            10,645                  10,645                10,645
                Adjusted R2                 0.8401            0.8771                  0.6025                0.9606
                                                                              ∗            ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                                                  p<0.1;        p<0.05;          p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category) within the sample of testers presenting an advertised home that is listed above $245,000. All
regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics.
Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational
attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car
ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford
down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time
of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability
of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                         Appendix–12
Table G.2 tests for differences within the sample of buyers who present an advertised
listing that falls above the median price in the audit (1,872 square feet). Results are
qualitatively consistent with those presented for higher priced homes, which is highly
correlated with home size. However, the amplification of steering of African American
buyers into lower skill and lower college attainment neighborhoods is considerably larger
for this subsample.

   Table G.2. Discriminatory Steering and Neighborhood Effects: Above Median Size

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                     Poverty Rate          High Skill        College                         Elem School
                                                                       ∗∗∗                             ∗∗∗
            African American               0.0246             −0.0814                    −0.1040                 −0.1095
                                          (0.0180)             (0.0297)                   (0.0316)                (0.6570)
            Hispanic                       0.0144             −0.0012                    −0.0326                 −0.6689
                                          (0.0198)             (0.0326)                   (0.0347)                (0.6635)
            Asian                        −0.0229              −0.0302                    −0.0072                 −1.2742∗
                                          (0.0190)             (0.0313)                   (0.0333)                (0.6837)
            Other                        −0.0794∗             −0.0322                      0.0830                −0.1433
                                          (0.0466)             (0.0767)                   (0.0817)                (1.7176)
            Observations                  7,745               7,745                       7,745                   5,529
            Adjusted R2                  0.5150              0.6616                      0.7371                  0.7342
                                                                                     ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                         p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01




                                                              Dependent variable:
                                        Assaults          Superfund        Toxics                                PM
                                                                      ∗∗
             African American             17.2982              0.2102          −740.4405                      −0.2257
                                         (38.7115)            (0.1003)        (1, 683.3640)                    (0.1742)
             Hispanic                   −44.9498             −0.1447           −713.8703                      −0.4097∗∗
                                         (59.0451)            (0.1102)        (1, 849.1520)                    (0.1915)
             Asian                      −42.2158               0.1349          2, 088.5800                    −0.2773
                                         (49.6056)            (0.1056)        (1, 772.7240)                    (0.1833)
             Other                      −11.8575               0.0936        −3, 149.4970                     −0.2055
                                        (140.3389)            (0.2592)        (4, 349.5300)                    (0.4499)
             Observations                5,154               7,745                7,745                        7,745
             Adjusted R2                 0.7594             0.8261               0.7985                       0.9509
                                                                                 ∗            ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                                                     p<0.1;        p<0.05;          p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a
white tester (the omitted category) within the sample of testers presenting an advertised home that is larger than 1,872
square feet. All regression specifications control for the full set of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search
Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester income, tester household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test,
educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics: household members, current home ownership status, current
lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in current residence, length of employment at current job, reason
tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned to tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester
appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of recommended building, total number of homes recommended to
tester, availability of advertised home as stated by agent. Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with
sampling design.




                                                       Appendix–13
Tables G.3 and G.4 tests for differences using a model that interacts the racial identity
of the tester with the racial composition (larger than median share of any group) of the
neighborhood of the advertised home.

   Table G.3. Discriminatory Steering by Implied Preferences for Neighborhood Race

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                  Poverty Rate        High Skill        College                 Elem School
   White x White Block Group                          −0.0065             0.0068            0.0080                   0.3331
                                                       (0.0085)          (0.0106)          (0.0136)                 (0.2224)
   African American x White Block Group                 0.0145          −0.0544∗∗∗        −0.0318∗∗                −0.0620
                                                       (0.0100)          (0.0169)          (0.0162)                 (0.2528)
   Hispanic x White Block Group                         0.0026          −0.0163           −0.0089                    0.4421
                                                       (0.0103)          (0.0159)          (0.0167)                 (0.2832)
   Asian x White Block Group                          −0.0094           −0.0358∗∗         −0.0276                    0.0041
                                                       (0.0104)          (0.0182)          (0.0168)                 (0.2670)
   Other x White Block Group                          −0.0140             0.0876∗           0.0350                   0.8918
                                                       (0.0283)          (0.0515)          (0.0456)                 (0.6284)
   White x AA Block Group                             −0.0071           −0.0029             0.0043                   0.1927
                                                       (0.0080)          (0.0117)          (0.0130)                 (0.2281)
   African American x AA Block Group                  −0.0053           −0.0160           −0.0261                    0.1143
                                                       (0.0103)          (0.0194)          (0.0166)                 (0.2660)
   Hispanic x AA Block Group                          −0.0031           −0.0181           −0.0052                  −0.2121
                                                       (0.0086)          (0.0128)          (0.0138)                 (0.2154)
   Asian x AA Block Group                             −0.0397∗∗∗        −0.0092             0.0297∗                −0.1459
                                                       (0.0101)          (0.0182)          (0.0162)                 (0.2640)
   Other x AA Block Group                             −0.0341           −0.1061             0.0371                 −3.9738∗∗
                                                       (0.0924)          (0.0923)          (0.1488)                 (1.8194)
   White x Hispanic Block Group                       −0.0089           −0.0055           −0.0110                    0.2713
                                                       (0.0083)          (0.0146)          (0.0133)                 (0.2244)
   African American x Hispanic Block Group            −0.0136∗            0.0126            0.0038                 −0.2165
                                                       (0.0078)          (0.0121)          (0.0126)                 (0.2285)
   Hispanic x Hispanic Block Group                    −0.0023           −0.0060             0.0031                   0.0327
                                                       (0.0092)          (0.0155)          (0.0149)                 (0.2270)
   Asian x Hispanic Block Group                         0.0010          −0.0023           −0.0020                    0.1955
                                                       (0.0108)          (0.0206)          (0.0174)                 (0.2829)
   Other x Hispanic Block Group                       −0.0096           −0.1624∗∗         −0.1279∗∗                  2.1202∗∗∗
                                                       (0.0351)          (0.0656)          (0.0565)                 (0.7666)
   White x Asian Block Group                          −0.0084             0.0020          −0.0077                  −0.2532
                                                       (0.0084)          (0.0125)          (0.0136)                 (0.2356)
   African American x Asian Block Group               −0.0051           −0.0083           −0.0101                  −0.2777
                                                       (0.0090)          (0.0132)          (0.0145)                 (0.2392)
   Hispanic x Asian Block Group                         0.0128          −0.0174           −0.0221                  −0.0856
                                                       (0.0107)          (0.0183)          (0.0172)                 (0.2883)
   Asian x Asian Block Group                            0.0001            0.0139          −0.0052                    0.1222
                                                       (0.0105)          (0.0170)          (0.0169)                 (0.2723)
   Other x Asian Block Group                          −0.0265             0.1462            0.0836                   1.1850
                                                       (0.0956)          (0.0916)          (0.1539)                 (1.9611)
   Observations                                      21,353             21,353            21,353                   14,024
   Adjusted R2                                       0.5239             0.6949            0.7565                   0.7392
                                                                                           ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                               p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category) for a tester of a given race who presents an advertised listing in a neighborhood that has
a higher than median share of households from a given race group. All regression specifications control for the full set
of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester income, tester
household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics:
household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in
current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned to
tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of
recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home as stated by agent.
Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                     Appendix–14
   Table G.4. Discriminatory Steering by Implied Preferences for Neighborhood Race

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                    Assaults         Superfund         Toxics                          PM
   White x White Block Group                           0.9054           −0.0448             9.4721                   0.0332
                                                     (13.4995)           (0.0489)     (1, 067.8610)                 (0.0688)
   African American x White Block Group                9.0721           −0.0456           283.3150                   0.0816
                                                     (15.5037)           (0.0580)     (1, 266.7170)                 (0.0816)
   Hispanic x White Block Group                      −9.3174              0.0642       −128.1759                     0.0604
                                                     (17.5422)           (0.0598)     (1, 305.4640)                 (0.0841)
   Asian x White Block Group                          12.9577             0.0468       −518.0471                   −0.0773
                                                     (17.3232)           (0.0602)     (1, 314.6090)                 (0.0847)
   Other x White Block Group                        −49.3236              0.1265       1, 890.8250                   0.2049
                                                     (55.1905)           (0.1637)     (3, 572.8160)                 (0.2301)
   White x AA Block Group                            −2.1581            −0.0171        −128.0595                   −0.0143
                                                     (14.8595)           (0.0465)     (1, 015.7800)                 (0.0654)
   African American x AA Block Group                   2.0980           −0.0602           435.2966                 −0.0636
                                                     (18.0123)           (0.0598)     (1, 304.5230)                 (0.0840)
   Hispanic x AA Block Group                         −4.6260              0.0167       −173.8895                   −0.0043
                                                     (15.0738)           (0.0497)     (1, 084.8560)                 (0.0699)
   Asian x AA Block Group                              0.3710             0.0407          526.5117                 −0.0696
                                                     (17.2934)           (0.0583)     (1, 272.1560)                 (0.0819)
   Other x AA Block Group                            262.4755∗∗           0.7636       2, 246.0930                   0.9613
                                                    (125.2848)           (0.5342)    (11, 658.1200)                 (0.7508)
   White x Hispanic Block Group                        8.8579             0.0193           26.8393                 −0.0035
                                                     (13.8372)           (0.0478)     (1, 041.9950)                 (0.0671)
   African American x Hispanic Block Group             5.7606             0.0641          130.7729                   0.0691
                                                     (13.4174)           (0.0453)       (987.5195)                  (0.0636)
   Hispanic x Hispanic Block Group                     3.3077             0.0135          −3.9950                  −0.0443
                                                     (15.2298)           (0.0534)     (1, 165.8150)                 (0.0751)
   Asian x Hispanic Block Group                      −5.9164              0.0675       −289.4899                   −0.0703
                                                     (17.7129)           (0.0626)     (1, 365.7790)                 (0.0880)
   Other x Hispanic Block Group                        2.8976           −0.2862           188.3278                 −0.8945∗∗∗
                                                     (66.1973)           (0.2030)     (4, 430.2880)                 (0.2853)
   White x Asian Block Group                         −8.4936            −0.0784           110.2458                 −0.0333
                                                     (13.4818)           (0.0488)     (1, 065.1220)                 (0.0686)
   African American x Asian Block Group                3.6301             0.0396          318.6820                 −0.0092
                                                     (13.4076)           (0.0521)     (1, 136.1060)                 (0.0732)
   Hispanic x Asian Block Group                     −11.7546            −0.1584∗∗      1, 285.0670                   0.0209
                                                     (17.2707)           (0.0616)     (1, 345.1810)                 (0.0866)
   Asian x Asian Block Group                         −8.9682            −0.1377∗∗      1, 289.1560                   0.0645
                                                     (17.5584)           (0.0605)     (1, 320.7750)                 (0.0851)
   Other x Asian Block Group                       −508.6788∗∗∗         −1.2315∗∗    −7, 946.8490                  −0.5006
                                                    (133.2316)           (0.5526)    (12, 058.4600)                 (0.7766)
   Observations                                      14,017            21,365            21,365                    21,365
   Adjusted R2                                       0.7741            0.8761            0.6887                    0.9635
                                                                                           ∗            ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                                               p<0.1;        p<0.05;         p<0.01

Note: Coefficients report differences in the attributes of neighborhoods recommended to minority testers relative to a white
tester (the omitted category) for a tester of a given race who presents an advertised listing in a neighborhood that has
a higher than median share of households from a given race group. All regression specifications control for the full set
of actor characteristics, assigned characteristics, and search Characteristics. Actor characteristics: tester income, tester
household income, gender of tester, age of tester, month of test, educational attainment of tester; Assigned Characteristics:
household members, current home ownership status, current lease type, car ownership status, reason for moving, years in
current residence, length of employment at current job, reason tester can afford down payment, current lease assigned to
tester; Search Characteristics: month of test, sequence of tester appointments, time of the appointment (am/pm), type of
recommended building, total number of homes recommended to tester, availability of advertised home as stated by agent.
Standard errors are clustered by market for consistency with sampling design.




                                                     Appendix–15
