                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HIGH-SKILL IMMIGRATION, INNOVATION, AND CREATIVE DESTRUCTION

                                        Gaurav Khanna
                                         Munseob Lee

                                      Working Paper 24824
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24824


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2018, Revised August 2018




We are grateful to seminar participants at the NBER Immigration and Innovation Conferences
and the University of California – San Diego for valuable comments, and to Patricia Cortes and
Shulamit Kahn for insightful feedback. We thank Alireza Eshraghi and Olga Denislamova for
excellent research assistance, and the Center for Global Transformation for support. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views
of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and
preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gaurav Khanna and Munseob Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
High-Skill Immigration, Innovation, and Creative Destruction
Gaurav Khanna and Munseob Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 24824
July 2018, Revised August 2018
JEL No. D22,D24,F22,J61

                                         ABSTRACT

Economists have identified product entry and exit as a primary channel through which innovation
impacts economic growth. In this paper, we document how high-skill immigration affects product
reallocation (entry and exit) at the firm level. Using data on H-1B Labor Condition Applications
(LCAs) matched to retail scanner data on products and Compustat data on firm characteristics, we
find that H-1B certification is associated with higher product reallocation and revenue growth. A
ten percent increase in the share of H-1B workers is associated with a two percent increase in
product reallocation rates – our measure of innovation. These results shed light on the economic
consequences of innovation by high-skill immigrant to the United States.


Gaurav Khanna
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92037
gauravk@ucsd.edu

Munseob Lee
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
munseoblee@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction

Recent political and academic discussions have shone a spotlight on issues related
to high-skill immigration. This discourse could have far reaching implications for
US policy, the profitability of firms, the welfare of workers, and the potential for
innovation in the economy as a whole. Yet, the effects of high-skill immigration on
receiving countries are theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, skilled migrants
may increase the profitability and innovative capacity of the firm (Kerr and Lincoln,
2010) and raise wages of native workers who are complements in production (Peri
and Sparber, 2009). On the other hand, migrants may crowd out domestic workers
(Doran, Gelber and Isen, 2017) and lower the wages of close substitutes (Bound,
Braga, Golden and Khanna, 2015).
    What has been missing so far from this discourse is a discussion about how mi-
grants may affect the product-mix produced by a firm and the innovation involved
in creative destruction. The entry and exit of products have long been seen as an
important determinant of firm-level innovation and Schumpeterian growth (Aghion,
Akcigit and Howitt, 2014). Hiring high-skill workers from abroad may have a mean-
ingful impact on such innovation, and this has implications not only for firm profits
but also for consumer welfare. For instance, hiring more engineers and programmers
from abroad, at perhaps a lower cost, allow firms to implement incremental innova-
tions that may lead to newer products on the market. In this paper we fill this gap by
studying the impact of H-1B worker applications, on firm-level product reallocation,
defined broadly as the entry of new products and the exit of outdated products.
    We create a new data set by combining data on H-1B worker applications and

                                          1
firm production. Our H-1B data consists of publicly-available Labor Condition Ap-
plications (LCAs).1 Our product level data from the Nielsen Retail Scanner Data is
combined with firm characteristics from the Compustat database. Together, a com-
bination of these datasets at the firm-by-year level between 2006 and 2015 allows us
to comprehensively examine the impact of wishing to hire foreign workers on firm
production and innovation.
       Our analysis consists of a few different methods. We first describe the entry and
exit of products over the business cycle and across a firm’s baseline propensity to
hire H-1B workers.2 We find that product reallocation falls precipitously in times of
recession and rises in periods of economic recovery. Moreover, product reallocation
is strongly associated with the baseline propensity to hire H-1B workers: firms that
applied for H-1B workers in the first year of our LCA data are more likely to con-
sistently have high product reallocation rates over the business cycle. Indeed, this
association is invariant to a firm’s R&D expenditure, size, or revenue share. R&D
expenditures and revenues are no longer strong determinants of product entry and
exit after accounting for baseline propensities to hire H-1B workers.
       We then use panel regressions, where we account for firm level characteristics
that are stable over time and for shocks that affect the economy widely with the
help of fixed effects. Our preferred specifications look at outcomes in the following
period as they are less likely to be affected by contemporaneous shocks, and we would
expect that firm dynamics change with a lag. We show that an increase in product
   1
     LCAs are filed with the Department of Labor when a firm wishes to hire H-1B workers, and a
single LCA may list many workers.
   2
     Our baseline propensity is whether or not a firm applied to hire H-1B workers in the first year
of our LCA data (2000-1).


                                                 2
reallocation is strongly associated with higher firm revenue growth.
      We find that the number of LCAs, the number of certified workers, and number of
workers as a fraction of the total firm employment base, is strongly associated with
reallocation rates.3 A one percentage point increase in the share of workers from
certified LCAs is associated with a five percentage point increase in the reallocation
rate. This association is stronger for software workers than other occupation groups.
In a distributed lead and lag set up, we also see that even as future H-1B certification
does not affect current reallocation rates, current H-1B certification does affect future
reallocation rates.
      Our results speak to the innovative capacity of the firm by focusing on product
reallocation, which is found to be highly correlated with firm growth and productiv-
ity (Argente, Lee and Moreira, 2018b). Previous work on high-skill immigrants and
innovation focus on patenting activity (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle, 2010; Moser, Voena and Waldinger, 2014). The propensity to patent may
be affected by rulings of the Federal Court of Appeals, the firm’s industry and prod-
ucts, and changes in state polices and taxes (Lerner and Seru, 2018). Indeed, many
important innovations are never patented (Fontana, Nuvolari, Shimizu and Vezzulli,
2013). While patents may be a good measure of newer production processes and
inputs into production, our measure of innovation captures the final products pro-
duced by firms. The major advantage of a product reallocation measure is that it
captures incremental innovations that are not usually patented. Previous work using
patent data might have underestimated the benefits of having additional high-skilled
  3
    A firm can file one LCA for many workers, and this LCA may either be denied, withdrawn or
certified. We define “certified workers” as the number of workers on certified LCAs.


                                             3
immigrant workers by not being able to capture these incremental innovations.
        Such changes affect not just firms, but also consumers. Changes in a firm’s
production portfolio are strongly linked to a firm’s revenue generation ability and
profitability. In concurrent work, we examine how changes in consumer goods prod-
ucts affect the welfare of US consumers (Khanna and Lee, 2018). Together these
results have striking implications for the overall consequences of H-1B migration on
the US economy.
        Our paper is organized into five sections. In Section 2 we provide a background on
the H-1B program and how that may relate to innovation and product reallocation.
In Section 3 we describe the data that we use and how we combine our datasets. Our
primary analysis is in Section 4 where we first describe trends over the business cycle,
the association between reallocation rates and revenue growth, and then between H-
1Bs and product reallocation. Section 5 concludes.



2         Background

2.1        The H-1B Program

The Immigration Act of 1990 established the H-1B visa program for temporary
workers in “specialty occupations” with a college degree.4 In order to hire a foreigner
on an H-1B visa, a firm must first file a Labor Condition Application (LCA) to the
Department of Labor (DOL), and pay them the greater of the actual compensation
    4
    Specialty occupations are defined as requiring theoretical and practical application of a body of
highly specialized knowledge in a field of human endeavor including, but not limited to, architecture,
engineering, mathematics, physical sciences, social sciences, medicine and health, education, law,
accounting, business specialties, theology, and the arts.

                                                  4
paid to other employees in the same job or the prevailing compensation for that
occupation.
      After which, the H-1B prospective must demonstrate to the US Citizenship and
Immigration Services Bureau (USCIS) in the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) that they have the requisite amount of education and work experience for
the posted positions.5 USCIS then may approve the petitions, up to the annual cap.
Approved H-1Bs are for a period up to three years, which can be extended up to six
years. Once the H-1B expires, employers can sponsor a green card and each country
is eligible for only a specific number of those. The U.S. General Accounting Office
2011 survey estimates the legal and administrative costs associated with each H-1B
hire to range from 2.3 to 7.5 thousand dollars. It therefore seems reasonable to as-
sume that employers must expect some cost or productivity advantage when hiring
high-skill immigrants.
      In the early years, the H-1B cap of 65,000 new visas was never reached, but by
the time the IT boom was starting in the mid-1990s, the cap started binding and
the allocation was filled on a first come, first served basis. The cap was raised to
115,000 in 1999 and to 195,000 for 2000-2003, and then reverted back to 65,000
thereafter. The 2000 legislation that raised the cap also excluded universities and
non-profit research facilities from it, and a 2004 change added an extra 20,000 visas
for foreigners who received a masters degree in the US. Renewals of visas up to the
six-year limit are not subject to the cap, and neither are employment at an institution
  5
    Workers may be educated in the US. The National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) shows
that 55% of foreigners working in CS fields in 2003 arrived in the US on a temporary working
(H-1B) or a student type visa (F-1, J-1).



                                             5
of higher education or a non-profit or governmental research organization.
   When the cap is reached, USCIS conducts a lottery to determine who receives an
H-1B visa. For instance, in the the 2014 fiscal year, USCIS received approximately
124 thousand petitions in the first five days of open applications for 85 thousand visas.
A computer generated lottery first determines the visas for petitions of applicants
who received a masters degree in the US (a quota of 20 thousand visas), and then
the remaining 65 thousand visas are granted. Those not selected in the lottery may
file again the next year. Those who are selected will eventually also receive an I-129
form from USCIS.
   According to the USINS (2000), the number of H-1B visas awarded to computer-
related occupations in 1999 was about two-thirds of the visas, and U.S. Department
of Commerce (2000) estimated that during the late 1990s, 28% of programmer jobs
in the US went to H-1B visa holders. H-1B visas, therefore, became an important
source of labor for the technology sector. Yet, many non-IT firms also hire H-1B visas.
Such workers may be in-house programmers, but also scientists, mathematicians and
engineers.


2.2    The Impact of High Skill Immigrants on the US

Work by economists on the impacts of the H-1B program are mostly focused on
the wages and employment of native born workers. Some argue that employers find
hiring foreign high-skilled labor an attractive alternative and that such hiring either
“crowds out” natives from jobs or puts downward pressure on their wages (Doran,
Gelber and Isen, 2017). Given the excess supply of highly qualified foreigners willing


                                           6
to work, and given the difficulty in portability of the H-1B visa, immigrant workers
may not be in a position to search for higher wages, allowing firms to undercut and
replace US workers (Matloff, 2003; Kirkegaard, 2005). On the other hand, negative
wage effects may be muted as native workers switch into complementary tasks (Peri
and Sparber, 2009).
      Importantly, immigrants may affect the innovative capacity of the firm. Kerr
and Lincoln (2010) and Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) provide evidence on the
link between variation in immigrant flows and innovation measured by patenting,
suggesting that the net impact of immigration is positive rather than simply substi-
tuting for native employment. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) also show that variation in
immigrant flows at the local level related to changes in H-1B flows do not appear
to adversely impact native employment and have a small, statistically insignificant
effect on their wages. Indeed, in other research it is evident that changes in the size
of the STEM workforce at the city-level may raise wages for US born workers (Peri,
Shih and Sparber, 2015).
      Even though much of the theoretical analysis underlying studies of immigration
are about firms, a large fraction of the literature focuses on variation across states
or metro areas.6 Yet, for high-skilled migrants sponsored by firms in specialty occu-
pations we may expect that effects on receiving firms will be rather different from
the impacts on the larger labor market. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) and Kerr, Kerr
and Lincoln (2015) are among the first to focus on the firm, and more recently
working papers using publicly traded firms (Mayda, Ortega, Peri, Shih and Sparber,
  6
    As Kerr, Kerr and Lincoln (2015) point out, the word “firm” does not appear in the 51 pages
of the seminal Borjas (1994) review of the immigration literature.


                                              7
2018) or administrative tax data (Doran, Gelber and Isen, 2017) look at employment
outcomes for native workers and the patenting propensity of the firm.
   Yet, focusing on either the labor market or innovative capacity may miss overall
productivity changes in the US economy. Bound, Khanna and Morales (2016) and
Khanna and Morales (2018) take a different approach and set up a general equilibrium
model of the US economy. Doing so allows them to conduct a comprehensive welfare
analysis and study the distributional implications of the H-1B program. Importantly,
by modeling the firms’ decisions, including the spillovers from technological innova-
tion, they find that even though US computer scientists are hurt by immigration,
complements in production, consumers and firm entrepreneurs benefit substantially.


2.3    Innovation and Product Reallocation

Work on high-skill immigrants and innovation often focuses on patenting activ-
ity (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010; Moser, Voena and
Waldinger, 2014). Such pioneering work highlighted the importance of immigrants in
innovation. While patents are a rich measure, they capture a specific type of innova-
tion. While patents may capture larger significant innovations, product reallocation
often captures incremental innovation that are rarely patented.
   Certain features of patent data make it important to study alternative measures of
innovation as well. First, immigration status is not directly observed in the patent-
ing data and often ethnicity needs to be inferred by the name, and one needs to
compare traditionally Indian or Chinese names to more Anglo-Saxon or European
names. Second, changes to patenting over time may be a result of changes in intel-


                                         8
lectual property laws (like the Computer Software Protection Act of 1980 and the
Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984), and rulings of the Court of Appeals
for the Federal Circuit, rather than actual innovation. Furthermore, there are gaps
when a patent is filed and when it is granted, and any contemporary analysis like
ours, would need to limit ourselves to filing information and ignore granting-status
or citations to avoid issues with truncation.
       The propensity to patent and cite innovations also vary widely across types of
products and industries. Some patents are heavily cited due to their industry rather
than “fundamental innovativeness” (Lerner and Seru, 2018). Indeed, a relatively low
number of important innovations may ever be patented.7 Lastly, patenting propen-
sities may differ across regions due to changes in state intellectual property policies
and taxes, or differences in industrial composition across regions, and analyses that
use cross state and city variation need to account for such changes.
       To complement the literature using patenting data, we investigate an alterna-
tive measure of innovation. For decades, economists have identified product entry
and exit as one of the key mechanisms through which product innovation translates
into economic growth (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman, 1991).
In the consumer goods sector, recent developments in point-of-sale systems allow us
to investigate barcode-level transactions, and therefore product entry and exit. We
calculate firm-level product creation and destruction by identifying manufacturers of
each barcode-level product and aggregating transactions from about 35,000 stores in
   7
    Fontana, Nuvolari, Shimizu and Vezzulli (2013) find that 91% of R&D award winning inventions
between 1977 and 2004 were never patented. Some inventions, like penicillin, may be never be
patented as inventors may never wish to patent them.



                                               9
the United States. Following the idea of creative destruction where new and better
varieties replace obsolete ones, we define firm-level product reallocation as the sum of
firm-level product creation and destruction. Most product reallocation is driven by
surviving incumbent firms that add or drop products in their portfolios. The speed of
product reallocation is strongly related to the innovation efforts of firms and several
innovation outputs such as revenue growth, improvements in product quality, and
productivity growth (Argente, Lee and Moreira, 2018b). The major advantage of
product reallocation as a measure of innovation outcomes is that it captures incre-
mental innovation that are not usually patented. Under the presence of incremental
innovations, previous work only with patent data might have underestimated the
benefits of having additional high-skilled immigrant workers.



3     Data

We combine data at the firm-by-year level from multiple sources. We first obtain
publicly available H-1B data on Labor Condition Applications (LCAs) between 2000
and 2016. We merge this H-1B data to firm-level data from the Nielsen Retail Scanner
Data (2006 to 2015) that provides us with information on products produced at the
firm level, and also Compustat firm level characteristics for a subset of large publicly
listed firms.




                                          10
3.1    Data on High-skill Immigration

Data on H-1B visas come from the publicly available list of 2000-16 Labor Condition
Applications (LCAs) which firms file with the US Department of Labor (DOL) when
they wish to hire a foreign high-skill worker. Attached to each LCA is an employer
name, address (including city, zip code and state), work start date and end date,
occupation and job title, and number of workers requested. The LCA database
also documents whether the application was denied, withdrawn or certified. For our
analysis we only use certified applications, and count the “certified workers” as the
number of workers on certified LCAs. We aggregate this LCA-level data to the firm-
by-year level, counting not just the number of LCAs and workers, but also the types
of workers for broad occupational categories. These categories, in descending order
of prevalence are: (1) software workers (including computer programmers, software
engineers and software developers), (2) Scientists / Mathematicians / Statisticians
and Engineers (including electrical and mechanical engineers), (3) managers (and
administrators), (4) those working in finance or marketing. Together, these categories
account for more than 90% of all LCAs in each year of our data.
   Due to the H-1B caps, not all certified LCAs lead to actual H-1B hires. However,
since they are necessary for approved H-1Bs, these LCAs measure the firms’ desire to
hire H-1Bs and therefore are likely to be highly correlated with actual H-1Bs. Since
our analysis is only for for-profit firms that produce consumer goods, none of the H-
1B LCAs we eventually match to our products dataset are cap exempt. Importantly,
our data set should not be thought of as being representative of H-1B firms. Instead,
it is only representative of consumer goods producing firms. Since about 2011 there


                                         11
has been an increase in outsourcing firms grabbing the majority of H-1B visas, and
filing a lot of LCAs – yet such firms are not a part of our sample, and not the focus
of our analysis.
       With the help of these data we compute a few important variables: (1) we count
the number of LCAs filed by a firm each year, (2) the number of workers under
certified LCAs, (3) the number of workers in each of the four broad occupational
categories mentioned above, and (4) the number of workers normalized by the total
employment in the firm (from Compustat).


3.2       Data on Products

For data on products, we use the Nielsen Retail Scanner Data provided by the Kilts
Center for Marketing at the University of Chicago. Each individual store reports
weekly prices and quantities of every UPC (Universal Product Code) that had any
sales during that week. The data is generated by point-of-sale systems and contains
approximately 35,000 distinct stores from 90 retail chains across 371 MSAs and 2,500
counties between January 2006 and December 2015. The data is organized into 1,070
detailed product modules, aggregated into 114 product groups that are then grouped
into 10 major departments.8 Table 1 summarizes basic facts on the data.
       Our data set combines all sales of products at the national and annual level. As
in Broda and Weinstein (2010); Argente and Lee (2016), we use UPC (Universal
Product Code) as the level of analysis. A critical part of our analysis is the identi-
   8
    The ten major departments are: Health and Beauty aids, Dry Grocery (e.g., baby food, canned
vegetables), Frozen Foods, Dairy, Deli, Packaged Meat, Fresh Produce, Non-Food Grocery, Alcohol,
and General Merchandise.



                                              12
fication of entries and exits, for which we mostly follow Argente, Lee and Moreira
(2018a,b). For each product, we identify the entry and exit periods. We define entry
as the first year of sales of a product and exit as the year after we last observe a
product being sold.
   We link firms and products with information obtained from GS1 US, the single
official source of UPCs. In order to obtain a UPC, firms must first obtain a GS1
company prefix. The prefix is a five- to ten-digit number that identifies firms and
their products in over 100 countries where the GS1 is present. In Figure 1 we show
a few examples of different company prefixes. Although the majority of firms own a
single prefix, it is not rare to find that some own several. Small firms, for instance,
often obtain a larger prefix first, which is usually cheaper, before expanding and
requesting a shorter prefix. Larger firms, on the other hand, usually own several
company prefixes due to past mergers and acquisitions. For instance, Procter &
Gamble owns the prefixes of firms it acquired such as Old Spice, Folgers, and Gillette.
For consistency, in what follows we perform the analysis at the parent company level.
   Given that the GS1 US data contains all of the company prefixes generated in
the US, we combine these prefixes with the UPC codes in the Nielsen Retail Scanner
Data. Less than 5 percent of the UPCs belong to prefixes not generated in the US.
We were not able to find a firm identifier for those products.
   With this data set on products and firms, we can compute how firm-level product
creation and destruction evolve over time.
   Note that typical firms in the data produce multiple products in several different
categories. Over the sample period, about 82.2 percent of revenue has been generated


                                          13
by firms operating in more than one product department. Figure 2 shows that the
share of firms in multi-departments has been between 78 and 84 percent from 2006
to 2015, declining a bit during the Great Recession.


3.3    Data on Other Firm Characteristics

We obtain other firm-level characteristics from Compustat. The Compustat is a
database of financial and market information on global companies throughout the
world. For the purpose of this research, we bring information on employment and
R&D expenditure over the sample period from the fundamental annual database
of North America. This limits the number of firms in analysis, but provides much
more detailed information on firms. For instance, with information on the number
of employees, we can calculate the share of high-skill immigrant worker applications,
instead of just the number of high-skilled migrant applications. Additionally, data
on R&D expenditures allow us to test the importance of H-1B workers on product
reallocation relative to R&D investments.


3.4    Combining Datasets

We merge our data-sets at the firm-by-year level, using a string matching algorithm
for firm names. When there is uncertainty in the name matching, we consult city
and/or zipcodes. We do not expect matching-error to be correlated with our main
variables of interest. For our analysis, we create two different merged samples: (i) the
LCA-Nielsen sample, and (ii) the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat sample. Table 2 reports
descriptive statistics for all three merged samples.

                                          14
   The first sample combines Labor Condition Applications (LCAs) and Nielsen
Retail Scanner Data. As Table 2 shows, the LCA-Nielsen sample contains 36,218
distinct firms for 2006 to 2015. This covers both small and big firms, where the
average annual number of certified workers from LCAs is 0.79 (many firms file no
LCAs in some years) and the average annual revenue in the Nielsen data is 6.25
million USD.
   The second sample adds Compustat to the LCA-Nielsen sample, in order to obtain
other firm characteristics. As Table 2 shows, the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat sample
has 482 distinct firms for 2006 to 2015. Due to the limited coverage of the Compu-
stat database, this sample mostly covers large companies, where the average annual
number of certified workers from LCAs is 20.7 and the average annual revenue in the
Nielsen data is 154 million dollars. From the Compustat database, we additionally
know that the average number of employees is 43 and the average R&D expenditure
to sales ratio is 0.25.


3.5     Measurement of Creative Destruction

We start with a description of the measures that we use to identify the degree of
creative destruction by firms in the product space.
   To capture the importance of product entry and exit, we use information on the
number of new products and exiting products, and the total number of products for
each firm i over year t. We define firm-level entry and exit rates as follows:

                                               Nit
                                      nit =                                      (1)
                                               Tit


                                          15
                                                Xit
                                     xit =                                         (2)
                                               Tit−1

where Nit , Xit , and Tit are the numbers of entering products, exiting products, and
total products, respectively. The entry rate is defined as the number of new products
for each firm i in year t as a share of the total number of products in period t. The
exit rate is defined as the number of products for each firm i that exited in year t as
a share of the total number of products in year t − 1.
    From the idea of creative destruction at the firm level, the overall change in the
portfolio of products available to consumers can be captured by the sum of firm-level
entry and exit rates. We refer to this concept as the product reallocation rate:


                                    rit = nit + xit                                (3)


With this measure we can investigate the extent of changes in the status of a product
in our data, either from the entry or the exit margin.



4     Empirical Analysis

4.1    Product Reallocation and Firm Outcomes

To understand the importance of product reallocation we first study the association
between reallocation and firm revenue growth. This is simply a replication of the
result found in Argente, Lee and Moreira (2018b), and theoretically similar to results
in Aghion, Akcigit and Howitt (2014). We test for this association in our sample
with the following regression specification:

                                          16
                   ∆Log(Revenue)i,t+1 = α + βri,t + µi + τt + i,t ,                   (4)

where ∆Log(Revenue)i,t is growth in the sum of revenue over all products in firm i’s
portfolio between years t and t−1. µi are firm fixed effects and τt are year fixed effects.
With the help of fixed effects, our associations account for firm characteristics that
are stable over time, and for annual shocks that affect the entire US economy. Our
resulting variation is driven by changes over time within firms. Here and elsewhere,
we cluster our standard errors at the firm level.
   In Table 3 we study this association. Product reallocation has a strong positive
association with firm revenue growth. When we look at product entry and exit sep-
arately, once again it is clear that both entry and exit of new products are strongly
associated with firm revenue growth, however firm entry has a much stronger asso-
ciation than firm exit. While these associations are not causal, they are suggestive
as to how product reallocation is important for firm revenue growth.


4.2    Reallocation and Immigration Over the Business Cycle

Our period of study, 2006 to 2016, encapsulates the Great Recession of 2008-10. This
is an ideal setting to understand how the business cycle affects product reallocation,
and how high-skill migration interacts with this relationship. In much of this sub-
section we divide firms by whether or not they have a propensity to apply for H-1B
workers. Any firm that filed an LCA that was certified in the first year of our LCA
data (2000-1) is categorized as a firm that has a propensity to hire H-1B workers. We
use the earliest possible year (2000-1) rather than our sample period (2006-15) for our

                                            17
classification, so as to ensure that contemporaneous changes in firm characteristics
are not driving much of our analysis.9 The aim is to capture baseline propensities of
the firm that may not be related to differential trends over time in reallocation rates;
perhaps, such as the ability of human resources (HR) departments within a firm to
be able to file H-1B paperwork, or connections to employers in countries like India.
       In Figures 3 we use the LCA-Nielsen sample to look at reallocation rates, product
entry and product exit over this period. We split the sample by H-1B dependent firms
(defined as any firm that wished to hire H-1B workers in 2000-1) and non dependent
firms (no new H-1B LCAs certified in 2000-1). Panel (a) of Figure 3 highlights two
important takeaways: (i) H-1B prone firms have higher product reallocation rates,
and (ii) the business cycle is strongly correlated with product reallocation. Over the
recession, product reallocation fell drastically, only to rise again over the recovery.
Firms that wished to hire H-1B workers started out with a higher reallocation rate,
were not as adversely affected as non-H-1B prone firms, and unlike non-H-1B prone
firms, recovered to their previous reallocation rates by 2015.
       In Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 3, we look at product entry and exit rates. As
expected, over the recession, product entry falls and exit rises. H-1B firms have
higher entry and exit rates at baseline, however, by the end of the period, non-H-1B
prone firms have marginally higher exit rates. The fall in entry over the recession
is not as strong for H-1B dependent firms, and the recovery is mildly stronger – by
the end of the business cycle H-1B prone firms have much higher entry rates than
   9
    The propensity to hire H-1B workers in 2000-1 is also strongly predictive of the propensity to
hire H-1B workers between 2006-15. However, it is important to note that the propensity to hire
may not be actual hiring given the caps.



                                               18
non-H1B prone firms.
   The stark differences between H-1B and non-H-1B firms in product reallocation
may be driven by other factors correlated with H-1B visas. For instance, firms that
spend more on R&D, or larger firms in general, may have more H-1B workers and also
higher reallocation rates. Additionally, it is important to understand the interaction
between H-1B dependency and R&D expenditures. Our analysis in Table 4 and
Figure 4 investigates this interaction.
   Table 4 is divided into two panels. In Panel A we use the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat
sample and divide firms into four groups by H-1B propensity and R&D expenditures.
Low H-1B firms are those that did not apply for a new H-1B worker in the first year
of our H-1B data (2000-1), whereas high H-1B firms did. This division roughly splits
the sample in half. We also split the firms by whether or not they are above the
median level of R&D expenditures as a proportion of total sales (in 2000-1). By
construction this division splits the sample in half.
   In Panel A it is clear that high H-1B firms have higher reallocation rates than low
H-1B firms. This is true whether or not the firms have a high R&D expenditure share.
Regardless of R&D share, high H-1B firms have a reallocation rate that is about 17%
higher than low H-1B firms. Interestingly, enough, within H-1B categories, R&D
share is not as strong a determinant of reallocation rates since firms with low and
high baseline R&D rates have similar reallocation rates.
   In Panel B, we do a somewhat similar exercise, but instead of R&D shares we use
baseline revenues from Nielsen. We use the larger LCA-Nielsen sample. Firms that
did not apply for an H-1B worker in 2000-1 far outnumber the firms that did apply


                                          19
for an H-1B worker. Once again comparing the means in reallocation rates suggest
a meaningful difference between H-1B and non-H1B firms: high H-1B firms have,
on average, between 35-38% higher reallocation rates than low H-1B firms. On the
other hand, baseline firm revenues are not predictive of reallocation rates over the
period as both large and small firms have similar reallocation rates.
   Such differences are succinctly captured in Figure 4 which splits up the sample by
H-1B propensity and R&D expenditure share. Consistent with the tables, it shows
that there is a substantial difference in reallocation rates between high and low H-1B
firms. This difference is unaffected by R&D expenditure share, which in and of itself,
is less predictive of differences in reallocation rates.
   Table 4 and Figure 4 suggest that whether or not a firm has a higher propen-
sity to hire H-1B workers is strongly associated with product reallocation rates. This
association is somewhat independent of whether or not the firm has high R&D expen-
ditures or is a large firm with high revenues. Indeed, in comparison to the association
between H-1B workers and reallocation rates, it seems like R&D expenditures and
firm revenues are less strongly associated with high product reallocation.


4.3    The Association Between Immigration and Product Re-

       allocation

We first study the association between high-skill immigration and product realloca-
tion graphically in Figure 5. Here, we plot reallocation rates, entry rates and exit
rates across the number of workers on certified LCA applications. Each point is
a firm-year observation. There seems to be a mildly positive association between

                                            20
reallocation rates and the number of certified workers. Yet, such analyses may be
confounded by firm specific characteristics or annual shocks to the economy. To
account for these we perform a fixed effects regression:


                       ri,t+1 = α + βH1Bi,t + µi + τt + i,t+1 ,                    (5)

where ri,t is the product reallocation rate for firm i in year t and H1Bi,t is a measure
of new H-1B worker certifications at firm i in year t. Even as we show results with
both contemporaneous and next period’s outcomes, our preferred specification looks
at future reallocation. As proposed in other similar work (Argente, Lee and Moreira,
2018b), future product reallocation is less likely to be affected by contemporaneous
shocks, and we expect that changes in firm dynamics occur with a lag. We include
both firm µi and year τt fixed effects, and cluster errors at the firm level.
   Our measures of H1Bi,t worker certifications take on a few different forms. We
look at the: (1) the number of LCAs filed by a firm each year, (2) the number of
workers on certified LCAs each year (called “certified workers”), and (3) the number
of workers from certified LCAs in each broad occupational group. We use the LCA-
Nielsen sample for such regressions. Additionally, using the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat
sample, we can (4) normalize the number of certified workers by total employment
in the firm, using Compustat measures of employment.
   Table 5 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions with the LCA-Nielsen merged
sample. We find a strong positive association between the number of applications/
certifications and reallocation rates in both the current and the following year. When
we divide certifications into four occupational categories, science / math and engi-

                                          21
neering have the largest effect in magnitude but is imprecisely estimated. Software,
is more precisely estimates and has a positive effect, which may be consistent with
the type of innovations we capture with reallocation rates. Unlike patent data, we
mostly capture incremental innovation, where it is possible that lower costs and a
better quality of occupations that perform auxiliary functions may matter more.
       Next we normalize our measures by the size of firms. The same number of high-
skilled immigrants may affect firms differentially by firm size. We now calculate the
share of applications/ certifications by normalizing them with the number of employ-
ees from Compustat. Table 6 reports the coefficients of OLS regressions with the
LCA-Nielsen-Compustat merged sample. Once again we find a positive association
between shares of applications/ certifications and reallocation rates. A one percent-
age point increase in the share of certifications is associated with a five percentage
point increase in the reallocation rate.10


4.4       The Timing of Effects

To further investigate the timing of effects we use a distributed lead and lag model.
Such a model allows us to check that future H-1B applications do not affect past
reallocation rates, and to also study whether our outcomes of interest react con-
temporaneously or with a lag. While informative, however, these results should be
interpreted carefully as we are not necessarily identifying a ‘shock’ in the number of
  10
    The mean share of certifications is 0.047%, so a one percentage point increase in the share
of certified workers corresponds to more than double the mean. The reallocation rate in Table 6
ranges from 0 to 200 with a mean of 25.85. A five percentage point increase in reallocation rates
corresponds to a 20% increase at the mean. In other words, a 1% increase at the mean share of
certified workers is associated with about a 0.2% increase at the mean of reallocation rates.



                                               22
H-1B applications, which is instead a choice variable for the firm. In the following
equation we describe the model:


            ri,t = α + β1 H1Bi,t−1 + β2 H1Bi,t + β3 H1Bi,t+1 + µi + τt + i,t ,                  (6)

while we would expect that past H-1B certifications H1Bi,t−1 affects re-allocation
rates, we can also test to ensure that the number of future H-1B certifications
H1Bi,t+1 is not correlated with current reallocation rates.11
    In Figure 6 we can see that future H-1B applications do not affect lagged reallo-
cation rates. Furthermore, the main impact on reallocation rates seem to show up
with a one-period lag.



5     Conclusion

In this paper we highlight an important fact: H-1B applications are associated with
higher rates of reallocation (entry and exit) of products at firms. Product real-
location is an integral part of Schumpeterian growth, driven by the discarding of
older products and the generation of newer products. We complement the literature
on patenting (capturing larger innovations) and highlight that smaller, incremental
innovations are captured by measures of product reallocation.
    At the firm-level we merge data on H-1B Labor Condition Applications with
Nielsen scanner data on products and Compustat data on firm characteristics. We
find that H-1B LCAs are strongly associated with product reallocation, which in
  11
     As we have a limited number of years in our data it is statistically challenging to include more
leads and lags.


                                                 23
turn is associated with firm revenue growth.
       Our work is consistent with work showing that high-skill migrants are strongly as-
sociated with higher patenting activity (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle, 2010). Measures of firm patenting and new product entry should be thought
of as complementary, yet capturing different aspects of a firm’s innovation ladder.
While patenting may be more associated with newer methods of production and
newer inputs into final goods, we study the entry and exit of final goods as and when
they show up in the consumer market. Yet, other work that uses variation gener-
ated by the H-1B lottery, finds little effect on patenting activity (Doran, Gelber and
Isen, 2017). We find it, therefore, important to study alternative measures of firm
innovativeness to get a comprehensive picture of firm dynamics.
       Importantly, as we look at consumer goods, we may expect that such activity
affects consumer welfare as well. In Khanna and Lee (2018) we study how prices and
the variety of products in the consumer goods market changes, as firms introduce
newer products and produce older products more efficiently when they wish to hire
H-1B workers.12 Such changes affect the welfare of consumers and alter quantitative
estimates of the overall impacts of high-skill immigration on the US economy.




  12
    This work is closely related to the findings of Cortes (2008) that finds that low-skill immigration
lowers the prices of non-tradable goods and services like housekeeping and gardening. In contrast,
we estimate the effects of high-skill migration at the firm level on prices and varieties of tradable
products.


                                                  24
References

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruc-
  tion,” Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt, “What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian
  Growth Theory?,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven N Durlauf, eds., Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Oxford: North Holland, 2014, chapter 1, pp. 515–563.

Argente, David and Munseob Lee, “Cost of Living Inequality during the Great Re-
  cession,” 2016.

  ,   , and Sara Moreira, “How Do Firms Grow? The Life Cycle of Products Mat-
  ters,” 2018.

  ,   , and      , “Innovation and Product Reallocation in the Great Recession,” Jour-
  nal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 93, 1–20.

Borjas, George, “Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1994.

Bound, John, Breno Braga, Joseph Golden, and Gaurav Khanna, “Recruitment of
  Foreigners in the Market for Computer Scientists in the US,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2015, 33 (S1), 187–223.

  , Gaurav Khanna, and Nicolas Morales, “Understanding the Economic Impact of
  the H-1B Program on the US,” High-Skilled Migration to the United States and
  Its Economic Consequences, 2016. (eds. Gordon H. Hanson, William R. Kerr, and
  Sarah Turner), University of Chicago Press.


                                           25
Broda, Christian and David E Weinstein, “Product Creation and Destruction: Ev-
  idence and Price Implications,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 691–
  723.

Cortes, Patricia, “The Effect of Low-skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence
  from CPI Data,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2008, 116 (3), 381–42.

Doran, Kirk B., Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen, “The Effects of High-Skill Im-
  migration Policy on Firms: Evidence from Visa Lotteries,” NBER, 2017. Working
  Paper 20668.

Fontana, Roberto, Alessandro Nuvolari, Hiroshi Shimizu, and Andrea Vezzulli, “Re-
  assessing Patent Propensity: Evidence From a Dataset of R&D Awards 1977-
  2004,” Research Policy, 2013, 42 (10).

Grossman, Gene M and Elhanan Helpman, “Quality ladders in the theory of growth,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (1), 43–61.

Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, “How Much Does Immigration
  Boost Innovation?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2),
  31–56.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln, “Skilled Immigration
  and the Employment Structures of U.S. Firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015,
  33 (S1), S147S186.




                                           26
Kerr, William and William Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
  Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (3),
  473–508.

Khanna, Gaurav and Munseob Lee, “High-Skill Immigration and Consumer Wel-
  fare,” Working Paper, 2018.

   and Nicolas Morales, “The IT Boom and Other Unintended Consequences of
  Chasing the American Dream,” Working Paper, 2018.

Kirkegaard, J., “Outsourcing and Skill Imports: Foreign High-Skilled Workers on
  H-1B and L-1 visas in the United States,” Peterson Institute for International
  Economics,Washington, DC., 2005. Working Paper no. 05-15,.

Lerner, Josh and Amit Seru, “The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issues for Corpo-
  rate Finance and Beyond,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 18-042,
  2018.

Matloff, Norman, “On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in
  Computer-Related Occupations,” University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform,
  2003, 36, 4.

Mayda, Anna Maria, Francesc Ortega, Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber,
  “The Effect of H-1B Visas on Publicly Traded Firms,” Working Paper, 2018.

Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, “German Jewish migrs and
  US Invention,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10).



                                       27
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber, “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2009, 1 (3), 135–169.

  , Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and Productivity
  in US Cities,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (S1), S225 – S255.

U.S. Department of Commerce, “Digital economy 2000,” Technical Report 2000.

USINS, “Characteristics of Specialty Occupation Workers (H1B).,” U.S. Immigration
  and Naturalization Service, 2000. Washington, D.C.




                                       28
                       Figure 1: Example of a Company Prefix




Note: This figure shows examples of a 6- and a 9-digit firm prefix. The source is the GS1-US
website (http://www.gs1-us.info/company-prefix).




                                            29
                    Figure 2: Share of Firms in Multi-Departments




Note: This figure shows the share of firms operating in more than one product departments. The
share is calculated with real revenue weights. The ten major departments are: Health and Beauty
aids, Dry Grocery (e.g., baby food, canned vegetables), Frozen Foods, Dairy, Deli, Packaged Meat,
Fresh Produce, Non-Food Grocery, Alcohol, and General Merchandise.




                                               30
      Figure 3: Product Entry, Exit and Reallocation Over the Business Cycle




                                    (a) Reallocation Rates




                                        (b) Entry Rates




                                         (c) Exit Rates
Note: This figure shows product reallocation rates, entry rates and exit rates by type of firm using
the LCA-Nielsen sample. Reallocation rates range from 0 to 2, whereas entry and exit rates range
between 0 and 1. More H-1B dependent firms have at least one H-1B worker application in the
2000-1 (the first year of our LCA data), whereas less H-1B dependent firms have no H-1B worker
applications in 2000-1.

                                                31
    Figure 4: Product Reallocation by H-1B dependency and R&D propensity




Note: This figure shows the reallocation rates by type of firm using the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat
sample. Reallocation rates range between 0 and 2. More H-1B dependent firms have at least one
H-1B worker application in 2000-1 (the first year of our H-1B data), whereas less H-1B dependent
firms have no H-1B worker applications in 2000-1. Low R&D have below median R&D expenditures
as a proportion of sales in 2000-1. High R&D have above median R&D expenditures as a proportion
of sales.




                                              32
Figure 5: Product Entry, Exit and Reallocation v Number of Certified H-1B Workers




                                   (a) Reallocation Rates




                                      (b) Entry Rates




                                       (c) Exit Rates
Note: This figure shows product reallocation rates, entry rates and exit rates by the number of
certified workers in the LCA data. Reallocation rates range from 0 to 2, whereas entry and exit
rates range between 0 and 1. LCAs that are certified (not withdrawn or denied) list the number
of workers that a firm wishes to hire. This measure is the number of certified workers. The LCA-
Nielsen sample pooled across firms and over 2006-15 is used. Values are binned at each unique
point of the x-axis (number of certified LCA workers).
                                              33
                       Figure 6: Distributed Lead and Lag Model




                                    (a) Reallocation Rates




                                        (b) Entry Rates
Note: This figure shows the impact of number of certified workers from H-1B LCAs on product
reallocation rates and entry rates. Reallocation rates range between 0 and 200, whereas entry rates
range between 0 and 100. LCAs that are certified (not withdrawn or denied) list the number of
workers that a firm wishes to hire. This measure is the number of certified workers. We use a
distributed lead and lag model to estimate the coefficients. The LCA-Nielsen-Compustat sample
over 2006-15 is used. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                                                34
                     Table 1: Facts on Nielsen Retail Scanner Data

The table reports basic facts on the Nielsen Retail Scanner Data.

                                               Nielsen Retail Scanner Data

                 Time period                           2006-2015
                 Coverage                       1,071 modules, 114 groups

                 Observational units                        Store
                 # of stores                            35,510 stores

                 # of states                                 49
                 # of counties                              2,550
                 # of products in 2006                     724,211

                 Frequency                            Weekly, average
                 Tag on temporary sales                   none




                                               35
               Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Two Merged Samples

The table reports descriptive statistics for two merged samples: (i) LCA-Nielsen and (ii) LCA-
Nielsen-Compustat.

                                              (1)                    (2)
Merged Samples:                            LCA-Nielsen      LCA-Nielsen-Compustat

Number of Firms                               36,218                   482
Years                                       2006-2015               2006-2015

Variables from LCA
  Average # of Certified Workers                0.79                   20.72

Variables from Nielsen
  # of Observations                          235,522                  4,022
  Average Firm Revenue (USD)               6.25 million            154 million
  Average Reallocation Rates (0-2)            0.1944                 0.2585

Variables from Compustat
  # of Observations                               -                    4,565
  Average # of Employees                          -                   43,841
  Average R&D to Sales                            -                    0.251




                                             36
                  Table 3: Reallocation Activities and Revenue Growth

The table reports the coefficients of OLS regressions with the LCA-Nielsen merged sample. The
dependent variable is the revenue growth rate in the next year: the change in revenues between year
t and t + 1. The product reallocation rate is defined as the product entry rate plus the product exit
rate at the firm level, as defined in the main text. Reallocation rates range from 0 to 2, whereas
entry and exit rates range between 0 and 1. Revenue growth rates are winsorized at the 1% level.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


 Dep. var: ∆Log(Revenue)i,t+1                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)

 Product Reallocation Rate                    0.432
                                           (0.0235)***
 Product Entry Rate                                                1.240
                                                                (0.0210)***
 Product Exit Rate                                                                      0.355
                                                                                     (0.0377)***

 Observations                               147,723              179,502              147,723
 R-squared                                    0.013                0.063                0.009
 Number of Firm                              27,574               31,626               27,574
 Fixed Effects                           Year and Firm        Year and Firm        Year and Firm
 Cluster                                      Firm                 Firm                 Firm




                                                 37
      Table 4: Reallocation Rates by Firm H-1B Status and R&D or Revenue

Panel A compares reallocation rates across H-1B propensity and R&D expenditures (as a fraction
of sales) using the LCA-Nielsen-Compustat sample. R&D expenditures as a fraction of sales are
divided at the median. Panel B compares reallocation rates across H-1B propensity and firm revenue
across all products in their portfolio using the LCA-Nielsen sample. Reallocation rates range from 0
to 2. Revenue is divided at the median. Low H-1B is defined as having no H-1B worker applications
in 2000-1. High H-1B is defined as having at least one H-1B worker application in 2000-1.

              Panel A: Reallocation Rates by H-1B and R&D propensity
                                Low R&D           High R&D            Difference
              High H-1B           0.289             0.286               -0.002
                     SE          (0.019)           (0.013)             (0.022)
                      N             48                62

               Low H-1B            0.247              0.242              -0.006
                     SE           (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.017)
                      N              78                 63

               Difference          0.041              0.044
                      SE          (0.021)            (0.018)


                   Panel B: Reallocation Rates by H-1B and Revenue
                              Low Revenue       High Revenue          Difference
              High H-1B          0.266              0.260               -0.005
                     SE         (0.008)            (0.003)             (0.007)
                      N           305                555

               Low H-1B            0.197              0.189              -0.008
                     SE           (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)
                      N            10442              12170

               Difference          0.069              0.072
                      SE          (0.007)            (0.003)



                                                38
                                              Table 5: LCA Application/Certification and Reallocation Activities

     The table reports the coefficients of OLS regressions with LCA-Nielsen merged sample. The dependent variable is the product reallocation rates this and next year.
     Reallocation rates range from 0 to 200. The product reallocation rate is defined as the product entry rate plus the product exit rate at the firm level as defined
     in the main text. The number of applications is the number of LCAs filed by a firm. The number of certifications is the number of workers on LCAs that were
     certified. The occupation composition is the number of workers in each occupation from LCAs that were certified. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level
     and presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


      Dep. var:                                                Reallocation Rate in year t                                 Reallocation Rate in year t + 1
                                                           (1)             (2)             (3)                         (4)               (5)               (6)

      Number of Applications                            0.00217                                                     0.00118
                                                     (0.000413)***                                                (0.000615)*
      Number of Certifications                                              0.00291                                                     0.00140
                                                                         (0.000466)***                                                (0.000767)*
         By Occupations:
39




           Software                                                                            0.00217                                                      0.00166
                                                                                            (0.000471)***                                               (0.000294)***
           Science, Math and Engineer                                                           0.0300                                                      0.0206
                                                                                               (0.0446)                                                    (0.0274)
           Manager                                                                             -0.00273                                                    0.000558
                                                                                              (0.00976)                                                    (0.0260)
           Finance, Analyst and Marketing                                                       0.0359                                                    -0.000832
                                                                                              (0.0196)*                                                    (0.0228)

      Observations                                     183,554             183,554             183,554             181,451             181,451             181,451
      R-squared                                         0.003               0.003               0.003               0.003               0.003               0.003
      Number of firm                                    31,876              31,876              31,876              31,685              31,685              31,685
      Fixed Effects                                 Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm
      Cluster                                            Firm                Firm                Firm                Firm                Firm                Firm
      Type                                               OLS                 OLS                 OLS                 OLS                 OLS                 OLS
                                      Table 6: Applying/Certified Immigrant Worker Shares and Reallocation Activities

     The table reports the coefficients of OLS regressions with LCA-Nielsen-Compustat merged sample. The dependent variable is the product reallocation rates this
     and next year. Reallocation rates range from 0 to 2. The product reallocation rate is defined as the product entry rate plus the product exit rate at the firm level
     as defined in the main text. The share of applications is the number of LCAs filed by a firm divided by the total employment base in Compustat. The share of
     certifications is the number of workers on LCAs that were certified divided by the total employment base in Compustat. The occupation composition is the number
     of workers in each occupation from LCAs that were certified divided by the total employment base in Compustat. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level
     and presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


      Dep. var:                                                 Reallocation Rate in year t                                 Reallocation Rate in year t + 1
                                                            (1)             (2)             (3)                         (4)               (5)               (6)

      Share of Applications                               3.910                                                        5.077
                                                         (2.693)                                                     (2.040)**
      Share of Certifications                                                 4.242                                                        5.593
                                                                             (2.789)                                                    (2.034)***
40




         By Occupations:
           Software                                                                                4.839                                                       9.344
                                                                                                (1.238)***                                                  (0.732)***
           Science, Math and Engineer                                                              -0.915                                                      0.203
                                                                                                  (2.140)                                                     (1.402)
           Manager                                                                                 8.953                                                       5.854
                                                                                                 (5.095)*                                                     (4.384)
           Finance, Analyst and Marketing                                                          0.771                                                       1.098
                                                                                                  (2.016)                                                     (2.221)

      Observations                                       2,742               2,742               2,742               2,800                2,800               2,800
      R-squared                                          0.015               0.016               0.022               0.022                0.022               0.029
      Number of firm                                      416                 416                 416                 429                  429                 429
      Fixed Effects                                  Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm       Year and Firm        Year and Firm       Year and Firm
      Cluster                                            Firm                Firm                Firm                Firm                 Firm                Firm
      Type                                                OLS                 OLS                 OLS                 OLS                  OLS                 OLS
