                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FINANCIAL INCENTIVES AND EARNINGS OF DISABILITY INSURANCE RECIPIENTS:
                   EVIDENCE FROM A NOTCH DESIGN

                                        Philippe Ruh
                                        Stefan Staubli

                                     Working Paper 24830
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24830


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2018




We thank David Autor, Janet Currie, Josef Falkinger, Johannes Kunz, Andrei Levchenko, Erzo
Luttmer, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Tobias Renkin, Andrea Weber, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Josef
Zweimüller, and seminar participants at HEC Montréal, the University of Calgary, the Vienna
University of Economics and Business, the University of Zurich, CIRANO Montreal, and the
2015 IZA/CEPR ESSLE for helpful comments. This research was supported by the Austrian
National Science Research Network "Labor and Welfare State" of the Austrian FWF, the
National Institute on Aging (R03AG045456), and the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #1 DRC12000002-03 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of
the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the
NBER. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Philippe Ruh and Stefan Staubli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Incentives and Earnings of Disability Insurance Recipients: Evidence from a Notch
Design
Philippe Ruh and Stefan Staubli
NBER Working Paper No. 24830
July 2018
JEL No. H53,H55,J14,J21

                                          ABSTRACT

Most countries reduce Disability Insurance (DI) benefits for beneficiaries earning above a
specified threshold. Such an earnings threshold generates a discontinuous increase in tax liability
—a notch—and creates an incentive to keep earnings below the threshold. Exploiting such a
notch in Austria, we provide transparent and credible identification of the effect of financial
incentives on DI beneficiaries’ earnings. Using rich administrative data, we document large and
sharp bunching at the earnings threshold. However, the elasticity driving these responses is small.
Our estimate suggests that relaxing the earnings threshold reduces fiscal cost only if program
entry is very inelastic.


Philippe Ruh
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Schönberggasse 1
8001 Zurich
Switzerland
philippe.ruh@econ.uzh.ch

Stefan Staubli
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and CEPR
and also NBER
sstaubli@ucalgary.ca
1       Introduction

    Disability Insurance (DI) programs are among the largest social insurance programs. In OECD

countries, total expenditures on disability benefits account for approximately 2.5 percent of GDP

(OECD, 2010). In many DI programs, beneficiaries lose part or all of their benefits if earnings

exceed a substantial gainful activity (SGA) threshold. This policy induces a discontinuous increase

in the (implicit) tax liability—a notch—and creates an incentive for beneficiaries to keep their

earnings just below the SGA threshold to retain benefits. If bunching at the SGA threshold is

widespread, then policies that relax the notch could increase work effort among DI beneficiaries,

potentially improving their economic well-being and their autonomy while reducing dependency

on benefits.1 Yet, these policies could create unintended costs if they induce more individuals to

seek disability benefits. Despite numerous anecdotes on the work disincentives induced by the

SGA threshold, there is little empirical evidence on the impact of the SGA threshold, and financial

incentives in general, on the labor supply of beneficiaries.2

    This paper helps to close this gap by investigating whether earnings thresholds induce DI reci-

pients to adjust their labor supply. Our estimation strategy exploits quasi-experimental variation in

the implicit tax on work in Austria’s DI program. Specifically, DI beneficiaries in Austria can earn

up to an SGA threshold of e439 per month (around USD 500) without losing benefits. However,

if monthly earnings exceed the SGA threshold by e1, then DI benefits are reduced by up to 50

percent in that month. This notch creates a strong incentive for many DI beneficiaries to bunch

on the low-earnings side of the SGA threshold. As shown by Saez (2010), the amount of bunching

can be used to estimate an elasticity of earnings with respect to the net-of-tax rate. However,

observed bunching might be attenuated if some individuals do not respond because of optimization

frictions such as adjustment costs and inattention. The structural earnings elasticity, the elasticity

absent frictions, is likely to be larger. Kleven and Waseem (2013) show that one advantage of a
    1
      Many countries are considering or have recently implemented policy reforms designed to increase work incentives
for DI recipients. For example, the U.S. is currently testing a benefit offset policy that reduces benefits by $1 for
every $2 of earnings above the SGA threshold, rather than fully suspend benefits. Switzerland tested a conditional
cash program that offered DI recipients a cash payment if they take up or expand employment and reduce disability
benefits (see Bütler et al., 2015, for an evaluation of the program). Other recent examples include the United Kingdom
and Norway (see Kostol and Mogstad, 2014).
    2
      For example, the article “Disability Insurance: Not Working” in the magazine the Economist (issue from January
24, 2015) provides anecdotal evidence for such behavior in the U.S. Social Security Disability Insurance. Empirical
evidence is provided by Schimmel et al. (2011); Weathers and Hemmeter (2011); Campolieti and Riddell (2012);
Kostol and Mogstad (2014) (discussed in detail below).


                                                          1
notch design, as opposed to a kink design, is the ability to estimate a structural elasticity because a

notch creates a region of strictly dominated choices on the high-earnings side of the SGA threshold.

In this range, beneficiaries can increase both total net income and leisure by moving to the SGA

threshold. Thus, we can use the number of people who locate in the dominated region to recover

the structural elasticity, because in a frictionless world this region should be empty.3

    Two features make the SGA threshold in Austria advantageous for studying how earnings

respond to financial incentives. First, the increase in tax liability at the SGA threshold is salient

and large in magnitude. The average DI beneficiary loses around 10 percent of his or her total

after-tax income if earnings exceed the SGA threshold by e1. Having large variation in tax liability

allows us to identify behavioral responses even if they are small. Detecting behavioral responses

would be more difficult in other contexts because earnings rules are typically more complex and

therefore less salient.4 Second, bunching below the SGA threshold can be difficult to detect in

administrative data, because earnings are measured at the annual level while the SGA threshold is

specified at the monthly level. Hence, recipients who bunch at the SGA threshold only for some

months of the year would not appear to bunch in annual data. In contrast, our administrative data

from social security and tax registers allow us to measure earnings and DI benefits at the monthly

level. Moreover, since sample sizes are large, we can graphically demonstrate bunching, providing

transparent evidence of the behavioral response.

    A notch may also create behavioral responses along the extensive margin, i.e. the decision of

whether to participate in the labor force. We identify the causal impact of the SGA threshold

on the extensive margin decision by exploiting a policy change that relaxed earnings restrictions

significantly. Since the change in law affected only a subsect of DI beneficiaries, we can estimate

   3
      Recent studies relying on notches in the budget set examine such diverse topics as earnings adjustments to income
and payroll taxes (Kleven and Waseem 2013; Tazhitdinova 2017), automaker responses to fuel economy regulations
(Sallee and Slemrod 2012; Ito and Sallee 2016), the impact of transfer taxes on the real estate market (Kopczuk and
Munroe, 2015; Best and Kleven, 2016), the effect of tax credits on retirement savings and income (Ramnath, 2013),
the labor supply effects of social security (Brown, 2013; Manoli and Weber, 2016), and firm responses to stricter tax
enforcement (Almunia and Lopez Rodriguez, 2017). See Kleven (2016) for a review of the bunching approach and
the related literature. Our paper contributes to this literature by studying behavioral responses at a notch in the
disability benefit schedule.
    4
      For example, beneficiaries in the public DI program in the U.S. can earn above the SGA for nine months (not
necessarily consecutive) over any five-year period. After exhausting the nine-months period, beneficiaries enter the
extended period of eligibility (EPE). If earnings are above the SGA threshold during the EPE, benefits are paid for
three additional months, but are suspended in full thereafter during each month that beneficiaries earn above SGA.
If earnings are above the SGA three years after entering the EPE, benefits are terminated. Abeler and Jäger (2015)
provide evidence that individuals underreact to complex tax rules relative to less complex ones.


                                                          2
the extensive margin response using a difference-in-differences approach. Such responses could also

introduce a bias in our estimate of the earnings elasticity, because they lower the observed earnings

distribution above the SGA threshold. To investigate the impact of extensive margin responses on

the earnings elasticity, we perform Monte Carlo simulations in which the data are generated by a

utility function allowing for extensive margin responses.

    The insights from our empirical analysis can be summarized by six broad conclusions. First,

there is large and sharp bunching in DI beneficiaries’ earnings just below the SGA threshold. If

the SGA threshold did not exist, beneficiaries who bunch at the SGA threshold would earn on

average e196 more per month. This represents a 45 percent increase relative to the SGA earnings

level. Bunching is very persistent over time; almost 60 percent of those who bunch after entering

the program continue to do so five years later. Second, we observe that many beneficiaries locate

in the dominated region, implying that observed bunching is attenuated by frictions. Over time

beneficiaries leave the dominated region quickly and most move to the SGA threshold. Third,

even though the estimated earnings response is large, the implied structural earnings elasticity is

small. We estimate an earnings elasticity of 0.27. Our elasticity is higher than estimates found in

studies that examine bunching in the income tax schedule, but it is in line with estimates found

in studies that examine bunching in contexts other than the income tax.5 We also find significant

heterogeneity in the responsiveness to financial incentives across subgroups. Women, younger age

groups, and beneficiaries with low benefits are more responsive to financial incentives than men,

older age groups, and beneficiaries with high benefits. Fourth, we find that the SGA threshold

creates sizeable extensive margin responses. DI beneficiaries who face relaxed earnings restrictions

after the reform increase their labor force participation by 6.7 percentage points. In contrast, only

2.3 percent of beneficiaries participate in the labor force before the reform. Fifth, the Monte Carlo

simulations reveal that the bunching estimator performs well in our application. Even though we

study a large notch, the bias from extensive margin responses is small. Sixth, the magnitude of our

estimates implies that relaxing the earnings restrictions would increase labor force participation

and earnings among current beneficiaries. However, overall government expenditures would likely
    5
      Saez (2010), Chetty et al. (2011), le Maire and Schjening (2013), Kleven and Waseem (2013), and Bastani and
Selin (2014) find elasticities between 0-0.05 for wage earners using kinks and notches in the income tax schedule.
Gelber et al. (2013), Tazhitdinova (2017), and Le Barbanchon (2016) estimate earnings elasticities between 0.1-0.35
relying on kinks in the U.S. Social Security program, notches in the “Mini-Job” program for low-income earners in
Germany, and kinks in the U.S. unemployment insurance, respectively.


                                                        3
increase as more individuals would seek DI benefits.

   Our paper is primarily related to the literature on policy reforms that provide financial work

incentives for DI beneficiaries. Hoynes and Moffitt (1999) simulate the financial impacts of potential

reforms to the DI program and conclude that the effects on work effort are often not as strong as

expected. Consistent with this view, Schimmel et al. (2011) find that the increase in the monthly

SGA threshold from USD 500 to USD 700 in the U.S. had only a small impact on beneficiaries’

earnings. However, more recent evidence suggests that some policies can be effective at increasing

employment. Campolieti and Riddell (2012) find that the introduction of an annual earnings

exemption of CAD 3,800 in Canada increased disability beneficiaries’ propensity to work, but did

not influence program inflow or outflow. Weathers and Hemmeter (2011) find that a pilot project

in the U.S. that replaced the notch at the SGA threshold with a gradual reduction in benefits led to

a 25 percent increase in the number of beneficiaries with earnings above the SGA amount. Kostol

and Mogstad (2014) also document that financial incentives in Norway’s DI program increased

earnings and disposable income of beneficiaries.

   Our paper is also related to the literature on the work potential of DI beneficiaries, documenting

that DI receipt reduces labor force participation and earnings (e.g., Bound, 1989; Chen and van der

Klaauw, 2008; von Wachter et al., 2011; Maestas et al., 2013; French and Song, 2014). Since these

studies use rejected applicants as a control group, they provide a good estimate for the employment

potential of beneficiaries at the time of applying. There is less evidence on the employment potential

of beneficiaries who have been on the program for some time with the exception of Borghans et al.

(2014), Moore (2015), and Gelber et al. (2017). Using administrative data from the Netherlands,

Borghans et al. (2014) find that more stringent DI rules increase earnings by e0.62 per euro of lost

DI benefits among existing DI recipients. Moore (2015) documents a strong increase in earnings

among individuals in the U.S. who lost DI eligibility after the removal of drug and alcohol addictions

as qualifying conditions. Approximately 22 percent of terminated beneficiaries started working at

levels above the SGA threshold. Gelber et al. (2017) find that an income effect accounts for most

DI-induced reductions in earnings among beneficiaries.

   This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes Austria’s DI program. Section 3 outlines

the bunching methodology and summarizes the data. Section 4 shows descriptive evidence for

bunching at the SGA threshold and presents estimates for the earnings elasticity. Section 5 presents

                                                   4
estimates for the extensive margin response. Section 6 describes our Monte-Carlo exercise to assess

the performance of the bunching approach. Section 7 calculates the fiscal effects of hypothetical

policy reforms. Section 8 concludes.



2     Institutional Background

2.1    The Austrian DI Program

    The DI program is one of the largest transfer programs in Austria and part of the larger social

security system, financed by a payroll tax on earned income. The program provides partial earnings

replacement to workers who are unable to engage in substantial gainful activity due to a medically

determinable health impairment that has lasted for at least six months. From 1985 to 2012, the

percentage of the working age population receiving DI benefits in Austria has been stable between

4.3 and 5.3 percent, as shown in Figure 1. In contrast, over the same period, the rate of DI receipt

in the U.S. increased from 2.2 to 5.3 percent.6

                                                       Figure 1


    To apply for DI benefits, individuals must submit an application to the local DI office. Employ-

ees at the DI office first check the non-medical eligibility criteria for DI benefits. Only individuals

who have contributed to the program for at least 5 years in the past 10 years and are not yet

eligible for retirement benefits can apply for DI benefits. DI eligibility in Austria is not conditi-

oned on earnings; individuals can continue to work while they apply for and receive benefits. If

an applicant meets the nonmedical criteria, a team of disability examiners and physicians assesses

the applicant’s overall ability to work and the medical severity of the disability. A disability award

is made to individuals whose earnings capacity, due to a physical or mental health impairment,

has been reduced by more than 50 percent relative to that of a healthy person with comparable

education.7


    6
      Other countries have experienced similar or even more striking increases in disability recipiency rates as the
U.S., from 2 percent to around 6 percent in Australia and Ireland, from 3 to 6 percent in the U.K., and from 6 to 10
percent in Norway.
    7
      Medical criteria for disability classification are relaxed starting at age 57. See Staubli (2011) for the impact of
this relaxation on labor force participation of older workers.


                                                           5
   In 2012, the DI exit rate was 4.2 percent, which is lower than in many other countries.8 There

are three main ways to exit the program. First, DI claimants may no longer meet the medical or

non-medical eligibility criteria for disability benefits. For example, their health status may improve

such that the DI recipient is no longer disabled. In 2012, medical improvements and return to work

accounted for 36.7 percent of program exits. Second, DI claimants may reach the full retirement

age, at which point they can ask to be transferred to the old-age pension program. However, few

beneficiaries do so because in most cases the old-age pension would be lower than the disability

pension. In 2012, 12.8 percent of those who left the DI program were shifted to the old-age pension

program. Third, the DI recipient may die. Death accounted for 50.5 percent of program exits in

2012.

   DI benefits replace about 60 percent of pre-disability earnings up to a maximum of about e2,800

per month (around USD 3,190). Benefits are subject to income tax and mandatory health insurance

contributions. The level of benefits depends on an assessment basis and a pension coefficient. The

assessment basis corresponds to the average earnings over the best 20 years after applying a cap

to earnings in each year. The pension coefficient is the percentage of the assessment basis that is

received in the pension. The pension coefficient increases with the number of contribution years up

to a maximum of 80 percent (roughly 45 contribution years). Applicants under age 60 qualify for a

special increment if their pension coefficient is below 60 percent (around 25 percent of beneficiaries

get a special increment).


2.2      The Substantial Gainful Activity Threshold

   DI beneficiaries in Austria can earn each month up to a Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA)

threshold without losing any benefits. That is, ∆s = 0 if z ≤ z ∗ where s is gross monthly DI

benefits, z is gross monthly labor earnings, and z ∗ is the monthly SGA threshold. However, DI

recipients may lose a share of benefits in each month in which z > z ∗ , depending on the gross




   8
       For example, the exit rate in the U.S. Social Security Disability Insurance is roughly double (Moore, 2015).


                                                           6
monthly income (s + z). The loss in benefits if z > z ∗ is calculated as follows:
          
          
          
          
          
          0                                                                            if s + z ≤ K1
          
          
          
          
          min(0.3(s + z − K1 ), z, 0.5s)
                                                                                       if K1 < s + z ≤ K2
  4s =                                                                                                            (1)
          
          
          
          
          min(0.3(K2 − K1 ) + 0.4(s + z − K2 ), z, 0.5s)                 if K2 < s + z ≤ K3
          
          
          
          
          min(0.3(K2 − K1 ) + 0.4(K3 − K2 ) + 0.5(s + z − K3 ), z, 0.5s) if s + z > K3 .
          


    The values for z ∗ ,K1 , K2 , and K3 are adjusted each year to account for inflation. In 2012, the

last year of our data, the monthly SGA threshold in Austria was e439 (around USD 500), which

was about half of the SGA threshold for non-blind DI recipients in the U.S, the corresponding

values for K1 , K2 , and K3 were e1,258, e1,887, and e2,515, respectively, and the average monthly

DI benefits were e1,053. Equation 1 highlights several important points: First, individuals do not

lose benefits even if z > z ∗ as long as s + z ≤ K1 . Second, the marginal loss in benefits from earning

an additional euro is increasing in income and equal to e0 if s + z ≤ K1 , e0.3 if K1 < s + z ≤ K2 ,

e0.4 if K2 < s + z ≤ K3 , and e0.5 if s + z > K3 . Third, the loss in benefits is capped by z and

0.5s, whichever is lower. Thus, DI beneficiaries always keep at least half of their benefits no matter

how much they earn.9

    It is important to note that the SGA threshold coincides with the earnings threshold above which

workers are automatically insured by the public pension system. This implies that DI beneficiaries

are required to pay 18 percent social security tax on all earnings as soon as their earnings exceed

the SGA threshold. The rules are different for employers and depend on the number of employees

with earnings below the SGA threshold. Employers with one employee who earns less than the

SGA threshold pay 21 percent social security tax as soon as the employee’s earnings cross the SGA

threshold. Employers with several employees who earn less than the SGA threshold pay social

security taxes if the total earnings of those employees are 1.5 times larger than the SGA threshold.

    Together, these rules change the implicit tax on earnings at the SGA threshold in two ways.

First, there is a discrete jump in tax liability—a notch—because beneficiaries lose a share of both
    9
      The hassle costs associated with changing earnings is low. The only requirement is that DI beneficiaries notify
the social security agency within seven days of any change in earnings. Firms also report earnings above the SGA
threshold directly because these earnings are subject to social security taxes. The social security administration
automatically deducts disability benefits if earnings exceed the SGA threshold and reinstates the original benefits if
earnings drop below the SGA threshold.


                                                          7
benefits and earnings on the first euro of earnings above the SGA threshold. The average beneficiary

loses about e125, or 10 percent of the monthly after-tax income, of which 60 percent is due to the

loss in benefits and 40 percent is due to social security contributions. Second, there is a discrete

change in the implicit marginal tax—a kink—because for each euro of earnings above the SGA

threshold beneficiaries have to pay 18 cents in payroll taxes and they lose up to 50 cents in benefits,

depending on whether the gross income exceeds K1 , K2 or K3 . If all DI beneficiaries in our data

earned z ∗ , then 36 percent would have gross income (z ∗ +s) between K1 and K2 , 10 percent between

K2 and K3 , and 3 percent above K3 . Thus, for 49 percent of DI beneficiaries, gross income at the

SGA threshold exceeds K1 and at least 30 cents of benefits are deduced for each euro of earnings

above the SGA threshold.10

    The notch and the kink create a strong incentive for DI recipients to bunch just below the SGA

threshold to avoid the high implicit tax on work and retain full DI benefits. In the next section,

we will describe how we combine the amount of bunching with the change in the implicit tax to

estimate an elasticity of earnings with respect to the implicit net-of-tax rate.



3     Methodology and Data

3.1    Theoretical Framework

    Saez (2010) has shown that the amount of bunching at kinks of the tax schedule can be used to

estimate an elasticity of taxable income with respect to the net-of-tax rate. However, the amount of

bunching might be attenuated if some individuals do not respond because of optimization frictions

such as adjustment costs and inattention.11 Kleven and Waseem (2013) have extended the bunching

approach to the context of notches, created by discontinuities in tax liability. An advantage of

notches is the possibility to identify the structural elasticity, the elasticity absent frictions, because

they generate an additional empirical moment besides bunching at the notch, specifically a hole in

the earnings distribution just above the notch. This moment can be used to measure the attenuation

bias from frictions.
   10
      Figure A.2 in Online Appendix A shows the distribution of gross income around the kink points K1 , K2 and K3
for our sample. There is no evidence of bunching at any of the kinks.
   11
      Gelber et al. (2013) show that it is possible to estimate a structural earnings response from kinks by exploiting
policy-changes in the magnitude or the location of the kinks. More specically, they estimate adjustment costs using
the speed by which earnings adjust to policy changes.


                                                          8
   Our theoretical model follows Kleven and Waseem (2013) but focuses on a notch in disability

insurance as opposed to a notch in the income tax schedule. Specifically, we assume that individuals

maximize the following quasi-linear utility function


                                                       n       z 1+1/e
                                    u(c, z) = c −           ·                                             (2)
                                                    1 + 1/e     n

subject to the budget constraint c = s + z − T (s, z). T (s, z) is the tax liability which depends on

disability benefits s and before-tax earnings z, n is an ability parameter, and e is the elasticity of

earnings with respect to the marginal net-of-tax rate 1−t. The quasi-linearity assumption simplifies

the presentation, but rules out income effects of tax changes on earnings. As a robustness test,

we also implement an estimation approach following Tazhitdinova (2017) that does not depend on

the structure of the underlying utility. A key assumption is that the distribution of ability in the

population is smooth. This assumption implies that, given a linear tax system T (s, z) = t · (s + z),

the smooth ability distribution translates into a smooth earnings distribution.

   Now suppose that a notch and a kink are introduced at the earnings threshold z ∗ , representing

the SGA threshold. The tax schedule with the notch and the kink can be written as T (s, z) =

t · (s + z) + [∆T + ∆t · (z − z ∗ )] · 1(z > z ∗ ) where ∆T is the size of the notch, ∆t is the size of the

kink, and 1(z > z ∗ ) is an indicator for earning above the SGA threshold.12 Panel (a) of Figure 2

shows that the notch shifts the budget constraint downward above z ∗ while the kink rotates the

budget constraint. The notch creates a region of strictly dominated choices between z ∗ and z D .

In this region, it is possible to increase consumption and leisure by moving to the SGA threshold

z ∗ . DI beneficiaries who earned in the interval (z ∗ , z ∗ + ∆z ∗ ) before the introduction of the SGA

threshold will move to z ∗ . This implies that the earnings distribution with the SGA threshold

exhibits bunching at z ∗ , as shown in Panel (b) of Figure 2. Individual H is the marginal bunching

individual: this individual chooses earnings z ∗ + ∆z ∗ before the SGA threshold is introduced and

is exactly indifferent between z ∗ and the interior point z I with the SGA threshold. The earnings

distribution with the SGA threshold should feature a hole because no individual is willing to locate

between z ∗ and z I . There is also a leftward shift in the earnings distribution above z ∗ , as the kink

induces all DI recipients above z ∗ to earn less.
  12
     The notch ∆T measures the loss in income when earnings exceed the SGA threshold by e1 and consists of two
parts: the loss in benefits ∆s(z ∗ + 1) and the social security contributions 0.18 · (z ∗ + 1).


                                                      9
                                                     Figure 2

   The key idea of the empirical approach is that the elasticity e can be inferred from ∆z ∗ , the

earnings response of the marginal bunching individual. More specifically, we exploit the fact that

the marginal bunching individual is indifferent between the SGA threshold z ∗ and the interior point

z I , as shown in Figure 2. Hence, we can set u(z I ) = u(z ∗ ) using equation (2) and rearrange terms

to obtain an expression which defines the elasticity e as an implicit function of the tax parameters,

the SGA threshold z ∗ , and the earnings response ∆z ∗ (see Online Appendix C for derivation):



                                                                          1+1/e
                                   ∆T /z ∗ − ∆t
                                                         
                     1                                 1         1
                                1+                −
                1 + ∆z ∗ /z ∗         1−t           1 + 1/e 1 + ∆z ∗ /z ∗
                                                                 ∆t 1+e
                                                                     
                                                        1
                                                    −       1−              = 0.                       (3)
                                                      1+e       1−t

Equation (3) cannot be solved explicitly for e, but it can be solved numerically after we have

estimated ∆z ∗ ; the values of the tax parameters and the SGA threshold are observed. In the next

section, we describe how we determine the earnings response ∆z ∗ .


3.2   Empirical Implementation

   The approach to estimate the earnings response ∆z ∗ relies on the identification of the counter-

factual earnings density—the distribution of earnings under a linear tax system without any notch

or kink. Following Kleven and Waseem (2013), we begin by grouping DI recipients into earnings

bins of e8 based on their monthly earnings. We proceed by estimating a flexible polynomial to the

observed earnings distribution, excluding observations in a range [z L , z U ] below and above z ∗ :

                                     p                  z U
                                     X                  X
                                                 i
                              Cj =         βi (zj ) +           γk 1(zj = k) + εj ,                    (4)
                                     i=0                k=z L

where Cj is the number of individuals in bin j, zj is the earnings level in bin j, and p is the order

of the polynomial. The excluded range [z L , z U ] corresponds to the area that is affected by the

SGA threshold either because of bunching or missing mass. Because we include indicator variables

for each bin in the excluded range, the polynomial is estimated without considering data from the

excluded range. The counterfactual distribution is given by the predicted values from equation

                                                        10
                                                                        Pp                 i.
(4) omitting the dummies in the excluded range: Ĉj =                      i=0 β̂j (zj )        Bunching is estimated as

the difference between the observed and counterfactual earnings distribution in the range [z L , z ∗ ]:
      Pz ∗
B̂ =     k=z L (Ck − Ĉk ). Missing mass is estimated as the difference between the observed and
                                                                    PU
counterfactual earnings distribution in the range (z ∗ , z U ]: M̂ = zk>z ∗ (Ĉk − Ck ).

    Since bunching below the SGA threshold is very sharp, we can determine the lower bound of

the excluded range z L by visual inspection. A similar approach is not feasible for the upper bound

z U because missing mass is fuzzier and cannot be easily determined visually. Instead, we exploit

the fact that the missing mass above the SGA threshold must be equal to the bunching mass below

the SGA threshold. More specifically, we start by setting z U equal to the first bin on the right of z ∗

and estimate the counterfactual earnings density using equation (4). The resulting bunching mass

in this case will exceed the missing mass. We then increase the upper bound in small increments

and re-estimate equation (4) until the estimated missing mass is equal to the estimated bunching

mass. Importantly, the resulting upper bound z U is the point of convergence between the observed

and the counterfactual earnings distribution and directly represents our estimate for the long-run

earnings response ∆z ∗ . Plugging this estimate into equation (3) allows us to uncover the structural

elasticity e.

    This method to pin down ∆z ∗ , coined the “convergence method” by Kleven and Waseem (2013),

assumes that the observed mass in the segment (z ∗ , z ∗ + ∆z ∗ ) is driven by frictions and that

the excess mass at the SGA threshold is coming from the area between the observed and the

counterfactual distribution. With heterogeneity in elasticities, it is possible that some of the mass

between z ∗ and z ∗ + ∆z ∗ is explained by low elasticities and not frictions, in which case the

convergence point overestimates the true ∆z ∗ .13 Moreover, in a dynamic setting the loss in current

income from residing in the bunching segment may be compensated by higher future earnings

through career effects. In the empirical application, we will shed light on the size of the bias

created by low elasticities and career effects by examining the dynamics of earnings adjustment.

   13
      On the other hand, Kleven and Waseem (2013) argue that the “bunching-hole method” provides a lower bound
estimate of the earnings response ∆z ∗ . This method estimates ∆z ∗ by rescaling the amount of bunching B̂ with the
         1
factor (1−f )
              to account for the fact that only a fraction (1 − f ) of individuals can bunch due to optimization frictions.
The fraction 1 − f can be estimated by the amount of missing mass in the dominated region (z ∗ , z ∗ + z D ) relative
to the counterfactual. The idea is that without optimization frictions, no individual should choose an earnings level
in the dominated region and any mass in this region must therefore be the result of frictions. Our main estimates
are based on the convergence method, but as a robustness check we also present estimates using the bunching-hole
method.


                                                            11
More specifically, we expect that over time individuals subject to optimization frictions or career

effects will move away from the bunching segment while those with low elasticities will stay.

    Since we observe the same individual many times, standard errors may be clustered at the

individual level. We calculate standard errors using a pairs-cluster bootstrap that accounts for

clustering of errors at the individual level (Cameron and Miller, 2015). We first generate many

earnings distributions by random resampling with replacement over individuals, keeping all observa-

tions of each individual that we resample. We then re-estimate the parameters for each new sample.

We define the standard error for each parameter as the standard deviation of the distribution of

estimates.


3.3    Data and Sample Selection

    We combine register data from two different sources. First, the Austrian Social Security Data-

base (ASSD) contains very detailed longitudinal information for the universe of workers in Austria

between 1972 and 2012. At the individual level, the data include gender, nationality, month, and

year of birth, blue-collar or white-collar status, and labor market history. Labor market histories

are summarized in spells. Specifically, the start and end dates of all employment, unemployment,

disability, sick leave, and retirement spells are recorded. The data contain several firm-specific

variables: geographical location, industry affiliation, and firm identifiers that allow us to link both

individuals and firms. Second, we use individual income tax reports that firms and the social secu-

rity administration are required to submit to the tax office at the end of each year. These reports

contain detailed information on benefits from the various social insurance programs, earnings, social

security contributions, and income tax withholdings for the tax office. We have access to the tax

records for the years 1994 to 2012 and they can be linked with the ASSD via an identifier variable.

    Our sample includes all DI spells that were initiated between 2001 and 2012 by individuals

younger than age 57 at the time of entry into the program. We exclude spells that started prior

to 2001 because earnings restrictions were not uniformly regulated for these spells. We focus on

DI recipients who are younger than age 57 because individuals who start claiming benefits after

age 57 face stricter earnings restrictions. These individuals lose all benefits if earnings exceed the

SGA threshold and they are not allowed to work in the same occupation as before the onset of the

disability.

                                                  12
    We construct monthly earnings by dividing the annual earnings associated with an employ-

ment spell by its duration (in months). For individuals with multiple employment spells, monthly

earnings are the total earnings over all employment spells in a month. This approach implicitly

assumes that an individual’s monthly earnings in a job are constant within a year, which is not

necessarily the case. Monthly earnings will be measured with error for spells in which earnings

fluctuate across months.14 Similarly, we calculate an individual’s full monthly DI benefits by divi-

ding annual DI benefits in the absence of any work by the duration of the DI spell within a year.

Since DI benefits are only adjusted for inflation from one year to the next, there should be no

measurement error in monthly DI benefits. Having data at the monthly level is important given

that the SGA limit applies monthly.15 We observe individuals up to eight years before they enter

the DI program and while they are on the DI program.

    Table 1 provides summary statistics for our analysis samples. Column 1 shows summary sta-

tistics for all DI recipients in our sample, column 2 shows summary statistics for DI recipients who

work at least once during the observation period, and column 3 shows summary statistics for the

subset of DI recipients who are working just below the SGA threshold. DI recipients are on average

48.2 years old at program entry and 59 percent suffer from a musculoskeletal disease or a mental

disorder, both typically difficult to verify. A comparison of columns 1 and 2 shows that only about

15 percent of DI beneficiaries are working while receiving benefits. Compared to all DI recipients,

working DI recipients are younger, have more labor market experience, have lower DI benefits, had

a lower wage in their last job, and suffer less from difficult-to-verify disorders. On average, they

earn about 50 percent less than what they earned before entering the DI program. This drop is

largely explained by the fact that many DI beneficiaries are earning just below the SGA threshold:

column 3 illustrates that over 25 percent of working DI beneficiaries are located just below the SGA

threshold. We do not observe hours of work and whether individuals work part-time or full-time,

but a recent study by Riesenfelder et al. (2011) documents that almost all individuals with earnings

below the SGA threshold work part-time with an average work load of 7.9 hours per week. Thus,
  14
      If measurement error is present, we would expect bunching at the notch to be attenuated, in which case our
elasticity estimate represents a lower bound.
   15
      It would be harder to detect bunching with annual earnings data because beneficiaries who earn just below the
SGA threshold for several months (but not the whole year) would not appear to bunch in annual data. Figure A.1
in Online Appendix A shows the distribution of annual earnings around the annual SGA threshold. While there is
clear evidence for bunching at the annual SGA threshold, the amount of bunching is an order of magnitude lower
than in the monthly data (see Figure 3).


                                                        13
individuals who bunch earn e14 per hour (in 2012 euros), assuming they work the same number

of hours as the average.


                                                     Table 1



4        Empirical Analysis of Earnings Response

4.1      Descriptive Evidence of Behavioral Responses

Evidence for Bunching in Pooled Data.                We start our analysis by providing graphical evidence

for bunching at the SGA threshold. We pool all years of data and calculate the difference between

earnings and the SGA threshold in each year, because the SGA threshold increases year by year

to account for inflation and wage growth. We then group individuals into e8 bins and quantify

excess mass and missing mass by estimating a sixth-degree polynomial to the observed earnings

distribution using equation (4).16 Figure 3 shows the normalized earnings distributions around

the SGA threshold as well as our estimate of the counterfactual earnings density (black line). The

vertical solid line denotes the SGA threshold and the vertical short-dashed lines denote the excluded

range [z L , z U ].

     Several things can be observed from the figure. First, there is large and sharp bunching at

the SGA threshold. Second, the earnings distribution exhibits significant missing mass, as the

density falls discretely above the SGA threshold. However, there are no visible holes because

the distribution of earnings is relatively flat above the SGA threshold, suggesting that frictions

are an important factor that prevents DI beneficiaries from adjusting their earnings. Third, the

SGA threshold significantly reduces earnings of DI beneficiaries. The point of convergence z U

where missing mass equals bunching mass is e464, suggesting that without the SGA threshold the

marginal bunching DI recipient would earn e464 more.

                                                    Figure 3


     The identification assumption underlying our estimates for excess bunching and missing mass is

that the earnings distribution would be smooth if there were no jump in the tax liability at the SGA
    16
     Figure A.5 in Online Appendix A plots the counterfactual earnings distribution for lower and higher polynomial
degrees, showing that the results are not very sensitive to the choice of the degree of polynomial.


                                                        14
threshold. We can shed light on this assumption by exploiting the movement of the SGA threshold

across years. Figure A.3 in Online Appendix A displays the distribution of earnings around the

SGA threshold for the years 2003, 2006, 2009, and 2012. The figures show that the excess mass

follows the movement of the SGA threshold closely.


Persistency of Bunching and Dominated Behavior.                 Taking advantage of the longitudinal

aspect of our data, we next investigate the dynamics of bunching and dominated behavior over time.

More specifically, we group beneficiaries in each quarter into one of four segments as a function of

their earnings z: (i) bunching segment (z L ≤ z ≤ z ∗ ), (ii) dominated segment (z ∗ < z ≤ z U ), (iii)

below segment (0 < z < z L ), and (iv) above segment (z U < z). Figure 4 illustrates the fraction of

beneficiaries in each segment over time for beneficiaries who in the first quarter after DI entry are

in the bunching segment (Panel a) or in the dominated segment (Panel b).

   Panel (a) shows that bunching is highly persistent over time. Around 60 percent of DI benefici-

aries who are in the bunching segment in the first quarter after DI entry are still bunching five years

later. On the other hand, the fraction of beneficiaries in the dominated and above segments is al-

ways very low (about 10 percent). Some beneficiaries move to the dominated segment, presumably

because it is difficult to control earnings perfectly. Over time there is an increase in the fraction of

beneficiaries in the below segment, perhaps reflecting that some beneficiaries reduce their earnings

as results of deteriorating health.

   Panel (b) shows that there is a drastic and fast decline in the fraction of beneficiaries in the

dominated segment. Five quarters after DI entry, only about 30 percent of beneficiaries are still

located in the dominated segment and this fraction declines further to about 20 percent. The bene-

ficiaries who remain in the dominated segment in the long run are likely those with a low earnings

elasticity. About 30 percent of beneficiaries in the dominated segment move to the bunching seg-

ment, suggesting that adjustment frictions prevent many beneficiaries from bunching in the short

run. About 25 percent of beneficiaries move to the above segment, indicating the importance of

career effects. As in Panel (a), there is an increase in the fraction of beneficiaries in the below

segment, likely as results of deteriorating work capacity over time.

                                               Figure 4



                                                  15
4.2     Earnings Elasticity Estimates from Bunching

Main Results.         In this section, we present estimates of earnings elasticities by combining the

nonparametric evidence on bunching presented above with the empirical framework in Section 3.

Table 2 displays the amount of bunching (column 2), the earnings response of the marginal buncher

using the point of convergence z U (column 3), the average earnings response of individuals who

bunch (column 4), and the structural elasticity based on equation (3) using a quasi-linear utility

function (column 5). The amount of bunching is measured relative to the average counterfactual

density between z L and z ∗ .

    Panel A shows that the earnings response is large and statistically significant. The marginal

bunching DI recipient would increase monthly earnings by e464 or 112 percent of the SGA threshold

in the absence of the notch. The average earnings response of recipients who bunch is roughly half

as large. Even though the estimated earnings response is sizeable, the implied earnings elasticity

is small at 0.27. Panel B shows that the earnings elasticity is stable over time and varies between

0.15-0.27 in the first seven years after DI entry.17 Studies exploiting kinks and notches in the

income tax schedule find an even smaller elasticity (5 to 10 times) among wage earners (Saez 2010;

Chetty et al. 2011; le Maire and Schjening 2013; Kleven and Waseem 2013; Bastani and Selin 2014).

Yet, papers using bunching in other contexts find elasticities that are in the range of our estimate.

Gelber et al. (2013), Tazhitdinova (2017), and Le Barbanchon (2016) estimate earnings elasticities

between 0.1-0.35 exploiting kinks or notches in the U.S. Social Security program, the Mini-Job

program for low-income earners in Germany, and the U.S. unemployment insurance, respectively.

    It is important to keep in mind that our approach relies on local moments around the SGA

threshold and therefore provides a good estimate of the work capacity of beneficiaries located

around the SGA threshold. The earnings elasticity might differ in countries with a different SGA

threshold than in Austria if the elasticity is heterogeneous across subgroups of beneficiaries, and

if characteristics of beneficiaries around the SGA threshold vary with its level. Since Austria’s

earnings threshold is quite low, it is likely that beneficiaries around the SGA threshold have limited



   17
     Even though bunching is increasing over time, the elasticity remains fairly stable because the additional bunching
mass is coming primarily from the dominated region, as shown in Panel (b) of Figure 4. This implies that there
is more missing mass in the dominated region and therefore the point of convergence z U is unchanged despite the
increase in bunching.


                                                          16
work capacity, in which case our earnings elasticity represents a lower bound.18

                                                       Table 2


Speed of Earnings Adjustment. The jump in implicit tax liability at the SGA threshold is

much larger for individuals on the DI program than those not on the program. Individuals on DI

lose a portion of their benefits and have to pay social security contributions while those not on DI

only have to pay social security contributions. Therefore, we would expect to see less bunching

before individuals enter the program and more after. The availability of data before individuals

enter the DI program allows us to examine how fast bunching adjusts to changes in tax liability at

the SGA threshold.19

    Figure 5 plots estimates of bunching b (Panel a) and the earnings elasticity e (Panel b) for each

year before and after DI entry for beneficiaries who work at least once in the first four years on the

program. The earnings distribution around the SGA threshold in each year is shown in Figure A.7

in Online Appendix A. Four years before program entry, bunching b is 1.9 and steadily increases

to 7 in the year of program entry. Bunching b jumps significantly in the first year on the program

to 17.1 and continues to increase to 19.1 four years after program entry.20 Panel (b) shows that

the earnings elasticity e is relatively stable across years and varies between 0.1-0.33.21

                                                       Figure 5


Heterogeneity in Responses. We next examine heterogeneity in earnings elasticities by divi-

ding the population into several subgroups. Table 3 presents estimates of the labor supply responses

for different subgroups of the population. There is significant heterogeneity in the responsiveness

to the SGA threshold among certain groups. Panel A illustrates that elasticities for DI benefi-

ciaries below age 50 are larger than for DI beneficiaries above age 50. This finding is consistent
   18
      Consistent with this view, Table 1 shows that beneficiaries around the notch had lower earnings in their last job
compared to the full population of beneficiaries.
   19
      A similar analysis is not possible for beneficiaries who exit the DI program due to medical recovery because
there are too few exits to be able to estimate a counterfactual earnings density.
   20
      The results are similar when we focus on the years before and after the DI application year instead of the DI entry
year (see Figure A.8 in Online Appendix A), suggesting that the increase in bunching before DI entry is not driven
by earnings adjustments in anticipation of DI receipt, but may reflect reductions in earnings due to deteriorating
health.
   21
      The elasticity estimates tend to be less precise before relative to after DI entry. The reason is that the earnings
distributions before DI entry show little missing mass above the SGA threshold, which increases the standard deviation
of the distribution of z U estimates in the boostrap procedure.


                                                           17
with existing evidence that younger DI beneficiaries exhibit the highest responsiveness to financial

work incentives (Kostol and Mogstad, 2014). Panel B shows that female DI recipients are more

responsive to financial incentives than their male counterparts. There are also differences across

impairment types, as illustrated in Panel C: DI recipients with mental and physical disorders are

less responsive compared to DI recipients with other impairments. Panel D shows that white-collar

workers are more responsive than blue-collar workers. A potential explanation is that white-collar

workers are better educated and hence are more aware of program rules and incentives.22 We next

split the sample depending on whether the number of days spent on sick leave prior to DI entry

was greater than the median. As Panel E shows, DI recipients with sick leave below the median are

more responsive than those with sick leave above the median. Panel F shows that DI recipients who

did not switch firms within six months before and after DI entry have greater abilities to respond

to the SGA threshold than those who did switch firms.23 As illustrated in Panel G, the earnings

elasticity is slightly higher in the primary/secondary sector and somewhat lower in the tertiary and

public sectors. Finally, we divide the sample in three terciles according to the size of the notch

relative to gross DI benefits. Panel H shows that the earnings elasticity is highest in the bottom

tercile and decreases for higher terciles.


                                                   Table 3


Firm Bunching. It is possible that observed behavioral responses are driven by “firm bunching”

(Chetty et al., 2011) rather than genuine responses of DI beneficiaries. More specifically, firms

may help beneficiaries to bunch by offering jobs at the SGA threshold, in which case our elasticity

estimates represent an upper bound on the individual response. The results in Table 3 suggest that

observed bunching could be partially driven by firm incentives, because some groups of recipients

that have less incentive to bunch still exhibit significant bunching. For example, women lose on

average 8.8 percent of after-tax income at the SGA threshold while men lose 11.1 percent, yet the

amount of bunching is similar for both groups.

    We perform two analyses to shed light on the role of firms. First, we follow Tazhitdinova

  22
      Unfortunately, we are not able to examine heterogeneity by education directly because we cannot observe
individuals’ education in our data.
   23
      We focus on a window of six months before and after DI entry because many DI recipients change firms upon
entry into the DI program, as documented in Figure A.4 in Online Appendix A.


                                                      18
(2017) and focus on DI recipients with multiple jobs where at least one of the jobs pays more than

the SGA threshold. Since the SGA threshold applies to cumulative earnings, DI recipients with

earnings above the SGA threshold in one job have no incentive to bunch in the other jobs. Thus,

any bunching in the secondary job would be direct evidence of firm responses to the SGA threshold.

Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows that earnings in the secondary job are often below the SGA threshold,

as there is a drop in the earnings distribution above the SGA threshold, but there is very little

bunching at the SGA threshold.24 Second, there is a special rule for firms that employ two or more

workers with earnings below the SGA threshold. For the workers below the SGA threshold, the

firm pays social security taxes if these workers’ total earnings exceed 1.5 times the SGA threshold.

If bunching is driven by the firm, we would expect to see bunching of total earnings of these workers

at 1.5 times the SGA threshold. Panel (b) of Figure 6 shows no evidence of bunching at this new

SGA threshold (solid line), again suggesting that firm bunching is small. There is a peak in the

sum of earnings at twice the SGA level because most of the firms in our sample have exactly two

workers with earnings below the SGA threshold. In sum, while we cannot completely rule out firm

responses to the SGA threshold, such responses do not seem to be strong in our context.

                                                   Figure 6


Robustness Checks.           Table 4 presents several robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of

our estimates. The first row shows the baseline results for the full sample for comparison. Panel

B shows that excluding DI recipients who are self-employed results in a slightly larger elasticity,

suggesting that our results are not driven by the self-employed.25 We next examine the robustness

of our results with respect to the shape of the counterfactual by varying the degree of the polynomial

in equation (4). As Panel C shows, elasticity estimates are somewhat smaller (larger) when using

a 5th (7th) order polynomial.

    Panel D shows results for alternative approaches to estimate the counterfactual earnings density.

The point of convergence z U assumes that in the long-run all beneficiaries in the dominated range

move to the SGA threshold. This assumption may lead to an upward-biased estimate of z U because,

as Figure 4 shows, not all beneficiaries in the dominated range move to the SGA threshold over
  24
      In contrast, Tazhitdinova (2017) finds substantial bunching in the secondary job at notches in the Mini-Job
program for low-income earners in Germany.
   25
      Since only 10 percent of DI recipients are self-employed, we cannot examine this group separately.


                                                       19
time either due to low elasticities or career effects. Row 1 in Panel D shows estimates when we

shift beneficiaries in the dominated range to different parts of the earnings distribution according

to their location five years after entering the DI program.26 This approach yields a slightly lower

earnings response by the marginal buncher of e408 and a slightly lower elasticity of 0.21. Another

concern is that the counterfactual density based on equation (4) ignores the potential left shift

in the observed distribution above the SGA threshold due to the kink. Following Chetty et al.

(2011), we account for such intensive margin responses by shifting the bin counts to the right of

z U upward until the area under the counterfactual and the empirical distribution is identical. Row

2 of panel D shows that incorporating such effects has a small impact on the earnings response

and elasticity. Row 3 of panel D shows that the bunching-hole method (see footnote 13) generates

a slightly smaller earnings elasticity, consistent with Kleven and Waseem (2013) who argue that

this method provides a lower-bound.27 Finally, we estimate a model that does not depend on the

functional form of the underlying utility following Tazhitdinova (2017) and find a slightly smaller

elasticity of 0.23 (row 4 of Panel D).28

    Individuals who are not on the DI program also experience a discontinuous change in tax liability

at the SGA threshold because they have to start paying social security taxes on all earnings. Panel

E of Table 4 shows that individuals not on the DI program show smaller bunching (b=4.7) and a

larger earnings elasticity (e=0.62). As Figure A.6 in Online Appendix A illustrates, the reason is

that frictions are large for this group of workers, as there is very little missing mass just above the

SGA threshold. Since the change in tax liability at the SGA threshold is smaller for this group,

the utility gain from moving to the threshold is lower as well, making it less attractive to adjust

earnings if there are adjustment costs.
   26
      Specifically, following Panel (b) of 4 we shift 20 percent of beneficiaries in the dominated range to the segment
below z L by increasing each bin proportional to the bin height. Using a similar approach, we shift 30 percent of
beneficiaries in the dominated range to the bunching segment and 27 percent to the segment above z U . We then
re-estimate a new counterfactual earnings distribution, bunching response, and earnings elasticity.
   27
      The bunching-hole method estimates the earnings response using ∆z ∗ = (1−fB        )h0 (z)
                                                                                                 , where h0 (z) is the coun-
                                                                                     ∗  D
terfactual density and f is the fraction of individuals in the dominated range (z , z ) relative to the counterfactual.
One difficulty is the determination of the dominated range because z D varies across DI beneficiaries depending on
their benefits. However, there is a minimum dominated range of e90 for all beneficiaries because they have to pay
18 percent social security tax on all earnings if earnings exceed the SGA threshold. We therefore set z D = 90.
   28
      Specifically, Tazhitdinova (2017) develops a method to estimate an earnings elasticity for a combined kink-notch
which is also the case in our setting. The idea is to estimate a counterfactual density that accounts for both missing
mass due to the the notch and the left shift above the threshold due to the kink. Assuming that the same elasticity
is driving responses to the notch and the kink, it is possible to split the estimated amount of bunching into buching
due to the notch and bunching due to the kink. One can then relate each bunching response to the corresponding
change in tax parameters to get an estimate for the elasticity.


                                                            20
                                                Table 4



5    Empirical Analysis of Labor Force Participation Response

    Since notches introduce a discrete jump in tax liability, they may induce individuals above the

threshold to stop working altogether. In this section, we directly estimate the magnitude of the

extensive margin response by exploiting a policy change that relaxed the earnings restrictions at

the SGA threshold. Prior to July 1993, in the first six months after program entry, DI benefits

would be suspended for a month if earnings in that month exceeded the SGA threshold. In July

1993, the Austrian government abolished the earnings restrictions in the first six months for all

DI recipients who entered the program before age 55. The earnings restrictions did not change for

recipients who entered the program after age 55, because eligibility criteria for DI benefits were

relaxed at age 55 and the DI program was primarily used as a gateway for early retirement above

this age threshold (see Staubli, 2011).

    To assess the impact of the change in the earnings restrictions graphically, Figure 8 plots the

fraction of DI recipients who report positive earnings in a month by their age at DI entry over the

period July 1991 to June 1995. For each recipient, we keep observations from the first six months

on the DI program, because the policy reform changed earnings rules only during this period.

Before July 1993, trends in labor force participation are similar among beneficiaries who entered

the DI program before and after age 55. In July 1993, labor force participation jumps upward for

recipients who entered the DI program before age 55 and then stays fairly constant at the new

level. In contrast, labor force participation trends smoothly over time for beneficiaries who entered

the DI program after age 55.

                                               Figure 7


    To estimate the extensive margin response, we use a difference-in-differences design, which

exploits the variation in earnings rules by program entry age that was generated by the 1993

reform. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:


                     yit = α + βT reati + γ(P ostt × T reati ) + λt + Xit0 δ + εit ,             (5)



                                                   21
where i indexes individual, t indexes year-month, y represents an outcome of interest (such as a

dummy for having positive earnings), T reat is a dummy which is 0 if an individual enters the DI

program between ages 55 and 65 and 1 if the individual enters between ages 20 and 55; P ost is

a dummy for calendar time after July 1993, λ is a vector of year-month fixed effects, and X is a

vector of background characteristics. The coefficient of interest is γ which measures the effect of

the liberalization in earnings rules for recipients who entered the DI program before age 55 relative

to those who entered after age 55.

    Table 5 reports estimates of equation (5) for the full sample (columns 1-2) and when we split

the sample by gender (columns 3-4) and by average earnings over the best 15 years (columns 5-

6). Panel A shows that the policy change increased labor force participation by 6.5 percentage

points. This estimate is robust to controlling for additional background characteristics (column 2

of Panel A). The effects are somewhat larger for women compared to men and about twice as large

for high-earners relative to low-earners. To compare the labor supply responses with the policy-

induced changes in financial incentives, we calculate an elasticity of labor force nonparticipation

with respect to the participation tax rate (Panel B).29 The results suggest an average elasticity

of labor force nonparticipation to the participation tax rate between 0.099 (without controls) and

0.102 (with controls). Consistent with the results in Panel A, the implied elasticities are larger for

women relative to men and high-earners relative to low-earners.

                                                          Table 5

    We next explore the impact of the 1993 policy change over time by replacing (P ost × T reat) in

equation (5) with a set of treatment by year-month interaction terms (baseline year-month is July

1991):
                                                  06/95
                                                  X
                       yit = α + βT reati +               γj (dj × T reati ) + λt + Xit0 δ + εit ,                    (6)
                                                j=08/91


    29
       The elasticity of labor force nonparticipation is defined as  = ∆(1−LF P )/(1−LF P )
                                                                           ∆P T R/P T R
                                                                                             , where ∆(1−LF P ) = −∆LF P
is the change in the labor force nonparticipation rate of the treatment group before and after the policy change, as
estimated in Panel A, (1 − LF P ) is the mean labor force nonparticipation rate of the treatment group before the
policy change, ∆P T R is the difference in the participation tax rate of the treatment group before and after the
policy change, evaluated at the pre-policy earnings distribution, and P T R is the mean participation tax rate of the
treatment group before the policy change. As argued by Kostol and Mogstad (2014) and others, in the case of a
notch the PTR is generally viewed as more relevant to behavioral participation responses than the marginal tax rates.
Moreover, the elasticity of labor force nonparticipation it is less sensitive to small changes in the very low labor force
participation rate, as compared to the labor force participation elasticity.


                                                            22
where dj is a dummy that is 1 in year-month j and 0 otherwise. The interaction terms for the period

before July 1993 provide pre-treatment specification tests, although they may capture possible

anticipation effects. Figure 8 plots the estimated γ-coefficients (the 95 percent confidence interval

is shown by dashed lines). The estimated coefficients fluctuate around zero and are insignificant

before the 1993 reform became effective (vertical black line), providing evidence that the empirical

strategy is not simply picking up differential long-term trends between treated and non-treated

individuals. The coefficients turn significantly positive after the reform and this increase in labor

force participation among treated individuals persists over time.

                                                Figure 8



6    Bunching Estimation with Large Notches

    Bunching estimators of notches have been primarily applied to settings with small notches.

Much less is known about how well this method works for large notches, as is the case in our setting.

In this section, we use numerical simulations to examine the performance of the bunching estimator

in our context, including whether extensive margin responses affect the estimation process. Such

responses would shift the observed earnings density above the threshold downward, leading to

overestimated bunching. We base our simulations on the utility function in equation (2) with the

difference that individuals face a fixed cost of labor force participation q that is smoothly distributed

across the population:


                                                   n       z 1+1/e
                                u(c, z) = c −           ·            − q.                            (7)
                                                1 + 1/e     n

Individuals choose earnings z to maximize equation (7) subject to the budget constraint c =

s + z − T (s, z). The fixed cost of participation allows for the possibility that taxes create extensive

margin responses. An individual will only participate in the labor force if q ≤ u(c, z) − u0 for

some z > 0, where u0 denotes the utility from nonparticipation. Bastani and Selin (2014) extend

this utility function to allow for income effects. They find, via numerical simulations, that income

effects do not bias elasticity estimates even for large kinks. Income effects may also be large for

notches, in which case, the estimated elasticity will be a mix of compensated and uncompensated


                                                    23
elasticities. Since the uncompensated elasticity is smaller than the compensated elasticity (if leisure

is a normal good), the elasticity estimate will be lower in the presence of income effects.

    We examine several scenarios that differ in the size of the tax notch T (s, z) and whether in-

dividuals face a fixed cost of participation. For each scenario, we follow the same steps. First,

we fix an elasticity e and calibrate a vector of ability parameters n such that the distribution of

utility-maximizing earnings without the notch resembles the counterfactual earnings distribution

in Figure 3.30 If we allow for extensive margin responses, we additionally calibrate a vector of

fixed costs q following Liebman (2002). Specifically, for each individual we randomly draw a fixed

cost from a uniform distribution with a lower limit of 0 and an upper limit equal to the difference

between the individual’s utility at the optimal z without the notch and the utility at zero earnings.

These fixed costs are then divided by a scalar to produce an extensive margin response that is

consistent with the one estimated in the previous section. Second, we introduce a notch at the

SGA threshold and re-simulate the distribution of utility-maximizing earnings choices. With the

notch, individuals initially located above the threshold face a higher tax liability and instead bunch

at the threshold or stop working altogether. Third, we apply the approach described in section 3

to estimate an earnings elasticity on the simulated data and compare the estimated elasticity with

the true underlying elasticity.

    The results from the simulation exercise for different scenarios are shown in Table 6 and il-

lustrated graphically in Figures B.1-B.3 in Appendix B. For each scenario, we report the bias in

the estimated elasticity relative to the theoretical elasticity in parentheses. The baseline scenario

“small notch” rules out extensive margin responses (i.e. q = 0) and specifies the notch as a jump

in the average tax rate of 8 percent, which is about a third the size of the notch in the Austrian DI

program. For this scenario, estimated elasticities are close to the three theoretical elasticities we

consider. The bias varies between -3 percent and 3 percent. The second row shows results when we

specify the notch to be the same as in the Austrian DI program. In this case, estimated elasticities

tend to be larger than for the small notch, but overall the estimation procedure works well. The

relative bias is largest for e = 0.1 (12 percent), but only 3 percent for e = 0.2 and e = 0.3. The

third row shows that we get a larger upward bias once we allow for extensive margin responses.

  30
     We assume that n follows a gamma distribution because this distribution most closely resembles the counterfac-
tual distribution.


                                                        24
The absolute bias increases with the underlying elasticity from 0.017 to 0.034, but the relative bias

is modest and varies between 11-17 percent. The last row reports results when we adjust the empi-

rical earnings density for extensive margin responses by adding the simulated extensive response in

each bin back to the empirical density. This adjustment of the empirical density lowers the relative

upward bias to 2-9 percent.

   We can also apply this simulation-based adjustment of the empirical density to our setting.

Specifically, we first simulate the extensive margin response using our estimate for the earnings

elasticity (e = 0.27). In a second step, we add the simulated extensive margin response to the

empirical earnings density in Figure 3 and re-estimate the elasticity based on the adjusted earnings

density.31 This adjustment reduces the earnings response ∆z from e464 to e392 and the earnings

elasticity from 0.27 to 0.20, suggesting that in our context the upward bias from extensive margin

responses is small.

                                                      Table 6

   A caveat is that even though the Monte-Carlo simulations suggest that the bunching approach

works well in our context, the same may not be true in other settings. In general, the performance

of the bunching estimator for notches will depend on (i) the size of the notch, (ii) the shape

of the observed earnings density, and (iii) the size of the extensive margin response. Since larger

notches affect the earnings distribution over a wider window, predicting the counterfactual earnings

density becomes more difficult, because the estimation relies on earnings bins further away from the

threshold. These bins may provide a poor counterfactual for the earnings bins around the notch,

especially in settings in which the observed earnings density changes in a very non-linear fashion

with earnings. Moreover, the shape of the observed earnings density also matters for whether the

observed earnings density above the notch will be distorted by intensive margin responses to the

higher marginal tax rate. These intensive margin responses will shift the observed earnings density

to the left and, as Kleven (2016) notes, in settings with steep observed earnings densities this left

shift can have a significant impact on the estimation. In our context, the large size of the notch

and the left-shift in the density are less problematic because the observed earnings density is quite

flat above the notch. Finally, bunching estimators will perform better if the extensive margin

  31
       Figure A.9 in Online Appendix A shows the resulting earnings distribution when we apply this adjustment.


                                                         25
response is small, which is also the case in our study. With a small extensive margin response, the

observed earnings density above the notch will be less distorted, making it easier to estimate the

counterfactual earnings density.



7        Fiscal Effects and Policy Implications

     This section discusses the fiscal effects of the SGA threshold for the government and the as-

sociated policy implications. Using data for the year 2012, we investigate the fiscal impacts of

two hypothetical policy changes. Under the first policy, DI beneficiaries would keep full benefits if

earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Under the second policy, DI beneficiaries would lose benefits

more gradually: They would lose e1 of benefits for every e2 of earnings above the SGA threshold.

This policy is currently being tested in the U.S. and is known as the “$1 for $2 benefit offset”

(Wittenburg et al. (2015)). In both scenarios recipients would still have to pay social security

contributions once earnings exceed the SGA threshold.

     We are interested in the long-run impact of each policy on DI benefits paid, payroll taxes

received, and government net expenditures. To calculate these effects, we proceed in several steps.

First, we calculate the new tax parameters ∆T and ∆t under each policy. For example, under the

benefit offset policy we have ∆T = 0.18 ∗ z ∗ and ∆t = 0.5. Second, we use the new tax parameters

and the elasticity estimates to calculate the overall earnings effect of the policy. This effect can be

decomposed into an intensive and extensive margin response. For the intensive margin response,

we feed the new tax parameters and our estimate of the earnings elasticity (e = 0.27) into equation
                                                                 0
3 to obtain an estimate of the earnings response ∆z . This estimate implies that beneficiaries
                                                                                                 0
who stop bunching under the new policy will now earn in the interval (∆z ∗ − ∆z ). Additionally,

beneficiaries to the right of the SGA threshold increase their earnings, because they face lower tax

rates under the new policy.32 For the extensive response, we use the estimated elasticity of labor

force nonparticipation to calculate the number of DI recipients who start to work under the new

policy.33 We assume that beneficiaries who start to work earn the same amount on average as
    32                                                                                                 ∆t
       The change in earnings of recipients to the right of the SGA threshold is calculated as ∆z =  (1−t) z where z
is the current earnings level, ∆t is the change in the marginal tax rate due to the policy change, and (1 − t) is the
marginal tax rate before the policy change. Since abolishing the notch induces a jump in the average tax rate rather
than the marginal tax rate, calculating ∆t is not straighforward. We approximate the change in the average tax rate
by an equivalent change in the implicit marginal tax rate as in Kleven and Waseem (2013).
    33
       More specically, the change in labor force nonparticipation under the new policy is given by ∆(1 − LF P ) =


                                                         26
beneficiaries above the SGA threshold. Based on the change in earnings, we can directly calculate

the change in payroll tax revenue and DI benefits.

    The results for the two hypothetical policy changes are reported in Table 7. The first column

shows that under the status quo the government spends e1,024.1 million on DI benefits per year

and receives e14.9 million in payroll taxes. As shown in the second column, abolishing the DI notch

generates additional DI benefit payments of e7.1 million because beneficiaries who earn above the

SGA threshold now receive full benefits.34 The policy generates additional payroll tax revenues

of e16 million, as some beneficiaries start to work while those who already work increase their

earnings, and therefore annual net government expenses decrease by e8.9 million. Column 3 shows

that the fiscal savings are ten times smaller under the e1 for e2 benefit offset policy. The reason is

that this policy induces smaller financial incentives compared to abolishing the notch and therefore

generates smaller behavioral responses.

                                                       Table 7


    Our calculations above ignore the possibility that relaxing the earnings restrictions could induce

more program entry by those able to earn above the SGA threshold.35 To shed light on this issue,

we calculate how elastic DI program inflow would need to be to lead to an increase in government

net expenditure. Specifically, as in Kostol and Mogstad (2014), we calculate an elasticity of induced

entry, defined as the percentage increase in the number of DI beneficiaries relative to the percentage

change in disposable income as a DI beneficiary. The abolishment of the DI notch yields an induced

entry elasticity of 0.26, while the benefit offset policy yields a smaller induced entry elasticity of 0.09.

However, these induced entry elasticities are well below the 1.2 elasticity that Mullen and Staubli

(2016) find for Austria, suggesting that after accounting for induced entry responses both policies

would increase government net expenses. This finding is consistent with Hoynes and Moffitt (1999)

who simulate the labor supply effects of proposed reforms to increase work incentives through

changes in the benefit formula and conclude that they are not as effective as expected. They

find that non-program based financial incentives such as the Earned Income Tax Credit are more
 ∆P TR
   PTR
         (1 − LF P ) where∆P T R measures the policy-induced reduction in the participation tax rate.
    34
       In our calculations, we ignore that the increase in DI benefits may induce beneficiaries above the SGA threshold
to reduce their earnings (and payroll tax contributions) through an income effect.
    35
       Making the earnings rules more generous could also lead to fewer program exits by current beneficiaries. However,
this effect is likely to be small given that the DI exit rate is already very low under the current rules.


                                                          27
favorable because they have the potential to increase work and to reduce DI caseloads at the same

time.



8    Conclusion

    Many countries specify a substantial gainful activity (SGA) threshold in their DI program at

which DI beneficiaries lose part or all of their benefits. This rule results in a discontinuous change in

tax liability, creating a strong incentive for many beneficiaries to intentionally keep their earnings

just below the SGA threshold. In this paper, we have examined whether DI recipients adjust

their earnings because of the SGA threshold as well as how elastic their earnings are to changes in

financial incentives.

    Using a large and salient notch located at the SGA threshold in Austria’s DI program, we provide

transparent and credible documentation of behavioral earnings responses of DI beneficiaries. We

find evidence for large and sharp bunching just below the SGA threshold and missing mass just

above the SGA threshold, suggesting that many DI recipients would earn considerably more in the

absence of the SGA threshold. Indeed, our estimation approach implies that DI beneficiaries who

earn just below the SGA threshold would increase monthly earnings by e196 on average if the

notch at the SGA threshold did not exist. This effect represents a substantial 45 percent increase

relative to the monthly SGA threshold of e439.

    While the earnings responses to the SGA threshold are large, the elasticities driving those

responses are not. We estimate that the earnings elasticity with respect to the implicit net-of-tax

rate is 0.27, suggesting a relatively low responsiveness of earnings to financial incentives. The reason

is that notches create extremely large implicit marginal tax rates and thus behavioral responses are

large, even when elasticities are quite small.

    Our findings are derived from the Austrian DI program and one needs to exercise caution when

applying these conclusions to other countries. The DI program in Austria shares similarities with

DI programs in other countries in terms of size and composition of beneficiaries. However, there

are also some characteristics that are distinct from other programs, most notably the level of the

SGA threshold. This difference is important because our estimation strategy exploits variation in

earnings of beneficiaries located around the SGA threshold. If the distribution of people changes as


                                                   28
earnings increase, then the elasticity estimated here might be different than an elasticity estimated

at a different SGA threshold.

   Our framework is useful to shed light on the fiscal effects of policy reforms that encourage

work among DI beneficiaries by reducing the implicit tax on earnings. Our calculations suggest

that relaxing the earnings restrictions would increase work and reduce government expenditures.

However, allowing DI recipients to earn more while keeping benefits may increase the incentive to

apply for DI benefits. While we cannot estimate the level of induced entry that would occur if

earnings restrictions were relaxed, we instead calculate how elastic entry responses would have to

be to increase net expenditure. We find that the elasticity of program inflow to changes in benefits

estimated in previous studies is above our break-even elasticity, suggesting that government net

expenditures would increase after accounting for induced entry responses.




                                                 29
References

Abeler, Johannes and Simon Jäger. 2015. “Complex Tax Incentives.” American Economic

  Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (3): 1–28.

Almunia, Miguel and David Lopez Rodriguez. 2017. “Under the Radar: The Effects of Moni-

  toring Firms on Tax Compliance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.

Bastani, Spencer and Håkan Selin. 2014. “Bunching and non-bunching at kink points of the

  Swedish tax schedule.” Journal of Public Economics, 109 : 36–49.

Best, Michael Carlos and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven. 2016. “Housing Market Responses to

  Transaction Taxes: Evidence From Notches and Stimulus in the UK.” Review of Economic

  Studies, forthcoming.

Borghans, Lex, Anne C. Gielen, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2014. “Social Support Substitution

  and the Earnings Rebound: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity in Disability Insurance

  Reform.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (4): 34–70.

Bound, John. 1989. “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.”

  American Economic Review, 79 (3): 482–503.

Brown, Kristine. 2013. “The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons from Cali-

  fornia teachers.” Journal of Public Economics, 98 : 1–14.

Bütler, Monika, Eva Deuchert, Michael Lechner, Stefan Staubli, and Petra Thiemann.

  2015. “Financial work incentives for disability benefit recipients: Lessons from a randomized field

  experiment.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 4:18.

Cameron, A. Colin and Douglas L. Miller. 2015. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust

  Inference.” Journal of Human Resources, 50 (2): 317–373.

Campolieti, Michele and Chris Riddell. 2012. “Disability Policy and the Labor Market: Evi-

  dence from a Natural Experiment in Canada, 1998–2006.” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (3-4):

  306–16.



                                                 30
Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2008. “The Work Disincentive Effects of the

  Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s.” Journal of Econometrics, 142 (2): 757–784.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Adjustment

  Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish

  Tax Records.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2): 749–804.

French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. “The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply.”

  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (2): 291–337.

Gelber, Alexander, Timothy Moore, and Alexander Strand. 2017. “The Effect of Disability

  Insurance Payments on Beneficiaries’ Earnings.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,

  forthcoming.

Gelber, Alexander M., Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks. 2013. “Earnings Adjustment

  Frictions: Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test.” NBER Working Paper 19491 : 1–91.

Hoynes, Hillary W. and Robert Moffitt. 1999. “Tax Rates and Work Incentives in the Social

  Security Disability Insurance Program: Current Law and Alternative Reforms.” National Tax

  Journal, 52 (4): 623–654.

Ito, Koichiro and James M Sallee. 2016. “The Economics of Attribute-Based Regulation:

  Theory and Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards.” Review of Economics and Statistics, fort-

  hcoming.

Kleven, Henrik J. 2016. “Bunching.” Annual Review of Economics, 8 : 435–464.

Kleven, Henrik J. and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization

  Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics, 128 (2): 669–723.

Kopczuk, Wojciech and David J. Munroe. 2015. “Mansion Tax: The Effect of Transfer Taxes

  on the Residential Real Estate Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (2):

  214–57.




                                               31
Kostol, Andreas R. and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “How Financial Incentives Induce Disability

  Insurance Recipients to Return to Work.” American Economic Review, 104 (2): 624–55.

Le Barbanchon, Thomas. 2016. “Optimal Partial Unemployment Insurance: Evidence from

  Bunching in the U.S.” Working Paper Bocconi University.

le Maire, Daniel and Bertel Schjening. 2013. “Tax bunching, income shifting, and self-

  employment.” Journal of Public Economics, 107 : 1–18.

Liebman, Jeffrey. 2002. “The Optimal Design of the Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Bruce D.

  Meyer and Douglas Holtz-Eakin, eds., Making Work Pay: The Earned Income Tax Credit and

  Its Impact on American Families, New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability In-

  surance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of

  SSDI Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103 (5): 1797–1829.

Manoli, Dayanand S. and Andrea Weber. 2016. “Nonparametric Evidence on the Effects of

  Financial Incentives on Retirement Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,

  8 (4): 160–82.

Moore, Timothy J. 2015. “The Employment Effect of Terminating Disability Benefits.” Journal

  of Public Economics, 124 : 30–43.

Mullen, Kathleen J. and Stefan Staubli. 2016. “Disability Benefit Generosity and Labor Force

  Withdrawl.” Journal of Public Economics, 143 : 49–63.

OECD. 2010. Sickness, Disability and Work: Breaking the Barriers. OECD Publishing.

Ramnath, Shanthi. 2013. “Taxpayers’ responses to tax-based incentives for retirement savings:

  Evidence from the Saver’s Credit notch.” Journal of Public Economics, 101 : 77–93.

Riesenfelder, Andreas, Susi Schelepa, and Petra Wetzel. 2011. “Geringfügige Beschäftigung

  in Österreich.” BMASK Sozialpolitische Studienreihe Band 9.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal:

  Economic Policy, 2 (3): 180–212.

                                              32
Sallee, James M and Joel Slemrod. 2012. “Car notches: Strategic automaker responses to fuel

  economy policy.” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (11): 981–999.

Schimmel, Jody, David C. Stapleton, and Jae G. Song. 2011. “How Common is Parking

  among Social Security Disability Insurance Beneficiaries – Evidence from the 1999 Change in the

  Earnings Level of Substantial Gainful Activity.” Social Security Bulletin, 71 (4): 77–92.

Staubli, Stefan. 2011. “The Impact of Stricter Criteria for Disability Insurance on Labor Force

  Participation.” Journal of Public Economics, 95 (9-10): 1223–1235.

Tazhitdinova, Alisa. 2017. “Adjust Me if I Can’t: The Effect of Firm Incentives on Labor Supply

  Responses to Taxes.” Mimeo, McMaster University.

von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011. “Trends in Employment and Ear-

  nings of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.”

  American Economic Review, 101 (7): 3308–3329.

Weathers, Robert. R and Jeffrey Hemmeter. 2011. “The Impact of Changing Financial Work

  Incentives on the Earnings of Social Security Disability Insurance (SSD) Beneficiaries.” Journal

  of Policy Analysis and Management, 30 (4): 708–728.

Wittenburg, David, David R. Mann, David Stapleton, Daniel Gubits, David Judkins,

  and Andrew McGuirk. 2015. “BOND Implementation and Evaluation – Third-Year Snapshot

  of Earnings and Benefit Impacts for Stage 1.” Report for the Social Security Administration.




                                                33
                                              Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                           All DI recipients              Working DI recipients
                                                                                            All             At notch
        Female ( percent)                                  45                        45                   48
        Age at DI entry (years)                            48.2   (8.0)              46.6   (9.0)         45.3   (9.1)
        Blue-collar ( percent)                             67                        68                   62
        UI duration last 15 years                          1.12   (1.31)             0.93   (1.19)        1.14   (1.21)
        Experience last 15 years                           9.67   (4.71)             11.1   (4.00)        10.3   (4.00)
        Sick leave last 15 years                           0.71   (0.79)             0.60   (0.71)        0.69   (0.75)
        Monthly DI benefits (in e)
          Full DI benefits                                 974 (498)                 920 (472)            1,040 (490)
          Partial DI benefits                              964 (507)                 688 (584)            1,040 (490)
        Monthly gross earnings (in e)
          Last job before DI                               3,009 (5,674)             2,411 (3,766)        1,992 (3,916)
          While claiming DI                                54 (533)                  1,179 (2,227)        375 (43)
        Health impairment
          Mental disorders (percent)                       40                        38                   44
          Musculoskeletal system (percent)                 19                        16                   16
          Cardiovascular system (percent)                  10                        10                   8
          Other (percent)                                  31                        36                   31

        No. of individuals                                 183,168                   27,054               7,084
        No. of observations                                7,562,737                 334,461              84,787
Notes: UI duration last 15 years, experience last 15 years and sick leave last 15 years are measured prior to DI entry. Sample
standard deviations for continuous variables in parentheses. Monthly DI benefits and monthly gross earnings are measured
during DI. Health impairments are only observed for DI spells that were initiated in 2004 or after.


           Table 2: Earnings elasticities for pooled sample and by year after program entry

                                           Bunching b           Earnings response ∆z                  Elasticity e
                                                                marginal      average
                                                                buncher       response
           A. Full sample                  19.1??? (0.7)        464??? (32)   196??? (7)              0.27??? (0.03)

           B. Yearly
             1 Year after entry            17.6??? (0.82)       488??? (44.6)      209??? (11.0)      0.27??? (0.05)
             2 Years after entry           20.4??? (1.02)       448??? (58.0)      194??? (29.4)      0.21??? (0.05)
             3 Years after entry           22.0??? (7.65)       488??? (130)       201??? (84.7)      0.26??? (0.11)
             4 Years after entry           19.1??? (1.21)       384??? (63.9)      170??? (35.7)      0.15??? (0.06)
             5 Years after entry           20.9? (14.2)         448??? (163)       184? (127)         0.21? (0.13)
             6 Years after entry           23.4??? (9.17)       496??? (162)       196?? (111)        0.25?? (0.13)
             7 Years after entry           22.4??? (3.25)       496?? (246)        201? (141)         0.26? (0.19)
Notes: The table presents estimates of bunching, the earnings response of the marginal buncher based on the point of convergence
z U , the average earnings response of individuals who bunch, and the structural earnings elasticity for the full sample and by year
after DI entry. The structural elasticity is based on equation (3) using the earnings response of the marginal buncher. Standard
errors in parentheses are obtained using a pairs cluster bootstrap that accounts for clustering of errors at the individual level.
All estimates are based on a sixth-order polynomial fitted to the empirical earnings distribution. Significance levels: ??? = 1%,
?? = 5%, ? = 10%.




                                                                34
                                  Table 3: Heterogeneity of earnings elasticities

                                            Bunching b        Earnings response ∆z                  Elasticity e
                                                                 marginal       average
                                                                 buncher      response
           A. Age
             < 35                          16.7??? (2.4)         496? (324)        171 (137)           0.45 (0.38)
             35 − 49                       18.9??? (1.0)        448??? (77)       188??? (35)       0.29??? (0.06)
             ≥ 50                          18.8??? (0.8)        432??? (29)        196??? (9)       0.19??? (0.03)

           B. Gender
             Men                           19.1??? (0.8)        448??? (35)        193??? (9)       0.17??? (0.03)
             Women                         17.9??? (0.9)        432??? (42)       184??? (10)       0.37??? (0.06)

           C. Health impairment
             Mental             16.3??? (1.1)                   376??? (44)       169??? (13)       0.21??? (0.05)
             Physical           17.9??? (1.4)                   400??? (49)       182??? (15)       0.16??? (0.05)
             Other              20.6??? (2.2)                   528?? (233)        216? (141)        0.34?? (0.20)

           D. Worker status
             Blue-Collar                   16.4??? (0.7)       376??? (22)         168??? (8)       0.21??? (0.03)
             White-Collar                  23.1??? (1.3)      568??? (176)        232??? (77)        0.29?? (0.14)

           E. Sick days
             Below Median                  20.2??? (1.1)      560??? (104)        219??? (63)       0.39??? (0.06)
             Above Median                  17.8??? (0.8)       392??? (26)         175??? (9)       0.19??? (0.03)

           F. Firm switches at DI entry
             Do not switch firm 20.2??? (0.8)                   504??? (39)        198??? (9)       0.32??? (0.04)
             Switch firm          15.4??? (1.2)                 384??? (41)       187??? (14)       0.18??? (0.04)

           G. Sector
             Primary/secondary             25.4??? (2.7)      592??? (182)        217?? (113)        0.35?? (0.15)
             Tertiary                      19.3??? (1.0)       464??? (47)        187??? (10)       0.28??? (0.05)
             Public sector                 17.7??? (1.6)       360??? (64)        160??? (16)       0.23??? (0.08)

           H. Size of notch
             1st tercile                   16.3??? (1.0)       368??? (43)        164??? (11)       0.34??? (0.06)
             2nd tercile                   18.1??? (1.0)       384??? (27)        177??? (10)       0.24??? (0.03)
             3rd tercile                   20.8??? (1.4)      504??? (184)         220?? (95)          0.13 (0.13)
Notes: The table presents estimates of bunching, the earnings response of the marginal buncher based on the point of convergence
z U , the average earnings response of individuals who bunch, and the structural earnings elasticity by age, gender, health
impairment, worker status, sick days, whether beneficiaries switch firm at DI entry, sector, and size of the notch relative to
DI benefits. The structural elasticity is based on equation (3) using the earnings response of the marginal buncher. Standard
errors in parentheses are obtained using a pairs cluster bootstrap that accounts for clustering of errors at the individual level.
All estimates are based on a sixth-order polynomial fitted to the empirical earnings distribution. Significance levels: ??? = 1%,
?? = 5%, ? = 10%.




                                                               35
                                Table 4: Earnings elasticities, robustness checks

                                                  Bunching b          Earnings response ∆z               Elasticity e
                                                                      marginal     average
                                                                      buncher      response
      A. Main results                             19.1??? (0.7)       464??? (32) 196??? (7)             0.27??? (0.03)

      B. Without self-employed                    19.8??? (0.7)       528??? (56)       195??? (8)       0.35??? (0.06)

      C. Alternative polynomials
        5th order polynomial                      20.1??? (0.6)       368??? (13)       184??? (5)       0.17??? (0.01)
        7th order polynomial                      19.5??? (0.7)       528??? (35)       205??? (8)       0.35??? (0.04)

      D. Alternative estimation approaches
        Bunching after 5 years        27.7???               (0.8)     408???   (13)     171???   (5)     0.21???   (0.01)
        Left shift due to kink        17.6???               (0.7)     384???   (16)     181???   (6)     0.19???   (0.02)
        Bunching-hole approach        19.1???               (0.7)     376???   (21)     192???   (11)    0.18???   (0.02)
        Reduced-form approach         18.5???               (0.7)     486???   (25)     175???   (6)     0.23???   (0.02)

      E. Workers not on DI program                4.7??? (0.7)        336??? (9)        152??? (4)       0.62??? (0.04)
Notes: The table presents estimates of bunching, the earnings response of the marginal buncher based on the point of convergence
z U , the average earnings response of individuals who bunch, and the structural earnings elasticity. The structural elasticity is
based on equation (3) using the earnings response of the marginal buncher (except for the reduced-form approach which uses
the approach developed by Tazhitdinova, 2017). Standard errors in parentheses are obtained using a pairs cluster bootstrap
that accounts for clustering of errors at the individual level. All estimates are based on a sixth-order polynomial fitted to the
empirical earnings distribution. Significance levels: ??? = 1%, ?? = 5%, ? = 10%.




                                                               36
Table 5: Estimates of labor force participation and implied elasticity of labor force nonparticipation

                                        Full sample                  Subgroups
                                    No         With                  Men       Women               Low-            High-
                                    controls controls                                              earners         earners
      A. LFP estimates
        ∆LF P                       0.065***       0.067***          0.059***       0.076***       0.044***        0.091***
        (P ost × T reat)            (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.003)
        Age DI entry<55             0.008***       0.002             0.018          0.009          0.001           -0.013
        (T reat)                    (0.001)        (0.015)           (0.020)        (0.032)        (0.023)         (0.021)
        Mean LF P                   0.028          0.028             0.029          0.027          0.019           0.037
        R2                          0.027          0.072             0.059          0.106          0.075           0.075
        No. of Obs.                 696,169        696,169           488,627        207,542        341,106         355,063

      B. Elasticity of labor       force nonparticipation
        Mean (1 − LF P )           0.972      0.972                  0.971          0.973          0.981           0.963
        ∆P T R                     -0.808     -0.808                 -0.859         -0.712         -0.679          -0.868
        Mean P T R                 1.192      1.192                  1.260          1.067          1.022           1.272
        Elasticity                 0.099*** 0.102***                 0.090***       0.117***       0.068***        0.141***
                                   (0.003)    (0.003)                (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.003)         (0.005)
Notes: Panel A reports estimates obtained from regression specification (5). Mean LF P , mean P T R, and mean (1 − LF P ) are
pre-reform averages for recipients who entered DI before age 55. All specifications include year-month dummies. Additional
control variables: gender, age-in-years dummies, average earnings in best 15 years before DI, work experience in 15 years
before DI, days unemployed in 15 years before DI, days on sick leave in 15 years before DI, and number of contribution years.
Specifications for subgroups include all control variables. Low-earners (high-earners) are below (above) the median in the
distribution of average earnings in best 15 years before DI. Panel B reports the elasticity of labor force nonparticipation based
                     ∆(1−LF P )/(1−LF P )
on the formula  =        ∆P T R/P T R
                                          . Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the individual level. Significance levels:
??? = 1%, ?? = 5%, ? = 10%.




     Table 6: Simulation exercise to assess robustness of elasticity estimates with a large notch

                                                              e = 0.1            e = 0.2             e = 0.3
               Small notch                                    0.103 (3%)         0.195 (-3%)         0.306 (2%)
               Austrian DI notch                              0.112 (12%)        0.206 (3%)          0.309 (3%)
               With extensive margin response                 0.117 (17%)        0.222 (11%)         0.334 (11%)
               Simulation-based adjustment                    0.109 (9%)         0.204 (2%)          0.308 (3%)
Notes: The table documents elasticity estimates for four different scenarios (rows) and three theoretical elasticities (columns).
See text for a description of the different scenarios. In parentheses, we report the bias in the estimated elasticity relative to the
theoretical elasticity.




                                                                37
                            Table 7: Annual Fiscal Effect of Abolishing the Notch

                                             Status quo         Abolish DI notch         e1 for e2 benefit offset
                                             (million e)        (million e)              (million e)
       DI benefits                           1024.1             7.1 (0.69%)              0.3 (0.03%)
       Payroll tax revenues                  14.9               16.0 (107.4%)            1.2 (7.7%)
         From intensive response                                4.9                      0.5
         From extensive response                                11.1                     0.7
       Net expenses                          1009.2             -8.9 (-0.9%)             -0.9 (0.1%)

       Induced entry elasticity                                 0.26                     0.09
Notes: All money amounts are in 2012 euros. Column 1 shows the annual DI benefit payments, annual payroll tax revenues,
and annual net expenses for DI beneficiaries below age 57 who are on the DI program in 2012. Columns 2 and 3 show the
changes in DI benefits payments, payroll tax revenues, and net expenses in million euros and in percent of the status quo (in
parentheses) from two policy experiments: (i) abolishing the DI notch while keeping the notch due to social security payroll
taxes (column 2) and (ii) replacing the notch with a kink with e1 for e2 benefit offset (column 3). The induced entry elasticity
measures how elastic DI inflow with respect to disposable income would need to be to offset the change in net expenses.




                                                              38
                     Figure 1: Disability Insurance Recipiency per Adult Ages 25-64




                                      6
                         Percent receiving benefits
                          3          42         5




                                                      1985   1990   1995        2000   2005      2010
                                                                             Year

                                                                    United States      Austria

Source for Austria: STATISTIK AUSTRIA population data; statistical supplement published by “Hauptverband der
österreichischen Sozialversicherungsträger”. Source for the United States: Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical Sup-
plement; Bureau of the Census, Census Population Estimates, available at http://www.census.gov/popest/estimates.html.




                                                                           39
                                                           Figure 2: Budget sets and density distributions
                                                                               (a) Budget set
                           After‐tax income z‐T(s,z)                                          H   (1‐t)z       (1‐t‐Δt)z

                                                                                  L
                                                                                             H’




                                                           DI benefits


                                                       0                 z*   zD zI z*+Δz*                     Earnings z

                                                                          (b) Density distributions
                           Density




                                                                     Bunching B




                                                                                                           pre‐SGA density


                                                                                                       post‐SGA density

                                                       0                 z*        zI                          Earnings z
Notes: Panel (a) shows after-tax monthly income as a function of monthly gross earnings without an SGA threshold (dashed
line) and with an SGA threshold (solid line); z ∗ denotes the SGA threshold; z D denotes the earnings level at which the after-
tax income is equal to the after-tax income at the SGA threshold. Panel (b) shows the density distribution without an SGA
threshold (dashed line) and with an SGA threshold (solid line).




                                                                                        40
                                     Figure 3: Earnings distribution around the SGA threshold




                                          .04
                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                 zU: −128
                                                                                                                                 z : 464 (32)

                                          .035
                                          .03
                                       .02 .025
                                     Fraction
                                          .015
                                          .01
                                          .005
                                          0




                                                         −300              0         300        600          900       1200                        1500
                                                                        Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of gross monthly earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical
solid line) for DI beneficiaries between 2001 and 2012. The histogram bin width is e8. The solid line beneath the empirical
distribution is a sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution using equation (4). The excluded range [z L , z U ] is
marked by vertical dotted lines; z U has been estimated such that missing mass equals bunching mass. Bootstrapped standard
errors are shown in parentheses.




                            Figure 4: Dynamics of bunching and dominated behavior over time
                               (a) Bunching behavior                                                                     (b) Dominated behavior
            1




                                                                                                        1
            .8




                                                                                                        .8
                 .6




                                                                                                             .6
         Fraction




                                                                                                     Fraction
       .4




                                                                                                   .4
            .2




                                                                                                        .2
            0




                                                                                                        0




                      0          5                       10                 15           20                       0          5               10                15       20
                                                  Quarter after entry                                                                 Quarter after entry

                          Bunching                 Dominated             Below       Above                            Bunching         Dominated            Below   Above


Notes: Panel (a) shows the dynamics of bunching behavior by quarter after DI entry. The sample consists of all DI beneficiaries
who are in the bunching segment [z L , z ∗ ] in the first quarter after DI entry. Panel (b) shows the dynamics of dominated
behavior by quarter after DI entry. The sample consists of all DI beneficiaries who are in the range (z ∗ , z U ] in the first quarter
after DI entry. “Below” and “above” denote the earnings intervals (0, zL ) and (zU , ∞), respectively.




                                                                                              41
                                          Figure 5: Bunching and earnings elasticity before/after DI entry
                                                  (a) Bunching b                                                                                 (b) Elasticity e




                                                                                                                 .6
              24




                                                                                                                 .5
              20




                                                                                                                 .4
                  16




                                                                                                                      .3
       Bunching b




                                                                                                         Elasticity e
                                                                                                             .2
          12




                                                                                                                 .1
              8




                                                                                                                 0
              4




                                                                                                                 −.1
                                                                                                                 −.2
              0




                        −4          −3       −2       −1         0         1      2        3    4                          −4      −3       −2       −1         0         1      2        3        4
                                                     Year relative to DI entry                                                                      Year relative to DI entry


Notes: Panel (a) shows the amount of bunching b and Panel (b) shows the earnings elasticity e using equation (3) for different
years before and after DI entry (vertical solid line). The sample consists of DI recipients who are working at least once in the
first four years after program entry. The dashed lines denote 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                                     Figure 6: Evidence for firm bunching
                                                                                                      (b) Sum of earnings in a firm of workers with earnings
                                    (a) Earnings in secondary job                                     below the SGA threshold
              .025




                                                                                                                 .01
                                                                                                                 .008
              .02.015




                                                                                                                   .006
          Fraction




                                                                                                            Fraction
                                                                                                         .004
       .01    .005




                                                                                                                 .002
              0




                                                                                                                 0




                             −300           0        300         600          900       1200   1500                        0    .5    1    1.5   2     2.5    3     3.5     4     4.5   5    5.5   6
                                         Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                       Sum of gross monthly earnings as a fraction of the SGA threshold


Notes: Panel (a) shows the distribution of monthly gross earnings in a secondary job relative to the SGA threshold (marked
by the vertical solid line) for individuals who concurrently hold a second job in addition to the main job, defined as a job that
pays more than the SGA threshold. Sample includes DI beneficiaries between 2001 and 2012 who are reported to work in two
firms in a month while being on the DI program or up to eight years before entering the DI program. Panel (b) shows the
distribution of the sum of gross monthly earnings in a firm of all workers with earnings below the SGA threshold in percent of
the SGA threshold. The sample includes all firms which employ at least one DI recipient once between 2001 and 2012 and at
least two workers with earnings below the SGA threshold. The histogram bin width is e8 in both panels.




                                                                                                    42
        Figure 7: Labor force participation for recipients entering DI before and after age 55




                                          .14
                                          .12
                                          .1
                                           .08
                                     Fraction
                                    .06   .04
                                          .02




                                                                                                                 Age<55
                                                                                                                 Age>=55
                                          0




                                                    07/91   01/92   07/92   01/93     07/93    01/94   07/94   01/95   07/95
                                                                                    Year−month
Notes: The figure shows the monthly fraction of DI recipient who work by age at DI entry over the period July 1991 to July
1995. For each recipient, we only keep observations from the first six months on the DI program. The black vertical line denotes
the month in which the July 1993 reform became effective.




Figure 8: Difference in labor force participation between recipients entering DI before and after
age 55
                                          .08
                                          .06 .04
                                       Fraction
                                    .02   0
                                          −.02




                                                    07/91   01/92   07/92   01/93     07/93    01/94   07/94   01/95   07/95
                                                                                    Year−month
Notes: The figure plots the monthly average difference in the fraction of recipients who work between recipients entering the DI
program before and after age 55, obtained from regression specification (6), where controls include gender, age-in-years dummies,
average earnings in best 15 years before DI, work experience in 15 years before DI, days unemployed in 15 years before DI, days
on sick leave in 15 years before DI, and number of contribution years. The reference year-month is July 1991. The dashed lines
denote 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the individual level. The black vertical line
denotes the month in which the July 1993 reform became effective. For each recipient, we only keep observations from the first
six months on the DI program.




                                                                                    43
                                                  Online Appendix:
        Financial Incentives and Earnings of Disability Insurance
                      Recipients: Evidence from a Notch Design

                                           Philippe Ruh and Stefan Staubli



A      Appendix: Additional Figures

                Figure A.1: Distribution of annual earnings around the SGA threshold
                             .06
                             .05
                             .04
                         Fraction
                           .03
                             .02
                             .01
                             0




                                    −6   −3       0        3         6         9       12        15   18
                                           Gross yearly earnings relative to SGA threshold (’000)
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of annual gross earnings relative to the annual SGA threshold (marked by the vertical
solid line) for DI beneficiaries between 2001 and 2012. The histogram bin width is e120.




                                                                  1
              Figure A.2: Distribution of gross monthly income normalized to year 2012




                             .02
                             .015
                         Fraction
                           .01
                             .005
                             0




                                    0      1000                      3000                        5000
                                            Gross monthly income normalized to year 2012
The figure shows the distribution of gross monthly income for DI recipients between 2001 and 2012. Gross monthly incomes
are normalized to 2012 with the adjustment factors used to adjust K1 , K2 , and K3 for inflation. The vertical red lines denote
the values for K1 , K2 , and K3 in the year 2012 (see equation (1) for details). The histogram bin width is e30.




                                                              2
   Figure A.3: Earnings distribution around the SGA threshold in 2003, 2006, 2009, and 2012
                                 (a) 2003                                                               (b) 2006
               .04




                                                                                      .04
                                                                z*: 361                                                                z*: 389
               .035




                                                                                      .035
                                  SGA2012                                                                SGA2012
               .03




                                                                                      .03
            .02 .025




                                                                                   .02 .025
          Fraction




                                                                                 Fraction
               .015




                                                                                      .015
               .01




                                                                                      .01
               .005




                                                                                      .005
               0




                                                                                      0




                       0   300     600           900     1200             1500                0   300     600           900     1200             1500
                                 Gross Monthlylsg Wage                                                  Gross Monthlylsg Wage




                                 (c) 2009                                                               (d) 2012
               .04




                                                                                      .04




                                                                z*: 417                                                                z*: 439
               .035




                                                                                      .035




                                  SGA2012                                                                SGA2012
               .03




                                                                                      .03
            .02 .025




                                                                                   .02 .025
          Fraction




                                                                                 Fraction
               .015




                                                                                      .015
               .01




                                                                                      .01
               .005




                                                                                      .005
               0




                                                                                      0




                       0   300     600           900     1200             1500                0   300     600           900     1200             1500
                                 Gross Monthlylsg Wage                                                  Gross Monthlylsg Wage


Notes: The figures show the distribution of gross monthly earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical solid
line) for DI beneficiaries in the years 2003, 2006, 2009, and 2012. The sample in each figure consists of DI beneficiaries who
entered the program in the four-year window before the observation year. The SGA threshold in 2012 is marked by the vertical
dashed line. The histogram bin width is e8.




                                                                             3
        Figure A.4: Fraction of individuals changing the firm by month relative to DI entry




                                                 .14
                                                 .12
                                    Fraction changing employer
                                     .04     .06   .08
                                                 .02
                                                 0        .1




                                                                 −24   −20   −16   −12       −8   −4      0      4     8            12       16       20       24
                                                                                              Month relative to DI entry
Notes: This figure shows the fraction of individuals who change the firm in different months before and after DI entry (vertical
dashed line).




Figure A.5: Estimated counterfactual earnings distributions around the SGA threshold for fifth-
degree and seventh-degree
                              (a) Fifth-degree polynomial                                                                 (b) Seventh-degree polynomial
               .04




                                                                                                                .04




                                                                                         L                                                                                 L
                                                                                     zU: −128                                                                             zU: −128
                                                                                     z : 376 (13)                                                                         z : 528 (35)
               .035




                                                                                                                .035
               .03




                                                                                                                .03
            .02 .025




                                                                                                             .02 .025
          Fraction




                                                                                                           Fraction
               .015




                                                                                                                .015
               .01




                                                                                                                .01
               .005




                                                                                                                .005
               0




                                                                                                                0




                       −300        0         300        600          900       1200                 1500                −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                               Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold


Notes: The figure shows the distribution of monthly gross earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical solid
line) for DI beneficiaries between 2001 and 2012. The excluded range [z L , z U ] is marked by vertical dotted lines. The histogram
bin width is e10. The solid line beneath the empirical distribution in the left (right) figure is a fifth-degree (seventh-degree)
polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution using equation (4). Bunching b is excess mass in the excluded range below the
notch relative to the average counterfactual density in the interval [z L , z ∗ ] and z U has been estimated such that missing mass
equals bunching mass. Bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                                                                       4
Figure A.6: Earnings distribution around the SGA threshold for workers not on the DI program
                                .006




                                                                                             L
                                                                                           zU: −112
                                                                                           z : 336 (9.1)
                                .005
                                   .004
                          Fraction
                            .003.002
                                .001
                                0




                                          −300      0        300         600         900        1200       1500
                                                 Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of monthly gross earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical solid
line) for individuals not on the DI program between 2001 and 2012. The excluded range [z L , z U ] is marked by vertical dotted
lines. The histogram bin width is e10. The solid line beneath the empirical distribution is a sixth-degree polynomial fitted to
the empirical distribution using equation (4). Bunching b is excess mass in the excluded range below the notch relative to the
average counterfactual density in the interval [z L , z ∗ ] and z U has been estimated such that missing mass equals bunching mass.
Bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                                    5
      Figure A.7: Earnings distribution around the SGA threshold before and after DI entry
                       (a) 4 years before entry                                                                  (b) 3 years before entry                                                           (c) 2 years before entry
              .04




                                                                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                                                            .04
              .035




                                                                                                     .035




                                                                                                                                                                                            .035
              .03




                                                                                                     .03




                                                                                                                                                                                            .03
           .02 .025




                                                                                                  .02 .025




                                                                                                                                                                                         .02 .025
         Fraction




                                                                                                Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                       Fraction
              .015




                                                                                                     .015




                                                                                                                                                                                            .015
              .01




                                                                                                     .01




                                                                                                                                                                                            .01
              .005




                                                                                                     .005




                                                                                                                                                                                            .005
              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                       −300          0         300         600         900        1200   1500                    −300     0         300         600         900        1200   1500                  −300      0        300         600         900        1200   1500
                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                     Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold




                           (d) 1 year before entry                                                                      (e) year of entry                                                             (f) 1 year after entry
              .04




                                                                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                                                            .04
              .035




                                                                                                     .035




                                                                                                                                                                                            .035
              .03




                                                                                                     .03




                                                                                                                                                                                            .03
           .02 .025




                                                                                                  .02 .025




                                                                                                                                                                                         .02 .025
         Fraction




                                                                                                Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                       Fraction
              .015




                                                                                                     .015




                                                                                                                                                                                            .015
              .01




                                                                                                     .01




                                                                                                                                                                                            .01
              .005




                                                                                                     .005




                                                                                                                                                                                            .005
              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                           −300       0        300         600         900        1200   1500                    −300      0         300        600          900       1200   1500                  −300      0         300        600          900       1200   1500
                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                     Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold




                           (g) 2 years after entry                                                                (h) 3 years after entry                                                            (i) 4 years after entry
              .04




                                                                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                                                            .04
              .035




                                                                                                     .035




                                                                                                                                                                                            .035
              .03




                                                                                                     .03




                                                                                                                                                                                            .03
           .02 .025




                                                                                                  .02 .025




                                                                                                                                                                                         .02 .025
         Fraction




                                                                                                Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                       Fraction
              .015




                                                                                                     .015




                                                                                                                                                                                            .015
              .01




                                                                                                     .01




                                                                                                                                                                                            .01
              .005




                                                                                                     .005




                                                                                                                                                                                            .005
              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                           −300       0         300        600          900       1200   1500                    −300      0         300        600          900       1200   1500                  −300      0         300        600          900       1200   1500
                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                     Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold


Notes: The figure shows the distribution of monthly gross earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical solid
line) for DI beneficiaries each year in the four years before and after DI entry. The sample consists of DI beneficiaries who are
working at least once in the first four years after program entry. The histogram bin width is e8. The solid line beneath the
empirical distribution is a sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution using equation (4).

                                  Figure A.8: Bunching and earnings elasticity before/after DI application
                                                          (a) Bunching b                                                                                                              (b) Elasticity e
                                                                                                                                                         .7
                      28




                                                                                                                                                         .6
                      24




                                                                                                                                                         .5
                      20




                                                                                                                                                              .4
              Bunching b




                                                                                                                                                 Elasticity e
                     16




                                                                                                                                                  .2     .3
              12




                                                                                                                                                         .1
                      8




                                                                                                                                                         0
                      4




                                                                                                                                                         −.1
                                                                                                                                                         −.2
                      0




                            −4          −3           −2         −1          0         1                      2          3            4                             −4   −3       −2         −1          0         1                    2             3           4
                                                             Year relative to DI application                                                                                             Year relative to DI application


Notes: Panel (a) shows the amount of bunching b and Panel (b) shows the earnings elasticity e using equation (3) for different
years before and after applying for DI benefits (vertical solid line). The sample consists of DI recipients who are working at
least once in the first four years after program entry. The dashed lines denote 95 percent confidence intervals.



                                                                                                                                         6
         Figure A.9: Estimated effect on the earnings distribution above the SGA threshold
                               .04




                                                                                               L
                                                                                             zU: −128
                                                                                             z : 392
                               .035
                               .03
                            .02 .025
                          Fraction
                               .015
                               .01
                               .005
                               0




                                       −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                              Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of gross monthly earnings relative to the SGA threshold (marked by the vertical solid
line) for DI beneficiaries between 2001 and 2012 when we add beneficiaries who would start working without the notch back
to the right of the SGA threshold (the difference between the light and the dark gray bars). The histogram bin width is e8.
The solid line beneath the empirical distribution is a sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the adjusted empirical distribution (light
gray bars) using equation (4). The excluded range [z L , z U ] is marked by vertical dotted lines; z U has been estimated such that
missing mass equals bunching mass.




                                                                 7
B     Graphical illustration of Monte Carlo simulations

    Figure B.1 shows the simulated and counterfactual earnings densities under the scenario “small

notch,” assuming a true underlying elasticity of e = 0.1 (Panel a), e = 0.2 (Panel b), or e = 0.3

(Panel c). Figures B.2 and B.3 display analogous results for the scenario “Austrian DI notch” and

“Austrian DI notch with extensive margin response,” respectively. In each panel, the black dashed

line denotes the simulated earnings density without the notch and the gray bars represent the

simulated earnings density with the notch. The gray solid line denotes the counterfactual earnings

density which is obtained by estimating equation (4) on the simulated earnings density with the

notch.

    In each panel, we exclude the bin just to the left of the SGA threshold because bunching is

so large that including this bin dwarfs all the other bins. The reason is that in the simulations

individuals respond to the notch by precisely earning just below the SGA threshold, while in the

empirical application bunching is more diffuse around the threshold. Moreover, in the simulations

individuals can freely adjust their earnings, while in reality some people may not bunch because of

optimization frictions (as discussed in the paper, the estimation strategy takes such frictions into

account when estimating the earnings elasticity).




                                                 8
                          Figure B.1: Simulated and counterfactual densities for small notch
                                  (a) e=0.1                                                                                 (b) e=0.2
        .04




                                                                                                 .04
                                                                        L                                                                                        L
                                                                       zU: −8                                                                                   zU: −8
                                                                       z : 72                                                                                   z : 96
        .035




                                                                                                 .035
                                                                       b: 8.4                                                                                   b: 11.8
                                                                       e: .103                                                                                  e: .195
        .03




                                                                                                 .03
     .02 .025




                                                                                              .02 .025
   Fraction




                                                                                            Fraction
        .015




                                                                                                 .015
        .01




                                                                                                 .01
        .005




                                                                                                 .005
        0




                −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                                                                                 0




                       Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold
                                                                                                         −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                                                                                                Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold



                                                                                 (c) e=0.3
                                                   .04




                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                     zU: −8
                                                                                                                     z : 120
                                                   .035




                                                                                                                     b: 14.5
                                                                                                                     e: .306
                                                   .03
                                                .02 .025
                                              Fraction
                                                   .015
                                                   .01
                                                   .005
                                                   0




                                                           −300       0         300        600          900       1200         1500
                                                                   Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold

Notes: The figure plots the simulated earnings distributions without the notch (black dashed line) and with the notch (gray
bars) for the cases e = 0.1, e = 0.2, and e = 0.3. The bin width of the gray bars is e8. The gray solid line denotes the
counterfactual earnings density which is obtained by estimating equation (4) on the simulated earnings distribution with the
notch. The bin just to the left of the SGA threshold is excluded in each panel.




                                                                                        9
                       Figure B.2: Simulated and counterfactual densities for Austrian DI notch
                                     (a) e=0.1                                                                               (b) e=0.2
        .04




                                                                                                  .04
                                                                          L                                                                                       L
                                                                        zU: −8                                                                                  zU: −8
                                                                        z : 272                                                                                 z : 360
        .035




                                                                                                  .035
                                                                        b: 30.5                                                                                 b: 39.7
                                                                        e: .112                                                                                 e: .206
        .03




                                                                                                  .03
     .02 .025




                                                                                               .02 .025
   Fraction




                                                                                             Fraction
        .015




                                                                                                  .015
        .01




                                                                                                  .01
        .005




                                                                                                  .005
        0




                                                                                                  0



                −300        0         300        600          900       1200      1500                    −300      0         300        600          900       1200      1500
                         Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                        Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold



                                                                               (c) e=0.3
                                                  .04




                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                 zU: −8
                                                                                                                 z : 456
                                                  .035




                                                                                                                 b: 48.3
                                                                                                                 e: .309
                                                  .03
                                               .02 .025
                                             Fraction
                                                  .015
                                                  .01
                                                  .005
                                                  0




                                                          −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                                                 Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold

Notes: The figure plots the simulated earnings distributions without the notch (black dashed line) and with the notch (gray
bars) for the cases e = 0.1, e = 0.2, and e = 0.3. The bin width of the gray bars is e8. The gray solid line denotes the
counterfactual earnings density which is obtained by estimating equation (4) on the simulated earnings distribution with the
notch. The bin just to the left of the SGA threshold is excluded in each panel.




                                                                                  10
Figure B.3: Simulated and counterfactual densities for Austrian DI notch with extensive margin
response
                                   (a) e=0.1                                                                               (b) e=0.2
        .04




                                                                                                .04
                                                                        L                                                                                       L
                                                                       zU: −8                                                                                  zU: −8
                                                                       z : 272                                                                                 z : 368
        .035




                                                                                                .035
                                                                       b: 28.8                                                                                 b: 37.4
                                                                       e: .117                                                                                 e: .222
        .03




                                                                                                .03
     .02 .025




                                                                                             .02 .025
   Fraction




                                                                                           Fraction
        .015




                                                                                                .015
        .01




                                                                                                .01
        .005




                                                                                                .005
        0




                                                                                                0




                −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500                   −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                       Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold                                        Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold



                                                                             (c) e=0.3
                                                .04




                                                                                                                L
                                                                                                               zU: −8
                                                                                                               z : 472
                                                .035




                                                                                                               b: 45.0
                                                                                                               e: .334
                                                .03
                                             .02 .025
                                           Fraction
                                                .015
                                                .01
                                                .005
                                                0




                                                        −300      0         300        600          900       1200       1500
                                                               Gross monthly earnings relative to SGA threshold

Notes: The figure plots the simulated earnings distributions without the notch (black dashed line) and with the notch (gray
bars) for the cases e = 0.1, e = 0.2, and e = 0.3. The bin width of the gray bars is e8. The gray solid line denotes the
counterfactual earnings density which is obtained by estimating equation (4) on the simulated earnings distribution with the
notch. The bin just to the left of the SGA threshold is excluded in each panel.




                                                                                 11
C     Appendix: Derivation of Equation (3)

    This section illustrates the derivation of equation (3). The utility level at the SGA threshold

z ∗ is given by

                                                                                       1+1/e
                                                   n∗ + ∆n∗                 z∗
                                                                     
                          ∗                     ∗
                      u(z ) = (1 − t) · (s + z ) −          ·                                   ,
                                                    1 + 1/e              n∗ + ∆n∗

where (n∗ + ∆n∗ ) is the ability level of the DI beneficiary that is indifferent between z ∗ and z I .

The utility level at the interior point z I is given by

                                                                                                    1+1/e
                                                                     n∗ + ∆n∗                zI
                                                                                      
         u(z I ) = (1 − t) · (s + z I ) − ∆T − ∆t · (z I − z ∗ ) −            ·                              .   (8)
                                                                      1 + 1/e             n + ∆n∗
                                                                                           ∗



Maximizing equation (8) with respect z I implies that z I = (n∗ + ∆n∗ )(1 − t − ∆t)e . Using this

expression, we can write the utility at the interior point z I as follows


                                                         1
                  u(z I ) = (1 − t)s − ∆T + ∆tz ∗ +         (1 − t − ∆t)1+e (n∗ + ∆n∗ ).
                                                        1+e
                                                                         z ∗ +∆z ∗
Setting u(z I ) = u(z ∗ ) and using the condition (n∗ + ∆n∗ ) =           (1−t)e     , we can rearrange terms so as

to obtain equation (3):

                                     ∗ +∆n∗
                                                     1+1/e                                      
                                                 z∗                                  1+e z ∗ +∆z ∗ ⇔
        (1 − t)z ∗ + ∆T − ∆tz ∗ − n1+1/e      n∗ +∆n∗            =  1
                                                                   1+e (1 −  t −  ∆t)       (1−t)e
                        h         ∗
                                       i                       1+1/e                  1+e
                  1          ∆T /z −∆t       1         1                   1          ∆t
             1+∆z ∗ /z ∗ 1 +    1−t      − 1+1/e    1+∆z ∗ /z ∗        − 1+e     1 − 1−t      =0




                                                      12
