                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
                          ON HYSTERESIS IN AGGREGATE
                               US IMPORT PRICES




                               Richard Baldwin




                           Working Paper No. 2483




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 January 1988




Prepared for the conference "The Economics of the Dollar Cycle" at Brandeis
University. I would like to acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions
of Avinash Dixit, Cathy Mann, Alberto Ciovanninj, Mike Gavin, Rich Lyons,
Andy Rose, Paul Krugman, Jeff Sachs, Rob Feenstra, Steve Ambler, Gene
Grossman, Nils Gottfries, Eric Fisher and Carmen Reinhart. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Lynde and Harry
Bradley Foundation and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation is
                                                          gratefully
acknowledged.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2483
                                       January 1988




  Some Empirical Evidence on Hysteresis in ggregate US Import Prices




                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper empirically investigates the hypothesis that hysteresis has

occurred in US aggregate non—oil import prices.      We find strong evidence that

a shift has occurred in the exchange rate pass—through relationship in the

1980s, and that the nature of the shift is consistent with the hysteresis

hypothesis. Results on two specific structural models of this phenomenon (the

beachhead model and the bottleneck model) are less conclusive. The data

broadly support both models, but neither by itself can provide a convincing

accounting of all the evidence.




                                             Richard Baldwin
                                             611 Uris Hall
                                             Columbia Business School
                                             NY, NY 10027

                                             (218) 280-3491
                                    1




 1. Introduction

      The 1980's have been marked by enormous swings in the real US dollar exchange

 rate. Starting in the third quarter of 1980 the real dollar appreciated during 1

out of the 18 subsequent quarters leading to a cummulative real rise of almost 0

 percent. The turning point, which came in Febuary 1985, was followed by a period

of steady depreciation which has lasted more than two years. Depending upon the

particular real exchange rate index chosen, between 75 and 100 percent of the real

appreciation had been reversed by second quarter 1987.

     This dollar cycle, the magnitude of which is entirely unprecedented by

post—war experience, has had rather puzzling effects on import prices.

Historically, movements in the real exchange rate have been passed through

approximately one—for—one to the real price of imports. The rising dollar of the

first half of the 1980s did lead to lower real prices of imported goods, however,

the two—year fall in the exchange rate has lead to only a slight increase in the

real import prices. This puzzling behavior is interesting in itself. It takes on

added importance, however, in that the slugglish rise of import prices has

contributed to the persistence of the US trade deficit.

     The failure of import prices to rise has been frequently noted in the business

press. The usual explanation offered is that import prices have not risen in the

face of the falling dollar because foreign firms have been cutting profit margins.

This, of course, is not by itself an explanation ——   it   is an implication. If costs

rise and prices don't, profit margins are squeezed. What we need is an economic

explanation of why foreign firms have found it optimal to not pass the depreciation

through to higher prices.

    Hysteresis is defined in the American Heritage Dictionary as, 'failure of a

property change by an external agent to return to its original value when the cause
                                  2

of the change is removed. One explanation of the recent behavior of US import

prices is that the unprecedented magnitude of the dollar cycle has resulted in
                                                   the hypothesis that hysteresis has
hysteresis. This paper empirically investigates

occured in aggregate US non—oil import prices.

     The possibility that large exchange rate shocks induce persistent real effects

has implications for both the real and monetary sides of international economics.
                                          fluctuations have persistent trade effects
For instance if temporary exchange rate
                                                 versus fixed exchange rate regimes
then the standard welfare analysis of flexible
                                             1987 finds evidence that the 1978—81
would have to be re—thought. Indeed, Bean

sterling ovei-valuation had negative hysteric effects on British export performance.

Additionally Baldwin and Krugman 1988 shows that import hysteresis can

theoretically lead to exchange rate hysteresis implying that the long run

equilibrium exchange rate may be path—dependent.
                                                      strengthen or weaken arguments
     On the trade side1 hysteresis in imports might
                                                   1987 points out that in hysteretic
for temporary cyclical protection. Also Dixit

models pricing below long run average cost is a normal, non—predatory response to

 the failing dollar. This casts doubts on the usefulness of the ITC's definition of

dumping. While these theoretical and policy ramifications of hysteresis are

 interesting, they are not addressed in this paper.
                                                           that hysteresis has occured
      This paper empirically investigates the hypothesis
                                                      based on standard ad hoc,
 in US aggregate import prices. We review evidence

 pass—through equations as well as evidence based on two structural models (the

 beachhead models Baldwin 1986 and the botttleneck model, Foster and Baldwin 1986)

 which could account for the hysteretic behavior of import prices.

      Briefly, the beachhead model asserts that the prolonged overvaluation prompted

 many new foreign firms to enter the US market (establish marketing 'beachheads").

 Not all of these new firms found it optimal to exit in the face of the falling
                                                           demand—side factors (US
 dollar due to supply—side factors (sunk investments) or
                                   3
consumers acquiring a taste for imports). The presence of these ne entrants led

to a persistent increase in the degree of competition in the US market for imparts.

The increased competition, in turn, led to lower profit margins.

     The bottleneck model focuses on the existence, and irreversibility, of

capacity constraints ('bottlenecks") in the marketing, distribution and servicing

networks of importers. According to the model, importers took advantage of a

dollar appreciation by expanding capacity and lowering prices. Thus at the peak of

the dollar cycle, importers were operating at their capacity constraints. The turn

around of the dollar was not fully passed through to prices since the cast

increases stemming from the dollar fall were partially offset by an alleviation of

the marketing bottlenecks.

     The prima facie case for import price hysteresis is presented in the second

section. Section three considers possible theoretical sources of the shift. The

next section examines a structural model (the beachhead model, Baldwin 198) that

could account for hysteresis. The model is presented and a number of testable

hypotheses are derived and empirically evaluated. The fifth section considers an

alternative model (the bottleneck model, Foster and Baldwin 19B6) which could also

explain the puzzling behavior of import prices. The model is presented and then

tested empirically. A summary of our findings and directions for future work are

provided in the conclusion.

     A direct test of the beachhead model would require time series data on the

number of varieties of imported goods and their close substitutes, as well as a

functional form for the dependence of the demand elasticity on the number of

varieties. Direct testing of the bottleneck model would require data on

distribution capacities. These tests are most likely to be fruitful on industry

level data.

     It is our intention here to focus on aggregate macro data. This choice may be

justified on two grounds. First hysteresis in aggregate import prices could be
                                  4
part of the explanation of the persistence of the US trade deficit. It is

therefore useful to test the hypothesis carefully on aggregate data. Secondly, it

would be convenient to have a simple micro explanation of the puzzling behavior of

aggregate import prices.

     To sum up the results, we find strong evidence that the pass—through

relationship has shifted in the 1980s. Examination of the time pattern of the

forecast errors and the residuals of standard pass—through equations, in addition

to formal structural break tests, lead us to this conclusion The shift, however,

is also consistent with a long—lived but not permanent change in the pass—through

relationship.    hysteretic shift is one that persists after the cause of the shift

has been removed. Since by many calculations the real dollar was still overvalued

by 10—30 percent in mid—1987 (Krugman and Baldwin 1986), it is perhaps too early to

distinguish between long lags and true hysteresis.

     Evidence on the two structural models of hysteresis is less decisive. While

the the evidence provides some prelimary support of both models, which model looks

better depends upon which real exchange rate measure is used. The beachhead model

does better on a measure based on wholesale prices. The bottleneck model does

better on a consumer price based measure. We conclude that neither model can

explain all the data, however both are likely to be part of any complete accounting

of import price behavior.



2. The Prima Facie Case for Hysteresis

     Before turning to structural models or formal econometrics we examine some

informal arguments for a shift in the pass—through relationship. The simplest and

perhaps most convincing case for the shift can be made by comparing the movement of

exchange rates and import prices during the pre— and post—1980 periods.     A graphic

way of doing so is to use the historical relationship between the exchange rate and

import prices to forecast post—1980 import prices and then examine the forecast
                                    5
 errors. To this end we regress the log of real import prices on the log of the

 real exchange rate and a constant using pre—1981.3 data (this date was chosen since

 it is only one year into the dollar cycle ——   long before the dollar was generally
 considered overvalued). The estimates are then used to forecast prices through

 1986 and the forecasted values are plotted against the actual import prices. We

 perform this exercise for the various price and production cost measures. The

 results are found in figures 1 through 4.

      The simulated values in figure 1 are generated from the regression of the log

 of the real import prices on the log of the real exchange rate and a constant.

 Specifically the real import price employed is the US SNP deflator for non—oil

 imports divided by the US wholesale price index (WPI) for manufactured goods1 and

 the real exchange rate index is the ratio of an import—weighted index of foreign

manufactured goods WPIs to the US WPI adjusted by an import—weighted nomimal

exchange rate index. Figure 1 shows that the historical relationship tracks the

actual import prices relatively well for the first few quarters of the cycle.

However, starting in mid—19821 the historical relationship overpredicts prices for

15 consecutive quarters. Figure 1 clearly depicts a primia facie case for

hystersis. According to the hysteresis interpetation, the unprecedented magnitude

of the dollar overvaluation (or anticipation thereof) altered the pass—through

relationship. This shift does not appear to be fading despite the passing of the

exchange rate shock.

     Figure 1 can be faulted, however, in that it allows for no lags in the

pass—through relation. Since most researchers include lags of the exchange rate in

the pass—through relationship. we allow for this possibility in figure 2.

Specifically we repeat the procedure used to produce figure 1 but this time include

8 lags (quarterly data) of the log of the real exchange rate as regressors. A

polynominal distributed lag structure is imposed. The results are plotted in

figure 2. Adding in the B lags does not change the general conclusions we drew
from figure 1. Rather the errors become even more pronounced. This may be due to

the short period of estimation (1977.1 to 1981.3).

    The data used in constructing these figures have many shortcomings. For

instance the exchange rate index includes only the 6—10 industrialized countries,
                                                results from the exclusion of the
leaving open the possibility that the pattern

newly industrializing countries. Moreover, a significant portion (between 10 and

20 percent) of the US non—oil imports are commodities, so that a

manufacturing—based production cost proxy can be expected to perform poorly during

                                           To partially address such concerns, we
periods of large commodity price swings.

repeat the procedure using an alternative measure of the real exchange rate.

     The next two figures repeat the figure 1 and 2 procedure using a real exchange

rate measure based on foreign consumer prices indices (CPIs). Consumer prices are
                                                include non—tradables), however, they
a poor proxy for production costs (since they

are availible for a wider range of US trading partners and for longer time periods

than are wholesale prices. The measure of foreign prices we use here is the
                                                            reported in Helkie and
Federal Reserve Board's foreign production cost proxy, as
                                            import—weighted CPIs from the 6—10
Hooper i98. The proxy is constructed from

countries and eight LDCs (Mexico, Brazil, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, South

Korea Philippines and Malaysia). The real exchange rate index is created by

 converting this foreign production cost proxy into dollars using an import weighted

nominal exchange rate index and dividing by the US SNIP deflator. The real import

 price is the non—oil import price deflator over the US SNIP deflator.

     Figure 3 shows the simulated pass—through without lags. Here again we see

 that import prices fell with the rising dollar but failed to rise post—1995. As a

 result import prices are too low in 1986 and the second half of 1987. The shift

 in figure 3 however differs from that in figure 1. Figure 3 indicates that the

 pass—through was muted in that the prices fell somewhat less than expected and have

 risen much less than expected. The inclusion of 8 lags does not change the
                                    7
 substance of this conclusion, as figure 4 depicts. What is common to both sets of

 figures is that the rising dollar was passed through to lower import prices, but

 the falling dollar has resulted in very little price rise.

      The results of figures 1 through 4 are not surprising. Out of sample

 predictions are usually increasingly wrong for macroeconomic relationships. An

alternative is to look at the residuals for regressions run on data from the whole

 period. Figures 5 through 8 correspond to figures 1 to 4 but are run on data from

the whole period. The regression errors are naturally less pronounced than the

forecast errors, however the patterns of the residuals are roughly congruent with

those of the forecast errors.

     In figure 5 the fitted values overpredict in 14 out of the 23 quarters of the

dollar cycle (1980.3 to 1986.2), including 11 of the last 14 quarters. Allowing

for lagged exchange rate effects in figure 6 does not change the general pattern.

Again the fitted values overpredict 14 out of 23 quarters (7 of the last 12). The

regressions run on CPI based data present a residual pattern similar to those in

figures 3 and 4. Allowing for lags, the relationship predicts the fall in prices

during the dollar upswing quite well but fails to account for the SlOW import price

rise post—1985.

     While the real form of the pass—through relationship (i.e., real import prices

and real exchange rates) is preferable from a theoretical standpoint, the nomimal

relationship has been more important in the existing empirical literature. To

facilite comparison of our results with this literature we regress a nominal

foreign production cost proxy (based on the CPI data described above) on the

nominal import prices. The results are found in figure 9. Clearly this figure

basically confirms the conclusion of the previous eight figures.

     In summary, the time pattern of the forecast errors and regression residuals

discussed above plainly suggest that there has been a change in the link between US

non—oil imports prices and the exchange rate. In figures 1, 2 and 5 the error
                                  8
pattern can be interpeted as a once—off shift in the relationship caused by the

prolonged overvaluation. The hysteresis hypothesis comes through perhaps even more

starkly for the CPI—based data. However this data seems to indicate that the shift

coincided with the turn around of the dollar. We take this evidence as sufficient

to tentatively assert two related stylized facts: 1> import prices fell in

response to the rising dollar but have risen less than expected in response to the

falling dollar, and 2) import prices in 1986 and 1987 are lower than the historical

pass—through relation would predict.



Structural break tests

     We now turn to more formal testing of the hysteresis hypothesis.   In a time

series regression a hysteretic shift in the pass—through relationship will look

like a structural break. Therefore the next type of evidence we examine is a

series of likelihood ratio tests for structural breaks.

     Clearly looking for structural breaks in time series data constitutes a very

blunt test of the hysteresis hypothesis. The break could stem from a wide range of

causes that have nothing to do with hysteresis. Moreover there is no reason to

expect hysteresis would imply a once—off shift in the relationship. Nonetheless

the tests are important in that a failure to find resounding evidence of a

strucutral break would cast more than a little doubt on the validity of the

hysteresis hypothesis. In a sense this exercise is nothing more than a

formalization of the assertion that the regression errors in figures 5 through B

are statistically larger in the post—break period than in the pre—break period.

      Table 1 lists the results of likelihood ratio tests for structural breaks in

pass—through equations. There is no universally accepted standard pass—through

equation. To account for this, the tests are performed on a variety of fairly

representative ad hoc pass—through equations (the exact equations are listed at

 the bottom of the table). Since there are unavoidable data problems, the equations
                                    9
 are also tested on a variety of data sets and a variety of data transformations.

 The import prices and exchange rates used in table 1 regressions are identical to

 those used in figures 1 through 8 described above. Lastly since it is not possible

 to formally identify the break point1 tests are performed for a variety of break

 points ranging from 1980:3 to 1985:1.

      Table 1 presents strong evidence that a structural break occured in the

 pass—through relationship sometime in the first half of the 1980s. The different

data types are listed across the top of the table1 while the different formulations

 are listed on the left hand side. Every cell of this matrix indicates a

combination of a pass—through equation and data. In each cell are listed the

various break points. A double star indicates that the no—break hypothesis is

rejected at the 99.5 percent significance level. A na" indicates that the test

could not be performed. Since every test that could be performed rejected the no

break hypothesis at the 99.5 percent level, we can be rather confident that

something has changed in the pass—through relationship in the 1980s.

     As they stand, the two stylized facts from the figures and the structural

break tests are consistent with hypothesis that hystersis has occured in the macro

pass—through relationship. While there is certainly room for alternative

explanations of these stylized facts, the hysteresis hypothesis cannot be rejected

out of hand as an empirically empty theorizing. Moreover, these stylized facts

will, perforce, be reflected in any econometric estimation of the pass—through

rElat ionship.




3. Possible Sources of Discontinuous Pass Through Behavior

     The last section argued that the relationship between US import prices and the

exchange rate has shifted sometime in the 1980s. Ignoring lags and aggregation

problems, the pass—through relationship could shift due to one of three factors if
                                   10

firms operate at the point where expected marginal cost equals expected marginal

revenue Rearranging this first order condition, we get the well known
                                       *
relationship between marginal costs, c ,   prices,   p, and the perceived demand
                                 *
elasticity, E: E(p[1—(1/E)J)=E(C ), where variables are measured in dollars. The

dollar denominated marginal cost of foreign firms depend on the exchange rate. We

can use this relationship to identify the three possible sources.

     The first conceivable source of the shift is a reduction in the cost markup,

or profit margins [1—(1/E)). Note that the margin depends only on the perceived

elasticity, E. Consequently a fall in the profit margins must be due to an

increase in the perceived elasticity. The second source is from the relationship

between marginal costs and the exchange rate. If the dollar marginal costs of

foreign firms depend upon the exchange rate in a discontiucus manner then the

pass—through relationship could be discontinuous.

     The third source of shifts are the expectations themselves.      As was clear from

the figures the shift in the pass—through relationship has persisted or worsened

well into 1987. Presumably any expectations based model would assert that foreign

firms had expectation of the exchange rate level that significantly differed from

the observed level. While such a explanation seems implausible, it is certainly a

possibility. We shall not discuss expectations based models here. It is

worthwhile to note, however, that the figures in the last section suggest that

firms reacted differently to the final run up of the dollar which many economists

believe to have been a rational bubble (Gavin 1986).




 4. The Beachhead Model

     The beachhead model has two versions one concentrates on supply side factors,

 the other on demand side factors. In both versions a large overvaluation (or

anticipation thereof> prompts the entry of new foreign firms into the US market.
                                       11

 The net effect is to increase competition in the US home market for imported goods.

 While the models differ in their accounts of why not all of the newcomers exit with

 the passing of the exchange rate shock, the lasting change in market structure is

 the ultimate source of hysteresis in both models.

     Chamberlain 1933 argued that an increase in the number of varieties availible

 increases the perceived elasticity of demand for each variety. The persistent

increase in the number of foreign firms therefore entails a persistent increase in

 the demand elasticity faced by foreign firms. This in turn leads to a persistent

decrease in profit margins. Hysteresis in import prices is the result. While the

Chamberlain framework is convenient, an increase in the number of firms leads to

lower profits margins and lower prices in almost any model of imperfect

competition. Thus any setup that leads to a persistent increase in the number of

firms is likely to result in price hysteresis.



Supply—side Hysteresis

     The first version (Baldwin 1986, 1987) relies on the existence of market entry

costs that are sunk and durable. We assume that the production costs of foreign

firms are homogeneous of degree one in output and the exchange rate. In addition

to the direct production costs, firms must incur a fixed cost, F, in order to sell

in the home market. This cost, which is essentially a market entry cost, is meant

to reflect the costs of the firm— and market—specific assets that are required to

sell in a new market. For example F could represent the costs of setting up a

distribution and service network, of training workers and managers, and of bringing

the product into conformity with domestic health and safety regulations. While

some of these costs may be recouped if the firm ceases to sell in the country, some

of them are likely to be sunk costs.

    Furthermore, we assume that these sunk assets require maintenance. In order

to continue selling in the home market, firms must incur a fixed maintenance cost,
                                   12

G   in each period. If the maintenance is not done, the sunk asset disappears,

i.e., the firm exits. For example, if F represents the cost of a brandname

introduction advertising blitz, B would represent the brandname maintenance

advertising. For simplicity, we assume that both F and B are incurred in the US

and so are independent of the exchange rate.   It might seem more sensible to assume

that not all of the sunk asset disappears when the firm exits. In this case the

re—entry costs would be below the entry costs. This consideration would complicate

the analysis without providing any compensating insight.

      In an imperfectly competitive world with these sunk and durable assets,

consider the effects of an exchange rate shock. A prolonged overvaluation of the

dollar would increase the competitiveness and profits of foreign firms. The

prospect of greater profits would in turn encourage more foreign firms to acquire

the assets necessary to sell in the US. Because the investment is sunk and

durable, not all the new entrants will exit when the overvaluation passes.

      Since firms are making intertemporal decisions, the exact nature of firms'

exchange rate expectations are crucial to the mechanics of the model. Baldwin 1986

and 1987 consider perfectly anticipated exchange rate overvaluations.   This

assumption is meant to capture the notion that firms may have anticipated a

prolonged overvaluation of the dollar due to persistent changes in US monetary and

fiscal policy in 1980. This approach may be criticized in that it fails to allow

for the stochastic nature exchange rates.

      Baldwin and Krugman 1986 extends Baldwin 1986 by solving the entry problem for

firms facing an independently and identically distributed (iid) exchange rate.

Moreover it shows that industry—level hysteresis will result in aggregate

hysteresis under plausible assumptions, and demonstrates that for a very simple

exchange rate model hysteresis in imports leads to hysteresis in the exchange rate.

      While the assumption of an iid exchange rate greatly simplifies the problem,

many economists feel that empirically the exchange rate is best modelled as a
                                       13
 random walk (Meese and Rogoff 1985).       It is therefore important that Dixit 1987a

 and 1987b solve the entry problem in a framework similar to the beachhead model

 allowing for Brownian motion (continuous random walk) of the exchange rate. In all

 of these models large exchange rate shocks have hysteretic effects.

      In summary1 the existence of sunk, market entry assets implies an asymmetry

 between firms' the entry and exit conditions. Due to this asymmetry the entry and

exit conditions do not uniquely determine the equilibrium number of firms but

 rather a range within which the number of firms must lie in equilibrium. A

sufficiently large overvaluation (regardless of which stochastic process it

follows) could shift the economy to an equilibrium with more foreign firms than

prior to the exchange rate shock. The net effect would be to leave the home market

structure more competitive. This lasting change in the market structure forces a

lasting reduction in profit margins.



Demand-side Hysteresis

     In the previous model the persistent change in the number of firms was due to

supply side considerations. A large exchange rate shock could also have persistent

trade effects via a demand side channel. This version of the beachhead model

relies on imperfectly informed consumers. Suppose that US consumers are uncertain

about the quality of foreign goods they have never tried. The economics of such

goods (so—called experience goods) have been widely studied (Schmalensee 1982,

Grossman and Shapiro 1986). The effect of this demand structure is that new

entrants face an initial period of low demand during which consumers become

familiar with their product. Suppose furthermore that firms must incur some sunk

costs in order to sell in the US. In this framework, a firm will enter the

domestic market only if it anticipates that the discounted sum of operating profits

in the introductory and established periods will cover its sunk costs.

     It is easy now to see how this combination of fixed costs and demand structure
                                   14

can lead to hysteresis. An overvaluation means higher operating profits for

prospective entrants during the overvaluation. Other things equal this will allow

more foreign firms to cover the fixed market entry costs. When the overvaluation

passes the dollar value of foreign marginal cost rises. However since domestic

consumers have tried their products foreign firms also face higher demand curves.

Consequently not all of the new entrants will be forced   out..


     Essentially the overvaluation plays the role of a costless introductory

pricing scheme which leads US consumers to become familar with new foreign

products. This permanent change in the information sets of US consumers implies

that the market can support a higher number of foreign firms after the

overvaluation than before the overvaluation.

     Another variation of demand side hysteresis focuses on US retailers rather

than US consumers. Suppose that US consumers are perfectly informed about the

quality of foreign goods however US retailers are imperfectly informed about

consumers' tastes for new goods.. If there is a fixed cost to retailing a new

product, then this version becomes isomorphic with the experience-goods model

discussed above. The difference is in that here, the overvaluation induces the

retailers and not the consumers to learn..

     In both versions of demand side hysteresis, an exchange rate shock may cause a

persistent increase in the number of varieties of imported goods which in turn

induces a persistent reduction in profit margins.



Testing the Beachhead Model

     Before turning to the data directly, we first review some relevant existing

 empirical literature on pass—through behavior. The beachhead model is comprised of

two assertions: first that an exchange rate shock can alter the US market

 structure faced by foreign firms, and second that market structure affects the

pricing behavior of foreign firms. While there are no direct empirical
                                       15

 investigations of the first assertion, there have been several studies done on the

 second. Dornbusch 198é is the seminal article. In that paper he uses

 dissaggregated macro data and some industry data to argue that market structure

 affects pass—through behavior.

         Mann 198é,a, 1986b and 1987 as well as Feinbeig 1986 and Foster 1986 examine

 pass—through behavior by industry. These studies generally support the second

 assertion of the beachhead model. Feinberg finds weak evidence of a negative

 relationship between industry concentration and price responsiveness to the

exchange rate. He finds somewhat stronger evidence of an inverse relationship

between price responsiveness and the capital—sales ratio. Foster finds that

pass—through elasticities have been falling in most industries throughout the

 1980s. Mann's work points out 1) that pass—through behavior differs greatly across

industries and 2) that the extent of the shift in the pass—through relationship

during the 1980s dollar cycle also differs across industries. Mann does not

formally link these differences to industry characteristics. However she notes

that the shift was greatest in industries where the industry—specific real exchange

rates moved the most, lending general support to the thesis that the dollar cycle

itself was responsible for the shift in the pass—through equation.



Some Testable Implications

        The first implication of the beachhead model concerns the timing of the shift

in the pass—through relationship. Whether we model the exchange rate process using

the perfect foresight, iid or random walk assumption, we come to the conclusion

that the new entrants should have started entering sometime during the dollar

upswing. Consequently we can write:

Hypothesis 1: Profit margins should have begun falling sometime between 1981 and
1985.

        ssuming that firms act as if the exchange rate is iid or a random walk, then
                                   1
entry and the attendent fall in the profit margins should have ceased with the

dollar turn around. Thus the profit margin should follow an S—shaped curve with

the first curve coming early in the dollar rise and the second curve coming with

the dollar turn around. If firms had perfect foresight of the exchange rate, all

firms that were going to entry would do so as quickly as possible.   This implies

that the profit margins should have stopped falling sometime in the rising phase of

the dollar cycle. Lastly if firms? expectation of the exchange rate were formed

adaptively they might have continued entering even after the turn around. It seems

reasonable to suppose that adaptive expectations would be formed using the current

and no more than B lags (quarterly data) of the exchange rate. Summing up the

implications of each of these models, we note:

Hypothesis 2: Profit margins should have stopped falling no later than early 1987.

     Examining figures 1 through B provides contradictory evidence on hypothesis 1

and 2. The figures based on the manufacturing WPI data, especially figures 1 and

2, tend to confirm the hypotheses. The historical pass—through relationship begins

to overpredict in the early 1980s as we would expect if profit margins shrunk. The

relationship seems to shift slowly until the end of 1984 or early 1985 and then

stops shifting. This tends to confirm hypotheses 1 and 2.

     The CPI based figures, however, tend to indicate that the beginning of the

shift occurs with the turn around of the dollar. In figure 4, for instance, it

appears that the shift begins in early 1985 and continues to widen into 1987. This

pattern tends to refute the hypotheses.



Testing for Parameter Constancy

     More formally we can test hypotheses 1 and 2 by testing for a parameter shift

 in a pass—through equation. In order to have confidence in our formal testing

however we must have a model of the pass—through relationship in which the

 perceived demand elasticity (and therefore the profit margin) is identified. The
                                                  17
    ad hoc equations discused in table 1 do not meet this requirement; ad hoc equations

    are useful in testing for structural breaks but not in testing for specific shifts

    in structural parameters such as €.                In particular there is no microeconomic

    justification of the lags in the ad hoc equations. We cannot therefore be sure of

    the relationship between the point estimates and E.



    A Micro Model of Lags in the Pass Through Equation

         In the appendix we formally derive a pass—through equation in which lagged

    responses and expectations are explicitly accounted for. In the model

monopolisitic foreign firms are faced with a delivery lag. The production decision

occurs at the beginning of period t before the realized value of the exchange rate,

et is known. Moreover, we assume that output produced in period t does not reach

the market until period t+n. The problem of the firm is to choose production in

each period in order to maximize the expected present discounted value of profits.

        Clearly firms will produce at the point where the discounted expected marginal

revenue in period t+n equals expected marginal costs in period t. Aggregating

across firms (which face delivery lags of various lengths) produces a pass—through

equation in which today's import price index depends on past exchange rates. The

pass—through equation we estimate is (see appendix for notation):



                           e                                    N
(1) log(P)         log(A                                    +                  +
                               [   (1 —       h        ]        iO olo(C.
                                                                   1      1)
                         j=1
                                          1/e[mJ

       The constant term (the first term on the right hand side of the equation) is

the parameter we are most interested in. As (1) shows, the constant term is

proportional to the average profit margin. The profit margin of a firm j,
I                    1
               h           depends upon the perceived demand elasticity faced by the firm,
1 (1 —
         1/€Em]
                                   18

    ccording to the Chamberlain assertion, this elasticity is a function of the

number of firms in the industry m. The beachhead model predicts that this number

can be changed by an exchange rate shock. To allow for this m has a time

subscript. The appendix gives the exact definitions of Q3, cx, u, A as well

and C.
     The perfect foresight assumption implies that mh should jump up in the early

1980s, forcing up E at the same time. In equation (1), this jump would look like

a once—off decrease in the constant term. Table 2 presents estimates of the

delivery lags equation allowing for an intercept dummy beginning at a variety of

points between 1980.3 and 1985.1. Equations are estimated allowing for a maximium

lag of 3 4 or 5 quarters (i.e., N=3, 4 or 5). The equation is run on both the

CPI—based and WPI—based marginal costs proxies.

     Table 2 shows that in most cases the estimated constant term (and therefore

the profit margin) falls as predicted. In five cases the constant term increased

after the break point but the increase is significant in only one case.   This

observed fall in profit margins is consistent with the implications of the

beachhead model (NB: we expect type—1 errors once in 20 tests). Table 2 can

therefore be said to provide support for the model. It is important to note,

though, that such a drop in the estimated constant term is consistent with a large

number of alternative models. In other words, this test of the beachhead model has

very little power against alternatives. Is always, all we can say is the data is

not inconsistent with the model.

     Table 2 may be critised for restricting the profit margin shift to be of the

once—off type. Given the heterogeneity of industries and the possibility of other

expectations processes it might seem more sensible to allow the profit margin to

shift over time. To allow for this, we estimate equation (1) with N3 allowing the

profit margin to vary over time according to a fifth order polynominal (a fifth

order polynominal allows for a close fit of the S—shaped time path of the profit
                                      19

 margin predicted by a random—walk exchange rate process). Thus we estimate
              3.                                  5.
 lo(P)= k + Z [3'lo(C.)      + Ut, where k    c + Z a3(time). This is estimated on
             i =0

both the CPI and the WPI   data.   The resulting time path of k (which is proportional

 to the log of the average profit margins) are plotted figures 10 and 11 from 1977.1

to 1986.2. In both figures the profit margins are still shrinking in 1986, which

presumably implies that the market was becoming increasingly more competitive even

into 1986.

     While these time paths are not directly inconsistent with hypotheses 1 and 2,

they are somewhat detrimental to the beachead model. The model predicts a close

tie between profit margins and the number of firms. The conclusion that foreign

firms were continuing to enter the US well into 1986 is somewhat contrary to the

anecdotal evidence in the US business press.



Implications for the Import Volume Equation

     While the presentation of the beachhead model stressed the impact of the

dollar cycle on the import pricing equation, the model also has implications for

the import demand equation. For instance, we might expect that the increased

number of varieties might shift out the aggregate import demand equation

synchronous with the pass—through shift. Unfortunately, it is not possible to make

strong predictions since the implications for the volume equation are very

sensitive to modelling issues.

     To take an example, consider a market with homogeneous goods and Cournot
                                                                             1
behavior. In this case the first order condition of the firm is: p      (
                                                                            1S/6
where p, S, and c are the price, market share and dollar marginal cost of a typical

foreign firm. In this setup the entrance of additional firms decreases S and so

leads to lower profit margins but it does not affect the demand curve. We should

therefore not anticipate that a persistent change in market structure would cause a
                                    20
shift in the relationship between relative prices, income and the volume of imports

at an industry level. If most industries approximate this structure, then we

should not expect a shift in the aggregate volume equation.

     On the other hand, if we modelled the industry demand structure with the

Spence-Dixit--Stiglitz model the industry wide demand equation depends upon the

number of firms as well as price and income. Clearly this model would lead us to

expect an aggregate demand shift synchronous with the price equation shift. This

leads us to conclude that the beachhead model makes no strong predictions about

shifts of the volume equation. What we can say is:

Hypothesis 3: If there is a shift in the volume equation, it should be synchronous

with the pass—through shift, and it should cause the historical relationship to

underpredict import volume.

     Figure 12 shows the regression residuals from a standard non—oil import volume

equation. The log of import volume is regressed on the log of US GNP and the log

of current and B lagged values of the import prices relative to the BNP deflator

(the real price lags are constrained by a third order polynomial distributed lag

structure). Figure 12 seems to indicate that there has been no shift in the

aggregate import demand equation.



5. The Bottleneck Model

     The second model we considered is the bottleneck model (Foster and Baldwin

1986). This model focuses on a different aspect of marketing, distribution and

servicing assets. Ps in the beachhead model we assume firms must incur some market

entry costs. Examples of such costs are distribution networks, training of sales

and service personnel and establishment of service centers. In the long run it

seems reasonable that these marketing and distribution assets are fully adjustable

and subject to constant returns to scale. However we might expect that not all of

the factors involved in distribution are instantaneously adjustable. That is to
                                     21

 say firms face a distribution capacity constraint (marketing bottleneck) in the

short run.

     With constant returns in the long run but some factors fixed in the short run,

 firms clearly faces diminishing returns in the short run. Moreover since the

diminishing returns stem from the fixity of distribution capacity, we might expect

 that the diminishing returns occur only at levels of sales that exceed capacity.

     An extreme version of the capacity constraint, which is common in the

industrial organization literature (e.g. Dixit 1980), is depicted in figure 13.

Here firms are asssumed to have a constant marginal cost of production and

distribution and a constant marginal costs of capacity expansion. The result is a

step function for total marginal costs where the discontinuity occurs at capacity,

K.

     The height of the step depends upon the number of periods the firm expects to

use the additional capacity. If it anticipates using the additional capacity

forever, the height of the kink is rA, where r is the constant discount rate and A

is the unit expansion cost. For shorter usage periods, the height will be greater.

Prices and costs are measured in dollars in figure 13. An exchange rate

appreciation will therefore shift down the marginal cost curve but not will not

affect the marginal revenue curve.

     If the exchange rate appreciates enough, firms will be led to the point where

they will choose to expand capacity. Figure 1f shows this situation. Marginal

cost curve mc0 is drawn so that it corresponds to the exchange rate a° where the

firm is on the brink of expanding. The price will be p°. If the exchange rate

continues to rise to e' the firm will expand capacity from K° to K', shifting the

marginal cost curve to mc'. As import sales and capacity expand the appreciation

will be passed through to lower prices in a continuous manner, lowering the price

to p'. This continuous relationship between the exchange rate and prices will

cease upon reversal of the appreciation.
                                    22
    When the exchange rate depreciates to e'' the marginal cost curve shifts up

to mc''. Initially the exchange rate rise has no effect since the firm remains

capacity constrained. In other words, the rise in marginal costs due to the

depreciation is entirely offset by the diminishing returns.   Consequently there

will be no change in outputs and price will remain at p'. It is not until the

exchange rate rises to a level like e''' (which corresponds to mc''') that the

depreciation will be reflected in a higher import price.   Pt e''' the price will be

pip? and output will fall to Q''.

     Plainly marketing bottlenecks result in discontinuous pass—through behavior.

Due to capacity constraints, total dollar marginal costs are a discontinuous

function of the exchange rate. Since the behavior of import prices is governed by

the equality of marginal revenue and marginal costs, the pass—through of exchange

rates to import prices is discontinuous

     The discontinuity predicted by the model is not a simple asymmetry.    The

discontinuity is path dependent. In the figure 14 example, a rising dollar led to

lower prices but a falling dollar did not raise prices (at least initially).

However, if due to a previous fall in the exchange rate, the firm was starting from

a situation depicted by mc0 in figure 15, the asymmetry would be reversed. Here an

appreciation would be absorbed by the kink (mc' for instance), while a depreciation

would be passed through (mc'' for instance) to a higher price, p''.

     This firm level reasoning must be modified when addressing aggregate

relationships. Clearly some firms may face no marketing bottlenecks so in the

figure 14 example the exchange rate change from e' to e'' would entail a reduced

aggregate pass—through rather than no pass—through. Those firms which are capacity

constrained should not raise their prices. Those which are unconstrained should.

This leads us to formulate our next hypothesis.

Hypothesis 4: The shift in the pass—through relationship should involve a period

of reduced pass—through that starts with the turn around of the dollar.
                                    23

      Once the exchange rate falls enough to alleviate all bottlenecks, there is no

 force to mute the pass—through of exchange rates. This gives us:

 Hypothesis 5: The end of the shift is not precisely predicted by the model.

 However once the shift ends, the pass—through elasticity should return to its

 pre—shock level.

 Despite the return of the pass—through elasticity to it original levels hysteresis

 has occured. The irreversible capacity expansion shifts the exchange rate at which

the bottlenecks will become binding.

     Since the economics of the bottleneck model involves no demand side

considerations, there is no reason to expect that the import demand equation should

shift. This conclusion implies

Hypothesis 6: There should be no shift in the import demand equation as a result

of the shift in the pass—through relationship.

     The bottleneck model involves a reduction in the pass—through elasticity while

some firms are capacity constrained. The net result is a temporary reduction in

the pass—through elasticity but a permanent shift in the relationship between the

level of the exchange rate and the level of prices.

     The time patterns of the forecast errors and regression residual shown in

figures 1 through B provides contradictory evidence on hypothesis +.    As noted

above, the shift appears to occur during the rising dollar in the WPI data, but at

the turn around in the CPI data. Thus the WPI data (especially figure 1 and 2)

seem to reject hypothesis 4 while the CPI data (figures 3, 4, 7 and 8) seem to

validate it. The CPI data indicates that the shift is still occuring, so that it

is too early for evidence on hypothesis 5.

     The evidence in Foster 1987 comes to bear here. Foster finds a pronounced

trend toward lower estimated pass—through elasticities across time, at least for

the aggregate pass—through relationship. If we use the bottleneck model to

interpet Foster's regressions, we find some support for hypothesis 4.
                                  24
     According to the bottleneck model, there was a structural break in the

pass—through elasticity beginning in 1985. In particular there was a reduction in

the pass—through elasticity. If this were true, but a regression were run

restricting the elasticity to be constant across the whole period, then the

estimated elasticity would be a complicated weighted average of the two sub—period

elasticities. When Foster runs regressions on samples starting at progressively

later dates, he is essentially increasing the weight put on the lower post—1985

elasticity. While there are alternative explanations for Foster's results, they

certainty are not at odds with hypothesis 4.

     Hypothesis 6 is concerned with the impact of bottlenecks on the volume

equation. As discussed above, figure 12 indicates that there has been no

pronounced shift in the import volume equation. This is consistent with hypothesis

6.




6. Conclusion

     This paper finds strong evidence that the pass—through relationship has

shifted in the 1980s and that the nature of the shift is not inconsistent with the

hysteresis hypothesis. Results on specific structural models, the beachhead and

bottleneck models, are less conclusive. The data tends to support both models, but

neither by itself can provide a convincing accounting of all the evidence. We

conclude that we have failed to find a single, simple micro story that can fully

account for the puzzling behavior of the macro data. As a result we conjecture

that both models are likely to play a role in any complete accounting of macro

import price behavior.



Future Research

     This paper contains a number of lessons for future research. The first

 involves the nature of structural models which might account for the shift. Any
                                   25
explanation must focus on an economic factor causing firms to find it optimal to

not pass the depreciation through to higher prices. In particular the business

press assertion that import prices have failed to rise because foreign firms have

been cutting profit margins is incomplete.

     The second concerns future empirical work. Clearly more precise tests of the

structural models require industry level data. Moreover this paper points out that

hysteresis in import prices involves a lasting change in the parameters underlying

the equilibrium relationship between import prices and the exchange rate.   In a

time series estimation of the pass—through relationship, this will appear as a

structural break. If the test statistics are to be meaningful (that is if the

statistics are to have well defined distributions under the null of hysteresis and

the alternative of no hysteresis) the estimation equation must allow for structural

breaks. The exact nature of the structural break should be derived from the model.
                                                  26

Appendix — A Delivery Lags model of Lagged Exchange Rate Effects

    This appendix derives the estimation equation of a structural model of the

pass—through relationship which explicitly accounts for lagged exchange rate

effects.. Delivery lags are a well known source of lagged effects in

macroeconomics. The model here is simply a straightforward application. We find

it convenient to work with a differentiated products framework where each firm has

a monopoly position for its own variety and maximizes profits in terms of dollars.

     This model of lags assumes that firm j faces a delivery lag of n. periods, and

a stochastic US demand curve. Period t output is assumed to reach the US market in

period t+n... The firm chooses sales to the US, yJ,
                                                 t
                                                    in each period to maximize the
             J

discounted sum of expected profits. Consider the case of n1. The problem of

firm j is:

                                                  -
(2) ma E(                   Rt
                                     R(Pt÷i[yJ)        ),
                      t=o        [




where            and c are the dollar price in period t+l (this depends on y) and the

marginal cost (which depends on the exchange rate) respectively, and R is a

constant discount factor, (1/(1+r)). Adopting fairly standard macro notation for

expectations (e.g., x11 is the expectation of x formed at time t—l) the typical

Euler equation for this problem is:



                            c
                  =
(3) t÷i   It          R( l-i/€)



where E3 is the constant demand elasticity faced by firm .        We   have assumed

R(1—l/e3) is non—stochastic. If different firms face delivery lags ranging from

                                                             e               &
zero to N periods, the aggregate import price index                    t—n
                                                                                 where e   is
                                                            j=l          j
                                                            27
 the number of firms and e'                   is   firm j's weight             in   the index) will be:




 (4) t=          ft
               i=l
                       i   —n
                               j        1

                                    (l—l/e)
                                                        -

                                                        j
                                                        t—n
                                                                 16
                                                                 j




where c           is firm j's dollar marginal cost in period t-n. Note that n is
          t—ni                                                                                 J            1

firm—specific          and ranges from zero to the maximium delivery lag lengths N.

        Taking logs of (4) produces:

                               C r            R    'i i&                 N
(5) log(P) =           log(                         -                +       < iog       n             ),
                              j=1   L       (1_1/J)                      i=O            jE?.   1c._j

where in the last term we have grouped firms according to the length of their

delivery lag, i.e., ?.              is      the set of firms with a delivery lag of i periods. The

parameter             is the sum of the &'s of the firms with delivery lags equal to i, so

cx' =     &'.
        iC?1
        Equation (5) depends crucially on unobservable expectations. To implement (5)

empirically we must specify the expections process in terms of observable

variables. To this end we assume firms have rational expectations in the sense

that while their expectations may be incorrect, their expectational errors have a

mean of zero and are uncorrelated with every thing that was in their information

set when they formed the expectation.

        This assumption allows us to specify the expectations in terms of observables

and at the same time gives us a theory for the time series properties of the error

term. Specifically, replacing                           (the expectations) with the values actually

realized, we get:
                                                 28


(6) log(P) = log(     rr
                                r        R              )   +
                                                                N
                                                                Z o.
                                                                      1   log(C_.)
                                                                                1
                                                                                             +
                                                                                                 Ut,
                                L (1—lIE3)                      i=0



where              index of individual firm's marginal costs.

      Using reasoning that is fairly standard in macro econometrics, the assumption

of rationality makes the stochastic properties of u easy to establish. Clearly u

has an expectation of zero, and E{UtUt_} =0 for all i > N. However

          N, due to the presence of overlapping expectational errors.                                      In other
for i

words, u follows a order—N moving average process.

        It is important to note that u is not orthogonal to the contemporary

regressands, so we must instrument. The assumed rationality provides us with a

large set of instruments. ny variable that was in the information set of firms

when the expectations were formed is orthogonal to ut.                        Thus we have E(utXt)O

for all i > N, where                    is the set of the publicly available variables at time

t—i

        If we use indices for P and C which are proportional to the true indices,

i.e.., P= S Pt and C v Ct then (5) becomes:



                           e                                      N
                                                            ) + 2 cx. log(C              )       + u
(7) log(P') =
            t
                 log(A     Tt       I                                     1          1                 t
                           j=1           (l-l/&)                 i=0



where A is the ratio of '               to   5. Clearly P' must be the real price of imports since

demand equations depend on relative prices, and C' must be a measure of real

marginal costs measured in the same units as P'.
                                    29
 FOOTNOTES

 1. Carmen Reinhart pointed out that the NI non—oil price deflator is a variable

weight index, while the CPI and WPI cost proxies are fixed—weight indicies. Since

the composition of US imports has been changing, part of the divergence between

actual and forecasted may be due to aggregation problems. This cannot be the whole

explanation since Mann's work shows that even industry level pass—through equations

 (where compositional changes are absent) have shifted.



REFERENCES

Baldwin, Richard. 1986. Hysteresis in Trade. MIT mimeo, pril.



Baldwin, Richard. 1987. "Hysteresis in Import Prices: the Beachhead Effect." First

Boston Working Paper No. FB—87—10, February.



Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman. 1986. 'Persistent Trade Effects of Large

Exchange Rate Shocks." NBER Working Paper No. 2017, September.



Bean, Charles. 1987. 'Sterling Misalignment and British Trade Performance." Centre

for Labour Economics (LSE) Discussion Paper No. 288, July.



Chamberlain, E. 1933. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition. Harvard University

Press, Cambridge,



Dixit, Avinash. 1980. "The Role of Investment in Entry—deterence." The Economic

Journal, 90, 95-106.



Dixit, Avinash. 1987a. "Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms under Fluctuating Real

Exchange Rates." Princeton mimeo, September.
                                   30



Dixit Avinash. 1987b. "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate

Pass-through." Princeton mimeo, November.



Dornbusch; Rudiger. 1986. 'Exchange Rates and Prices." merican Economic Review,

77, 1, 93—106.



Foster, Harry. 1986. 'The Relationship Between US Import Prices and the Exchange

Rate: n Empirical Investigation." MIT mimeo, December.



Fosters Harry and Richard Baldwin. 1986. "Marketing Bottlenecks and the

Relationship between Exchange Rates and Prices." MIT mimeo, October.



Feinberg, Robert. 1986. "The Effects of Foreign Exchange Movements on US Domestic

Prices.", mimeo, December.



Gavin, Michael. 1987. "The Dollar as a Speculative Bubble 198f—l98S." Columbia

mirneo, March.




Grossman, Gene and Carl Shapiro. 1986. "Foreign Counterfeiting of Status Goods."

Princeton mimeo.



Krugman Paul and Richard Baldwin. 1987. "The Persistence of the US Trade

 Deficit." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.



Mann, Catherine. 1987. "Prices, Profit Margins and Exchange Rates after the Fall."

 Federal Reserve Board mirneo, July.
                                   31

Mann, Catherine. 1986a. Prices, Profit Margins and Exchange Rates.' Federal

Reserve Bulletin; 72, 367-379.



Mann, Catherine. 1986b. 'The Effects of ggregate Demand and Exchange Rate Shocks

on the Profit Margins of Internationally Traded Goods." Federal Reserve Board

mimeo, November.



Nelson, P. 1970. 'Information and Consumer Behavior." Journal of Political Economy,

78, 311—329.



Schmalensee, Richard. 1982. "Product Differentiation Pdvantage of Pioneering

Brands." American Economic Review, 72, 349—365.
Figure 1:Forecast errors af pass through equation using WPI
  data with no lags, estimated on pre—1981:3 data.
   002
         0
 —0.02

 —0.04-

  —0.06

  —0,0
   —0.1

  —0.12
  —0.14
  —0.16
  —0.1

    —0.2
  —0,22
                          79    60    61        82     83     84    6.     86
             77      76
                                                     + forcasted values
             O log of real non—oil import
                  prices

Figure 2:ForeCaSt errors of pass through equation using WPI data
  with 8 lags, estimated on pre—1981:3 data
  fl   n4

  0.02
        n

 —0.02
 —0.04
 —0.06


  —0.1

 —0.12
 —0.14
 — IJ. 1 6


   —0.2
 —0 22



              o log    of real non—oil import         + forcasted values
                      prices
Figure 3:Foracast errors of pass through equation using CPI data
  with no lags, estimated on pre—1981:3 data.
  4.8


 4,75

  4.7

 4.65

  4.6

 4.55

  4-,5


 4,45

  4.4

 4,35
           70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 8.3 84 85 86 87
         a log of real non—oil import     + forcasted values
              prices


Figure 4:Forecast errors of pass through equation using CPI data
  with 8 lags, estimated on pre—1981:3 data.
 4.8

4,75

 4.7

4 65

 4,6

4.55

 4,5


4,45

 4.4

4,35
          70 71 72 7374757677 7 79 0 1 2 83 4 85 86 87
       Q log of non—oil import prices     + forcasted values
Figure 5: Regression residuals from pass through equation using WPI
  data with no lags (estimated on 1975:1—1986:2)
  002
         n
 —0.02
 —0.04
 —0.06
 —0.08
  —0.1
 — 0.1   2
 —0,14
 —0,16
 —0.18
  —0.2
 —0.22
 —0.24
             77     78             79       80            .91           82    83        84   8.5

             0 log of real non—oil import                                    + fitted values
                  prices


Figure 6: Regression residuals from pass through equation using WPI
  data with 8 lags (estimated on 1975:1 — 1986:2)
  0.02



 —0.02
 —004
         0-
             I




                    / '    +-•
                          .'
                                        \
                                                     ..' \


  -0.1-
 —0.12-
 —0.14-

 — C'   18                                                                                         it. t
  —0.2 '                                                                                     "
 —022
 .....,,2.
             77      75
                               I


                                   7•
                                             I


                                            50
                                                 I    I    I    I   I
                                                                        2      I

                                                                               53
                                                                                    I
                                                                                        54   5.5

                  log of real non—oil import                                  4 fitted values
                     prices
Figure 7: Regression residuals from pass through. equation using CPI
  data with no lags (estimated on 1967:1 — 1987:2)
  4,8


 4,75

  4,7


 4.65

  4.6


 4,55

  4,5


 4 45

  4,4.


 4,35
           70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 7 80 81 82 8.3 84 85 86 87
         Q log of real non—oil import       ÷ fitted values
              prices



Figure 8: Regression residuals from pass through equations using CPI
  data with 8 lags (estimated on 1967:1 — 1987:2)
 4.8


4,75

 4.1


4.65

 4,6


4,55

 4,5


4.45

 4,4

4,35
          70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77   78   79 80 81 82 83 84 85 8€ 87
         D log of real non—oil import        - fitted   values
              prices
Figure 9: Regression residuals from pass through equation based on
  nominal import prices and nominal foreign costs (1967:1—1987:2).
4.8

4,75

 4,7

4.65

 4.6

4.,55



 4.5

4,45

 4,4
        79             81     82      83     4        85       86         87
             log of nominal non—oil        + fitted   values
                import prices




  Figure 10: Time varying profit margin, CPI data




  77          7       79      EO                                    84-        85   86
            Figure 11: Time varying profit m.argin, WPI                     data
                                                                   —
        -




       1




       —
            I
                             7
                I   I    I       I           I           I                       I     I          I             P
                                                 1
                                                     I                  I                  I

       77           73                 ?30                                                 84         85   86


            Figure 12: Import volume equation, fitted vs actuals




5.5
5.4.




5,1
  5




4.6
L5

       69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 8IJ                                 81       82 8.3     84 85 86 87
                                     o Actiia1           -4-   fitted
      Figure 13: MonopolistiC firm's Problem with Bottleneck




$'s




                                  Residual
                                   Demand


                                          —.mc(e)




                              Marginal
                               Revenue


                                                     Imports
                       K
          Figure 14: Discontinuous Pass—through with Bottlenecks


        $'s




pt It

p0
pt                                                   mc''' (e' '




                                                         Residual
                                                          Demand
                                                     mco(e°)
                                                     mc'' (e' ')

                                                     mc' (e')




                                              Marginal
                                               Revenue


                                                           Imports
              Q'.''   K°   K'
Figure 15: Reversed Asymmetry in the bottleneck model




  ptt




                                                                 It
                                                           Inc



                                                                      mc'

                                                                            Residual
                                                                            demajid




                                            i'iargifl-'-
                                            revenue
                                                                 Imports
 TABLE 1 —   Likelihood   Ratio Tests for   Structural   Break on Reduced Form Equations

                                                             DATA
                                                 CPI data            Manf. WPI data
                                        Level     1st Diff Real       Level   Real
 Model Formulation

                          Break Point
 Helkie & Hooper             1980:3         **
                             1982.1         **     —

                             1982.3         **     —

                             1983.1         **     —

                             1984.1         **     -
                             1985.1         na

Krugman & Baldwin            1980:3         **     **         **       **      **
                             1982.1         **     **         **       **      **
                             1982.3         **     **         **       **      **
                            1983.1          **     **         **       **      **
                            1984.1          **     **         **       **      **
                            1985.1          **     **         **       **
Mod'd Krugman & Baldwin 1980:3              **     **         **       **      **
                        1982.1              **     **         **       **      **
                        1982.3              **     **         **       **      **
                        1983.1              **     **         **       **     **
                        1984.1              **     **         **       **      **
                        1985.1              **     **         **      **      **

** indicates  no structural break hypothesis rejected at 99.5 7.
na indicates test could not be performed due to near
      singularity in data
—  indicates test was not performed
Helkie & Hooper
 log(p) = c + log(pform) + pdl(log(er),8) + pdl(log(pcom),4) ÷ AR(1)
     pdl indicates that lags were restricted to follow a 3rd order polynomial;
        length of lag follows variable name.
     p is nominal non—oil import price
    plorm is an import weighted index of foreign CPI (6—10 and 8 LDCs)
    er is the import weighted nominal exchange rate index
    pcom is a world commodity price index
    first order autocorrelation correction was performed
Kruqman & Baldwin
 log(p) = c + pdl(log(er),8) + AR(1)
    pdl indicates that lags were restricted to follow a 3rd order polynomial;
        length of lag follows variable name.
    p is either nominal or real non—oil import price deflator
    er is either nominal or real import weighted exchange rate
    first order autocorrelation correction was performed
Modified Kruqman & Baldwin
 Iog(p) = c ÷ log(pform) ÷ pdl(log(er),8) + AR(1)
    pform is either a CPI or t4PI based import weighted index of either real or
       nominal foreign prices
    er is either nominal or real import weighted exchange rate index
TABLE 2 — Change in Profit Margin at Various Break Points
                                                         Data
                                           CPI data             Manf. I,JPI data

Model Formulation
                            Break Point
Delivery Lags
/Rat'l Exp'ns.(NS)           1980:3                 **                   **
                             1982.1                 **                   *
                             1982.3                 **               I
                             1983.1                 **               I
                             1984.1                 **
                             1985.1                 **

                                                    **                   **
 /Rat'l     Exp'ns.(N'+)      1980:3          .
                                              4 **                       *
                              1982.1
                              1982.3            **                   I*
                              1983.1                **
                              1984.1                **                   *
                              1985.1          L     **                   *
 w/Rat'l                      1980:3                **                   **
             Exp'ns.(N3)
                              1982.1                **                   *
                              1982.3          .1.
                                                    **
                              1983.1                **
                              1984.1                **
                              1985.1                **                   **

.L    indicates that intercept dummy is negative implying that perceived
        demand elasticity increases after break point (i.e., profit margin
        falls)
      indicates that intercept dummy is positive implying that perceived
        demand elasticity decreases after break point (i.e., profit margin
        r i ses)
**    indicates    no change in constant term hypothesis rejected at 99.5 7.
        level
*     indicates    no change in constant term hypothesis rejected at 95
        level




Delivery Lags Pass Through Equation:

                              N
     log(P) = c + dummy +     Z r. 1og(rer. ) + MA(N),
                             i=0
  where Pt is the real import price, dummy is an intercept dummy
starting at the break point listed, and rer. is the real exchange rate
 at t—i. M indicates that the error as assumed to fol1o a moving
average process of order N.
