                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE BASIC ANALYTICS
                               OF MORAL HAZARD




                              Richard J. Arnott

                             Joseph E. Stiglitz




                           Working Paper No. 2484




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                January 1988




We would like to thank Seppo I-lonkapohja and two anonymous referees for useful
comments, and the National Science Foundation, the Olin Foundation, and
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2484
                                                 January 1988




                     The Basic Analytics of Moral Hazard




                                  ABSTRACT

     This   paper develcçs the basic analytica of noral hazard, for the
two-a.itcxzie case where either a fixed damage accident oirs or it does
riot. The analysis focuses on the relationship between the insurance
premium paid ar the insurance benefits received in the event of an
accident, ar is corducted in benefit-premium space. The central
massage of the paper is that even when the urd.erlyirg functions, the
expected utility function ard the function relatim the accident
prthability to accident-prevention effort, are extrQly well-behaved,
the irdifference curves ard feasibility set (the set of insurance
contracts which at least break even) are not—irdifference curves need
not be convex arxl feasibility sets never are; price-ard inccze-
consunption lines may be discontinucus; ard effort is not in general a
ircriotonic or continucus function of the paramaters of the insurance
policies provided.
    Part I of this paper establishes these results, while Part II
discusses scm of their iirplications. The bad behavior of irdifference
curves ard the feasibility set profirdly affects the nature ard
existence of cxxpetitive &iuilibrium. We illustrate this, thcxzh we do
not provide a thorough analysis. We also show that cxir canonical nodel
of an insurance market with noral hazard can be reinterpreted to
provide a nodel of loans with bankruptcy, or of work incentives.



Note: ä=       ,        ,     A


Richard J. Arnott                                Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Queen's University                               PrincetOn University
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6                        Princeton, NJ 08544
CANADA
                  The Basic nalvtics of Moral Hazard
     In the staixard (ArrcM-Debreu) carpetitive treatnnt of risk, the
states of nature, which occur with exogencxis probabilities, are
observable. Insurance cxntiient on the realized state entails lump-
siun transfers across states aixi therefore has no incentive or
substitution effects.
    Moral hazard arises when neither the states of nature nor
irxiividuals' actions are observable to an insurer)- What is observable
is whether a particular accident has occurred. tJrxler these cor3itions,
there is no ucthanism by which the insurer can iixiuce the insured to
reveal either the state of nature or his level of precaution
truthfully. Thus, the insured-against events are accidents of varyir
drees of severity, cor.itional on neither the state of nature nor the
insured's actions. The provision of insurance against such events will
generally affect the iixiividual's incentives to take precautions2—
i.e., have substitution effects. There is therefore a tradeoff between
incentives ard risk-bearing. This is the noral hazard problan.
     Moral hazard is pervasive in the econany. It occurs whenever risk
is present, iriiividuals are risk-averse, arKi "effort" is costly to
itcriitor. rd it arises not only in insurance markets, but also when

     1this is the extreme fonn of noral hazard. Moral hazard probl
arise, thcugh they are diluted, when the states of nature ar/or
irK3.ividuals' actions are imperfectly observable (observable with noise).
     2The provision of insurance therefore affects the probabilities of
the events. For this reason, we define noral hazard to arise when the
provision of insurance affects the probabilities of the insured-against
events.
                                    2
insurance is provided by governments, thrc.igh social institutions, or
in principal-agent cx)ntracts.
     This paper develops the basic analytics of ncral hazard.      The

analysis focuses on the relationship between the insurance premium paid
ar the insurance benefits received in the event of an accident.     We

derive the properties of the irxlifference curves ar of the feasibility
set, the set of insurance contracts which at least break even. The
central massage of the paper is that even when the ur1er1yir
functions, the expected utility function ar the relationship between
ef fort ax the accident prcabi1ity, are extremaly well-behaved, the
irdifference curves arxl feasibility sets are not—ir*.ifference curves
need not be convex ari feasibility sets never are; price- axx macma-
consumption lines may be discontinuous; arxl effort is not in general a
irriotonic or continuous function of the pararreters of the insurance
policies provided or of the prices of goods.
      Part I of this paper establishes these results, while Part II
 discusses sate of their iit,lications. We shc that our canonical nidel
 of an insurance market can be reinterpreted to provide a imde1 of loans
 with bankruptcy, or of work incentives. The properties that we uncover
 here have profour implications for the nature arxl existence of
 cctrpetitive equilibrium. We illustrate sare of these




      ecause of space limitations, we provide a thorcigh analysis of
 the nature ar existence of ccetitive equilibrium in a cipanion
 paper (Arnott ani Stiglitz [1987a]).
                                    3
                       Part I: Basic Analytics

1. The Wdel
    Thra.ighout ncst of the paper we shall enploy the sinpiest model in
which moral hazard is present. Each irxIividual in the econciny engages
in a single activity that has two possible outxues, which we refer to
as "accident" arKi "no accident" .' The c*itxit of the econcany is a
consuirption good which is the only good in the ncany. n
ir1ividual 's level of outp.it (his consumption or inccsne in the absence
of insurance) depends on whether or not an accident occurs to him. The
probability of an individual havirg an accident is a function of his
accident-prevention effort,5 and different individuals' accident
probabilities are statistically iixleperdent. To isolate the ithencarena
arising fran moral hazard (fran those which would arise if there were
adverse selection as well) we assurre that individuals are identical.
Alternatively, we could assume that insurers can observe all the
relevant characteristics of the insured (except, of course, effort),
and interpret cur analysis as applying to a group with the sarre
characteristics.
     Because they are risk-averse, individuals will want to insure
against the accident. We assuxte that whoever provides the insurance

     4One nay instead interpret the two aitcares as "large damage
conditional on an accident occurrixg" and "nall damage conditional on
an accident occurring."
    5Our analysis is sufficiently general that effort may be
interpreted variously as exertion, the tiit spent in accident-
prevention activity, the nature (unpleasantness) of the accident-
prevention activity undertaken, and (for saxe utility functions) units
of the consumption good used up in accident prevention.
                                    4
can serve whether the accident has occurred, bit neither the
urIerlyin states of nature nor irdividuals' effort levels—this is the
informational asynintty which gives rise to the ural hazard prthln.

Thus, insurance is provided against the accident. As iire insurance is
provided, the marginal private benefit to the inlividual of experdirg a
given level of effort on accident prevention falls; as a result, he
will teni to eqerd less effort which will increase the probability of
his havirg an accident.
     We denote by Yo      ar   Yi consurrtion in the events no accident
ard accident, respectively. In the absence of insurance
            y0=w         y1=w-d,
where   w is the no-accident out.it ard d the damage due to the
accident, so that w-d is the accident outpit. We characterize an

insurance policy in term of a net (of priuin) payout or benefit, a
which the inlividual receives in the event of accident, ard a premii,
19 , which the irdividual pays if
                                  an accident does not occur.6 Thus,

with insurance
            y=    w-/3   ard   Yl = w-d+a .                      (l.la,b)
        The probability, p ,   that an   accident occurs to an irdividual   is
 a function of his level of (accident-prevention) effort, e . At sate
 points in the paper, we shall asstm that the irdividual has a choice
 of only a discrete nuither of effort levels, each corresporxlir to a
 different accident-prevention activity or technique.         In this case,
 effort n1 not be quantified. We denote by pJ the probability               of



     6This correspords to an insurance policy with 9 payable in both
 events, ard a gross payout in the event of accident of a +      19


                                         5
accident when effort level j is chosen, ar by     the prc1abi1ity of
accident when nothir is done to prevent the accident.7 we ass.m that
  < 1 —with no effort an accident need not occur.
     At other points in the paper, we shall asstm that the ir1ividual
has a choice over a continuum of effort levels, we assi.nt that nre
effort always reduces the pr±ability of accident ar does so in a
continucus manner, and we cardinal ize effort in such a way that e=O
with zero effort and p (e) is strictly convex and analytic for e > 0.
Thus, p' (e)       <   0   ard p"(e) > 0   for e> 0 .       this case, too, we
                                                           For
assun that p(O)                  p<1   we refer to p(e) as the prcbability-of-
accident function.
       The individual 's expected utility is
                 EU = (1—pJ)UJ0(y0) + pJUJ1(y1)                               (1.2a)
in the discrete effort levels case, where J0 is the individual 'S
utility function with effort j if an accident does not occur, aixi
Ui1        the   correspordir utility function when an accident              does   occur.
In the continuum of effort levels case, expected utility is
                 EXJ= (1—p(e))U0(y0,e) +p(e)U1(y1,e).                         (l.2b)



We assuxre that
                           au.

                           a>
                                        a2U
                                           21 <   0,   i = 0, 1 ;   i.e •,   in each
                                        äy
event      and for     every effort level, there is positive but diitinishir
marginal utility of consunption. For the continuum of                 effort




           7w lli the iidividual to mix activities on the assunption that
p=    E     Up3 where U] is the prcportion of "time" he devotes
      :i
devotes to accident-prevention activity j
                                              6
                                                          äU.
levels case we shall ass ackitionally that                      <0 ar
a2U                                                           ä2U.
          , 8   .it shall place r reztions °''                äye
ae2

   In imid of the subsequent analysis, it will prove insightful to
focus on certain restricted classes of utility functions. Sattiiies we
shall treat expected utility functions of the form
          EU = (l—PJ) u0(y0) + pJu1(y1)    eJ     —
                                                           (l.2ai)
in the discrete effort levels case, ar
             EU = (l—p(e))   u0(y0) + p(e)u1(y1)      —   e(l.2bi)
in the continuum of effort levels case. We refer to these as separable
expected utility    functions.      Note that to go fran        (l.2a) to (l.2ai) an
fran   (l.2b) to (l.2bi) requires three assumptions:              first, that utility
in both events is    strongly      separable in   consumption    ar effort; secoixi,

that the disutility of effort is event-iMeperKlent9                  ard   third, that

effort   is measured by the disutility it             causes.        For part of the

 analysis, we go further ard assume that the utility-of-consuliption
 function is also event-irdepenjent, that is U,J (y)
                                                     = u1 (y) for all

 y . The general theory requires, of ccurse, neither the assumption of
 separability nor that       of   event-iixleperdence. Cxr objective is to shcM
 that even with these        strong   assuirptions, the irdifference curves aixi
 feasibility set will not be well-bthaved.
      8Sfrce the cardinalization of e has been chosen so that
 p(e) is convex, this assumption is restrictive.

      9Th1s assumption ard the previcus one are natural if cur iixdel is
 interpreted as static, since normally we think of effort as occurring
 prior to the realization of the event ard prior to consumption. These
 two assumptions are less reasonable if instead cur indel is interpreted
 as describing a stationary state.
                                           7
     Unless specified otherwise, we asstme separability.                    We consider
sate of the cczrçlications that arise with non-separable utility in
sections 4 ar 6.3.

2. Ill-Behaved Consuners with Well-Behaved Utility Functions:
     The Peculiar Share of Irdifference Oitves
2.1 Discrete effort levels.
     We define vJ (aj3) to be the expected utility as a function of cr
ar      J3 when effort level j is chosen in the discrete effort levels
case,   i.e., VJ(a,/3) = (1-pJ)UJ0(w-/3)    + pJUJ1(w-d+a)            Eui   .   i.et   v)
be the irdifference     curve in a-        space alor which expected utility
is V with effort level j           . Fmu      (1. 2ai), with separability the

slope of such an effort-fixed irx3.ifference     curve at           (a,3) is




              = —( ____) = up          .      s(a,f3) > 0       ,             (2.1)
                     aaP/a,8    u(l-p3)
where    a'       a derivative ar s is the marginal rate of
              denotes
substitution between a ai fi with effort level j . The slope

is positive because a is a good ar     is a bad. Let
          U"
A0 ()     - —4 denote the (local) coefficient of absolute risk
          U0
aversion in the no-accident event with premium fi           ,

A1(a)     - U,'
            j—4
                  denote the corresporin coefficient in the event of
              1
accident. Then the curvature of the effort-fixed irK3.ifference curve
can be shn to be

                     = — s(A,1+s3A0) < 0 .                            (2.2)
              da
                                       8
Thus, effort-fixed irdifferex airv are strictly wex.
reflectiiø the ixitvidua1's aversion to risk. Also sixKe
a is a good az fi a bad, 1c,er effort-fixed infffference
irves are preferred.        These    relts are shin in Figure 1.
                                   Insert Figure 1
      We consider the case with to effort levels—high (H)
arxi lc* (L). Frcau (1.2ai), with the axtitrary insurance
package (a,) ar associated consunYtiOn levels (y1,y0)
the   iriividual's expected utility is
      VH(YY1) = (l_pH)u(y) + pu1(y1)
                                                      —    eH                 (2.3a)

with high    effort,   ar
                  =                   +
                                          pi1(y1)
                                                      —    eL                 (2.3b)
                       (1-p')u0(y0)

with lz effort. Frcan        (2.1)

                               H       u(y1)         pL         = sL(a,) ,
       sH(a,/3) = u(Y1)     (
                              p                  (                            (2.4)
                     ut(
                      00)    1—           u'(
                                           00)       1—




 since     L >   pH     (with   higher effort, the probability of accident is
 1crier). At any point      in    a- space, the 1i-effort irdifference curve
 is steeper than the high-effort irdifference curve since with 1czer
 effort the probability of accident is higher, an therefore to
                                                               maintain

 the sane level of utility, the irdividual                     requires a nal1er increase

 in   payit to cczrpensate for a given increase in prium.
         Irdividuals   choose the effort level            to   maximize their expected

 utility.     Fran    (2.3a) arti (2.3b)

                                             9
          vH(y0,y1) vyy
                -           >e—e       L
as
       u0(y0)       u(y1)               .                       (2.5)


Aior         which we refer to as the switdiiri locus, iix3ividuals are
irdifferent between the two effort levels; i.e. I1, L is the locus of
(a,) such that UJ (Yo) - u1(1) = H,L . Eq. (2.5) ilTplies that at

lc.j   levels of isurance (bel 0H, L) irKitviduals choose high effort,
while at high levels of insurance they choose 1cM effort, which accords
with intui-°

                                   Insert Figure 2


    We may nc define an irdifference curve with erdogenous effort
(hereafter sinply initfference curve) corespoiiliog to V=V to be the
locus of (a,3) such that max (Vl(a,/3),VL(a,/3)) = V        Since       .


irdividuals choose high effort for (a,/3) belcM p  arxl li effort
for (a, ) above 0H, L , then the iniifference curve V coincides
with v1 below 4H,L jj vLu above it. Fran Figure 2, this
iiplies that an iixlifference curve is the uer envelope of the
correspotxlini effort-fixed irdifference curves, ard furthernore that it
has    an escalloped shape arvi    is therefore not   convex.
        The above argunnt generalizes straightforwardly to the case where
there is an arbitrary nunter of discrete effort levels. Hence, with
sevarable utility, as itore insurance is provided, the inltvidual

        l0 assune that high effort is chosen with zero insurance.
                                            10
ctiooses sucxessivelv l,er levels of effort. FurthernEre. irxiifference
curves are rt convex.
2.2 ntinuum of effort levels
     Expected utility       is a function   of a , /3 , ar        e; i.e.,

   = 1J(a,$,e) .       We   assim the irdividual chooses the level of effort
taking a    ar /3 as        fixed; thus,
           e(a,/3) =   argmax EXJ(a,/3,e) ,                             (2.6)
which we refer to as the effort supply function. Substitution of (2.6)
into EIJ(a,/3,e) yields V(a,13) , which gives expected utility as a
function of the benefit aria premium. We nc investigate the prcerties
of the correspordirig ir1ifference curves.
     Usir the erivelcpe        theorem, it   folls frau (l.2bi) that
           = s   ar                 =                +
                                                         (1—p2
                                                                 da '    (2.7a,b)



where s                is the marginal rate of substitution between
                 p U0,

 a ani /3 arid r u/u is the ratio of marginal utilities. The
 expression in curly brackets in (2.7b) is native, reflectir the
 observation made earlier          effort fixed, irdifference curves
                                that, with
 wald be strictly convex because of risk aversion (recall Figure 1).
 alt increasing the annt of insurance decreases effort (we shall prove
 this shortly) arid increases the probability of accident, which effect
 by itself causes irdifferences curves to be concave; this is captured
 by the second tenn in (2.7b) which is positive (p' <0, r> 0

       <0)   .   Thus,      there   is one effect   causing indifference

 curves to be convex, arid another causing them to be concave. TO
                                             11
ascertain which effect daninates requires evaluating                                  -V
      Fran   (l.2bi), the first-onier corxlition of the                           inilvidual's

maximization prcbln is
                               +                           =0     .                        (2.8)
             e((—u0(y0)            u1(y1))p'(e)—l)
                     is the marginal private benefit of effort
(-U0 (y0) +u1 (y1) ) p'
in utility tern, the decrease in the prcbability of accident timas
the gain in utility fran not having an accident, while 1 is the
marginal cost. Since p" (e) > 0 , the secoi-order conlition is
satisfied at any local extrenum. Furthernre, where effort is
positive, differentiation               of (2.8)      yields,
                          2                                       2
      —
      ..e = — u(p')
      aa          p"
                              < 0 ar
                                            a/3
                                                  =   -   u(p')
                                                            p"
                                                                      <0      .            (2.9a,b)

These pations imply that                 at any ()              where the effort chosen

by the in3.ividual        is positive,       effort decreases as nore insurance is

provided until a point is reached bevord                        which effort is zero. This
result is shan      in Figure 3.


                                          Insert      Figure 3

Constant effort        loci have slcçe ard curvature


           - = - r ai
                                   d2
                                        - = r(A1-rA0).                                     (2.lOa,b)
           e                       da e

Finally,     we define        the zero effort line (ZEL) to be the locus of                         (a,)

satisfying


              (—u0(y0) +       u1(y1))     liin   pt(e)     — 1   =   0   .                (2.11)
                                           e0
      Define       to be the set of               (a,) for which effort is positive.
Then, using (2. 7a) ard (2. 9a,b),
                                                      12
th.
      4—
                                < o   for   (a,)
                                                                         (2.12)
                   0        for(aM/t
Ai    oczt)inirY       (2.12)    a (2.7b) yields

                                                 3
                                       uj (p')
                 [ (-& +                     2]           for (a,3) E

         =   f                                                           (2.13)


                                                            for   (a,)


Eq.  (2.13) in1ies that irdifference curves are convex bevorI
the zero effort line, bit be1'z the zero effort line effort may
fall off sufficiently fast as itcre insurance is provid that the
iixlifference curves are not convex. !re specifically, the
irdifference curve at a point (a,) is iwre likely to be noncorivex,
the less risk-averse are individuals (the smaller A1 an A0) , the
ure responsive the probability of accident to effort, ard the 1er
the curvature of the p(e) function.
     1st of the ar.pli1 literature on iral hazard corducts the
analysis on the assunption (explicit or iirplicit) that litlifference
curves are convex. We have shn that doir so is restrictive.
        Sample indifference curves are drawn in Figure 4. The slope
                                            Insert Figure 4 ——

                                                     13
discontiiiuity and subsuent nonconvexity in V0                      at the zero

effort line occurs if
     liin            =   -.                                              (2.14)
     e,O


This condition       relates to the curvature            of the prc1ability    of
accident     function as effort goes to zero. An example                in which this

condition     holds is p = - e6             for   small e and            1/2   ,   for
which
                 3              2
     urn             =          — e 2€-l      =
     e.j,o               e)
3. Price— and Inccai-Consunçtion Lines
     The possible nonconvexity of indifference curves inplies
that inccaue- and price- consumption lines may be discontinuous.
3.1 Two      effort levels, mac -consumption line

     We      tenn q           (the premiunVbenef it       ratio)   the "pric&' of
insurance. Then an inc-consumption line (IC) correspondiog to
price q is the locus of points of maximal utility on the faniily
of (budget)     lines /3 =      q(a-a0)     with /3        0 and a     0 .     An

effort-fixed income-consumption line                   is defined analogously, but with
effort    fixed.

        As   in the previous section, to iirrove intuition, we first thtain
the characteristics of the two effort-fixed income-consumption lines
correspondir to slope q ,       then detentine hcM the correspondiog
                                      and
inccae-consumption line is derived fran the two effort-fixed incczt-




                                                  14
consuntion lines.11 The high-effort iix me-ccrisuuption line, dert



     :
by icH , is given


     (u(9
             (P)
             1—p


ai its slope by
                           =q ,                          (3.1)




     thICH
             =-                                          (32)


The formula for the l—ef fort incc e-consuittion line arEl its slope
are analogcxs.
     We now show that the incare—consmtion lines may be
discontinuc&s. We start with the situation shcn in Figure 5, in which
a line with slope q is tarent to the same irdifference o.itve at two
points ar meets the a-axis at      . This is possible because the

irdifference curve has an escalloped shape. The lcMer tarency point
corresponds to high effort, the higher one to li effort. Then we
increase     cr0   ,   shiftir the line of slope q to the right, arx
ascertain whether V1(a,/3)   or v1(a,j3) increases faster alor the
respective effort-fixed incte-consunption lines. Surpose, for the
sake of argunrit, that vH is increasirg faster. Then in terme of
Figure 5,                         .   Since          =

                                              V}1H



      l] siitplify exposition, we examine only those sejitnts of
 incate- am price-consuirtion lines for which a> 0 arEl
/3>0.
                                         15
then            ,L   It ar1 7H id >             it      'ghere 6

                     a0—6             a0+8      a0+6


is an arbitrarily small positive nuither. This irrplies that the point
of maximal utility alor the line /3 = q(a- (a-6)) is on 1CL , while
the corresporx1ir point alon the line /3 = q (a- (a+6)) is on icH
Hence, in this case, the (effort-variable) incit-consumtption line
jtmips dznwards at a, fran (al,/3L) to (H,/3H) ,                as   ao   ireases.

___________________                  Insert_Figure_5

       It is straighforward to sh that
                  äV3
                            p(U1)J                                        (3.3)

To urbdersta1 this result, we may decanpose the effect of the increase
in a0    .   Prior to the increase, the irffvidual was at (aJ, /3J) .             Then

the initial effect of an increase in a0             is to cthare the
                                                       by tho
iixlividual's insurance p.]rdases to (aJ+da0j3J) which increases his
utility by (u'1)Jda0 with prthability pJ ,                 arx hence his expectud
utility by pJ (U' i) ida0 . The secx,r effect results frau ncvement from
(aJ -fda0, /3J) to sate other point on the budget line
  =  q(a-(ada0)) . Since the bxlget line at (aJ,/3J) is tarent to
the iixlifference amrve there, by the envelope theorem the secrx1 effect
has no first-order inpact on utility. It follows fran (3.3) that


                              <=>              pL(uj)L .                  (3.4)
sii                  while (u'1)1> (u1)L     a 1uget          along

line, then it açears that the ii me-xsmutiofl line can iunv
either u or d'an at a point of discontinuity. It can be shcn

that sucth is indee the case.
3.2   Continuum of effort              levels incxi1-CcXE.fl1VtiCfl         line

      Similar arguments shc'i that with a continuum of                       effort

levels,    there may     be   discx)ntinuities in the             ircczte-consunption       line.
Where     D ar D' are the lcMer ar uçer points of a discontinuity                                   in

the incane-corisurrtion line, the line jurrçs dn if
pD(ui)D > pD(u1) ar up if the inuaiity is
                                               in the                             oçosite

direction. In      addition, we can shs' that                    there   may be
slcaDel seqrrnts of the incai—consunvtiofl line. The slcpe of the
inccii-cons.mption        line         (except at the points of discontinuity)                is



                                   +
                                         (p' )
                                                 3uj
                     —   -    A1       p"p ( l-p)                                        (35)
             daIC                         ,
                                        (p )
                                               3,
                                                U0
                                                       '



                                   +
                              A0       p"p (l-p)
whicth    is positive if either the numerator or dencninator                        is

native, b.it not both.
3.3      Price-consuir,tion        line
         The price-consi.tiofl            line (PC)         is the locus   of (cr,/3)    of   maximal

utility on the family of lines /3                      = cp with /3        0 ani a       0 (i.e.,

rays natirg frczn the origin                      in   the positive orthant). We derive the

 effort-f ixed price-consunption lines ani then obtain the price-
 consunption line with effort eniogenc*is.
         The price-consuuption line                  with high   effort denoted by PC , is
 the locus    of   points      satisfying

                                                       17
                 HH
           (ui) p
             H Ha'
          (u) (1—p

ar its slope is

                               ,
             Pc       l+/3A

frcau whidi we see that an effort-f ix& price-consunvtion line can be
positive1y-s1cvI. The l-ef fort uations are analogous.
    We nc investigate points of discontinuity in the price-
consumption line. ¶flirn to Figure 6. We start off with a situation in
which a ray frcin the origin with slope q is tarent to the sane
irdifference curve at two points, the lcier one correspordir to high
effort ai the uçer one to 1c effort. The price-consumption line
jumps upwards at this price if                     ard dcnwards


if the inality is reversed. Proceedir as was done with
incai-oonsumption lines, we can sh that the price-consumption line
jumps upwards at a point of discontinuity if (U' i) HpTczH < (ui' ) LpLtL
ard dcMnwards if the inuality is reversed. This ineguality, too, can
go in either direction. Hence, the price-consunption line can be
discontinuous ard can I uiip either up or down at a point of
discontinuity.


                              Insert Figure 6


                                    18
      Similar results hold for the continuum.
      Finally,    we note that the existence ar properties of
discontinuities in the price- ar incx*ne-consunption lines deper on
global rather than local properties of the utility ar probability-of-
acxident functions. As a result, there açpear to be no simple,
primitive restrictions on these functions (except those whicth guarantee
that irxiifference curves are everywhere convex) which guarantee that
price- ar4/or iriccm—consuitptiofl lines do not have discontinuities.
      As we shall see later, the possibility of discontinuities in the
price- an incane—consuiiption lines has important inplications for the
existence ar properties of canpetitive equilibrium.
     In section 2, we examined the properties of irxlifference curves
when the expected utility function is separable.                   We n briefly

consider sane     of the ccanplications that arise         when this assunption is

relaxed.



4.    Non-separable Utility Functions.

       The level of effort expered at accident avoidance may           well   affect

the   marginal rate    of substitution between goods           in the two   events,


       12At   interior points,       the slope of     the price-consumption line is
given by
                            3
                        (p') ut
                                 1       1
                                -—
              —
                        p"p(l-p) a
                                3
                         (p') u'
                                     0       1
                                         +—
                         p'tp( l-p)       /3

                                                 19
accident ar no accident. This is vis1y the case where "effort" is
an experxliture of niney, so that uj (y ,e) = uj (y - e) . This greatly
cxlicates the analytics; we focus here on two interestir qualitative
results which enrge—ef fort may not be nonotonic in the anint of
insurance, ard in the continuum of effort levels case effort may not be
a continuc*s function of the anint of insurance.
4.1 Non-nonotonic effort.
     The first result is seen nostly easily within the context of the
discrete effort levels nodel. Here it is possible that vHo ar vL0
 (defined as before, but noi with non-separable utility) intersect trore
than once, as shown in Figure 7. If this occurs, then the inlividual
will tploy one level of effort at both high ar low annts of
insurance ard the other level at internliate ancynts. The intuitive
rationale for this is that as the (ccnpensated) aircunt of insurance
provided increases, the marginal cost (disutility) of effort may fall
faster than the marginal benefit. The bouzxlary lines in a - space
between different activities can have a1nst any shape.


                            Insert Figure 7


4.2 Discontinucus effort.
    We now show that with a continuum of effort levels, but a non-
separable utility function, effort may not be a continuis function of
the annt of insurance, even though the urderlyin utility ard
prthability-of -accident functions are "well-behaved."


                                   20
       To see this, we write the first-order coniltion for effort (for an
interior solution),
                                                     äU
                                  äU0            +
        (- U0   +   U1)p' = - (—(1-p)                      p)

The IRS is the       marginal benefit of effort, ani the WS the marginal
cost. Since

            J0+U1)p') =
            äe                   ( - — + äU1
                                         —) p'             + (-U0+U1)p"

the marginal benefit curve need not be dcMnward-slOpin. Increases in
effort may increase the utility difference between the accident ani
no-accident events aril hence increase the marginal return th further
effort.     Similarly, since

                     (l-p)   +      p)           a2U0 (1—p) — ä2U1                àU0—
                                                                                     äU1
        -             äe
                                         =   —                               +         —) p'
                                                 äe2           ae2

the marginal cost curve             need not be upc1ard-slopirP. If                   the   marqinal

 cost   to effort is ler in the no-accident event,                          nre   effort makes the
 no-accident event imore likely, ani hence may lcMer                        the marginal      cost of
 effort.        Thus, at any            (a,)         there may be multiple            local   cçtimal

 effort levels.

         The possibility     of multiple local optimal effort levels for a
 given      (a,/3)     considerably octplicates the analysis, since the effort
 level chosen by an iniividual may charge discontinuously as a                                 an $
 are    altered.

         A gecametric interpretation of                   this   discontinuity is       provided   in
 Figure 8. Consider two             fixed-effort           iixliffererice   curves, corresponding

 to different levels              of effort b.it the sane level of utility, which
 intersect twice           (in a-   space).          Consider e      (e1, e2)     .   If at
                                                      21
 --
(a,/3) , EU
                                       e    -.
              is convex in e , then V (a,/3) =
                                                 e
                                                 V
                                                     -
                                                     (a,f3) >

ve(a,p) . At (a,/3)   , effort will switch discontinuously between e1
arx e2.       If, hcever, EU is concave in e at (a, /3) , then there
can be no such discontinuity.

                              Insert Figure 8

5. Irriplications for Deitiaitl Functions.
      Quasi-concavity of in3ifference maps is important in conventional
theory because without it, demari functions are discontinuous.        The
analysis of section 3 can be interpreted as establishing that if
insurance firms offer individuals "linear" or price insurance
contracts--a payment of a with premium aq --the demand for insurance
(and hence effort) may be discontinuous in q . It is also easy to
establish that the demand function for insurance may be discontinuous
in other prices (e.g. the cost of autaiobile repairs) as well.

      Furthernire,   an increase in the price of insurance can lead to a
discontinuous     increase in insurance pirchased (ard a corresponding
discontinuous decrease in effort) rather than the expected decrease)-3
6. The Badly-Behaved Zero Profit Locus
      In this section, we show that with itoral hazard the set of
feasible contracts, those     at   which profits are non-native, which we
term the feasibility set,     is   never convex. We focus our attention on

     -3With separable utility functions, insurance purciiases decrease
with the price of insurance and effort increases, except at points of
discontinuity in the price-consumption line. This property does not
extend to non—separable utility functions. These results can be
obtained straightforwardly fran differentiation of the first-order
conditions of the individual's effort choice problem.
                                       22
the shape of the miter bouriiary of the set, which i refer to as the
resxe cc*traint or, where aprcipriate, the zero profit 1ocis (ZPL.
We again divide the analysis into two cases,
                                                 with two activities,
the other with a continuum of effort levels.
6.1 TWo effort levels, setarable utility.
     When high effort is experxled, the effort-fixed zero profit locus
is
     13(1_pH) — apR = 0 ,                                             (6.1)

which is a ray fran the origin with slope               H   Zero profits
                                            1-p
are made when the ratio of the premium to the net paycxit, which we
have tenid the price of insurance, equals the probability of accident
divided by the probability of no accident. When 1 effort is
expended, the corresporxling effort-fixed zero profit loucs is a ray
 fran the origin with slope                   Since with la'i effort, the
                                  1-p
probability of accident is higher, a higher price must be charged
for insurance to break even. The effort-fixed zero profit loci
 are shn in Figure 9.
                                  Insert Figure 9
       We nc.z derive the zero profit loc'is with effort endogenous.
 Define the feasibility set contingent on high effort to be the set of
 (a,/3) for which expected profits are non-neqative when high
                                                               effort is
 expended, and denote it by H r1 let          be the set of (a, /3) for
 which the individual chooses high effort; it was shown in section 2
 that this is the area below 0H, L      Define L and         accordingly
 for low effort, and         to be the feasibility set with effort
 eniogenous. A point        (a, (3)     is   in if either it is in ' H        aixi the
                                             23
iix3.ividual expers high effort there g it is       L   ar the    in .
iniividual experxs l effort there; i.e.  =     fl)       n £)

The feasibility set with effort enogencus is shzn by the cross-
hatched area in Figure 9. The zero profit loc'..s with effort erxiogenous
is the bouixary of                  .   Frai   the Figure, it is clear that the
feasibility set with effort erdogenis is not convex.
6.2 Continuum of effort levels, separable utility.
      The zero profit locus is
      (l—p(e))--ap(e) =    0        .                                    (6.2)

Its slope is given by

      thZPL
              =          Th',äe'                                         (.)
                                                                          63
                  (l—p)—(a+/3)p


Substitutir (2.9a,b)       into (6.3)     gives
                     (a+I3)u(P')3
               p-          p   ,,

                                               for    (a,j3)€2.
                         (a+13)u' (p')
               (l—p) +
                                                                         (6.3')
&r ZPL =
                                                for    (a,) ,
              1-p

      Several properties of the zero profit locus for this case
 are generally worthy of note.
 1.   The zero profit locus is continus.
 2.   The curvature of the zero profit locus depeits on third
      derivatives    of the prcbability-of-acCident function,
      restrictions on which have no persuasive econanic justification.
 3.   There are nonetheless restrictions on the feasible shape of the
                                               24
    zero profit locus. First, beycrd the zero effort line, the
    zero profit locus is (3(1-n) - = 0 . Secorxl, the zero
    profit locus incles the origin ar has a slope
                               third all points on the line

    sennt joining a point in           on the zero profit locus ar
    the origin must lie in the feasibility set.15 ilatedly, at any
    point on a positively-sloped sennt of the zero profit locus at
    which effort is positive, the ZPL is steeper than the ray
    joining the origin to that point.16               føjth, the zero profit
    locus can have an infinite slope ani backward-bending segments,
    but cannot have zero slope.-7

       14pJnie, with separable and event-inlepeixlent utility, the
slope of the ZPL at the origin exce&s the slope of the indifference
curve there (recall (2.7)).
       15Label the point on the ZPL (ao,13o)         and   a point on the line
sinent               .    Both have the same price of insurance, but since
effort
          (a1,131)
         decreases       as one ncves cut along the line segment, the
probability of accident is higher at            (ao,(3o)
                                                           than at    (a11(31)
Since zero profits are made at (ao,(3o) ,       positive   profits must be itade
at (a1,/31)

     16The slope of the zero      profit
                                    locus   given by (6.3'), that of a
                                                is
line joining the origin to the point (a,13) on the ZPL p(e(a,J3))/(l-
p(e(a,13))

     3-7Consider  increasing     frcxa sate point on the ZPL, holding a
                                  (3

fixed.    This has an ambigucus effect on profits. The increase in /3
with   effort constant, increases profits. ait the increase in (3 with
a constant, 1iers effort which effect by itself causes profits to
fall. When the former effect dczninates, the ZPL is positively-sloped;
when the latter dcininates it is negatively-sloped; and when the two are
offsetting, it is infinitely-sloped.holding /3 istant. Both effects
      Now consider increasing a
operate to decrease profits, which iirçlies that the ZPL cannot have a
                                       ,




zero slope.


                                           25
    4. The feasibility set is never convex.18
6.3 Continuum of      effort levels, non-separable utility.

    We     have seen that non-separability of the expected utility
function can cause effort to be discontinuous in the parameters of the
insurance contract. This can result in the feasibility set not beirrj
connected, and in points on the boundary of the feasibility set havir
positive profits.

                              Part II: Li1ications
     In   this part of the    paper,   we undertake two tasks: First, we shc.i

that the fact that both indifference curves and the feasibility set are
"badly behaved" has stror ilications for the existence and nature of
equilibrium; and second, we illustrate that our analysis of insurance
markets can be directly applied to other markets, inclx1irg credit and
labor markets.
7. Existence and Properties of Eciuilibrium
     A thorxh analysis of the existence and prcçerties of equilibrium
turns out to be rnarkably cp1ex, even for the simplest case of

     The slce of the ZPL beyond the zero effort line is p (0) / (1-
p(O)) , while at the origin it is p(e(O,O))/(l—p(e(O,O)), which is
smaller. Hence, a necessary condition for the feasibility set to be
                /3
convex is that —   at the point of intersection of the ZPL
                a
                                          p (0)
and the ZEL be   strictly less    than              . Bit   since   the point
                                          1—p (0)

                 /3    p(O)
is on the ZPLJ, — =             there.
                 a     l—p(O)

                                          26
separable, event-independent utility. A reasonably cciplete analysis
is provided in rnott and Stiglitz (1987a). Here our aim is to use the
gecitriC and analytic tools developed thus far in the paper to
illuminate sans of the issues involved. To siiilify, we continue to
assuins separable utility.
       The existence and properties of equilibrium are crucially
dependent on what information is available to insurance finns. There
are three itris of information of concern to an insurance finn when
insuring a client: i) whether or not the accident actually orred;
ii) the effort undertaken by the client to prevent the accident; and
iii) if effort is not observable, the client' s purchases of insurance
fran other    finns.

       In   our analysis, we have assumed, and shall   continue   to assuire,


that   finns cannot observe their clients' accident-prevention effort at
 all,1-9 and can observe perfectly and without cost whether an accident
 occurred.
       With respect to the other iten of information, we treat only the
 two extmts:     i) where a firm can costlessly observe its clients'
 insurance purchases from other finns—we tern this the "observable
 insurance purchases" case or simply the "observability" case; and ii)
 where a finn cannot observe its clients' purchases from other firir,
 the "unobservable insurance purchases" or "unobservability" case. This
 information is relevant since in the fonrer case the firm can ration
 its clients' purchases of insurance, whereas in the latter it cannot.

      19H8itran [1979) considers the case in which firs can observe
 their clients' effort with noise.
                                      27
    The existence ard prcerties of equilibrium also depen:1 on what
insurance contracts are der admissible. The set of admissible
contracts clearly deperds on what is cservable; if the quantity of
insurance pirchased at other firn is not cservable, then admissible
contracts cannot directly restrict the anøint prthased at other firms.
&it   there   may be other   restrictions   on the set of admissible contracts
which are imtivated by other considerations:      Should neqative
iisurance20 or raixic*u jpgp21 be alic? Should latent policies--
policies which are not purchased in equilibrium but seive to deter
entry—be permitted? The nature of equilibrium turns out to deperxl
critically on the answers to such questions. When the set of
admissible    contracts   is exparded, not      only   may there be new equilibria,
but       the newly-admissible contracts may upset the original
       also

equilibria (this occurs, for example, when the set of admissible
contracts is expanied frcan price contracts to price arKi quantity

contracts).      It is .ir view that what         contracts   should be treated as
admissible depenis on context (ard in particular, on transactions
costs) 22


       20ere the iwlividual pays when an accident occurs ani receives a
payout when it does not.
       2lpett ani Stiglitz [l987b) discuss randcan                  insurance with
cbsei:vability    of insurance purchases.

     22For instance, neqative insurance requires verifying that an
accident has not occurred, which may be far itore costly than verifyir
that one has occurred; rajxlczriization nay require verification that the
firm is in fact rardcmiizir accordir to the specified pi:thabilities,
again a task which is far harder than simply verifyir that it pays a
given annt       in   a given situation.

                                           28
7.1. Observabilitv: exclusive contract eauilibrium.
       Stien it is feasible for firn8 to restrict the quantity of
insurance (in particular, if the quantity of insurance which an
jrxIividual buys is thservable), equilibrium will be characterized by
exclusive contracts, in which the irxuividual will ,irdiase all of his
insurance frm a sir1e provider. The equilibrium is at the point of
maxiimim utility on the feasibility set.


                                    Insert Figure 10


     Figure 10 shs three possible exclusive contract equilibria for
the two activities case—e' ,e" ,        .   At e" , the point of
intersection of the high effort zero profit locus ar1 the switchir
locus, the      iriividual    would like    to pirchase itore insurance at the

goir     price       (pH/ (i_pH))      but were the firm to offer aitional
insurance, he would switch to a 1i level of effort, an the policy
would make a loss. This result extens to the case where there is a
continuum of effort levels. We sh.i&i in the previous section that at
 any       on a positively-sloped snnt of the ZPL at which effort is
       point
 positive, the ZPL is steeper than the price line joinir the origin to
 that point. This establishes that cciripetitive equilibrium will
 nonnally   entail   rationir       of insurance, when it   is feasible,   as well as

 positive effort ar partial           insurance (i.e.,   U'0 >

 7.2    Price   eauilibrium
        A   second form of equilibrium, which is relevant                        with
 unobservability, is that            where insurance firn simply       offer price

                                            29
contracts, and do not restrict the quantity of insurance. Cr earlier
analysis can be us& th derive several important results.
     A zero profit price equilibrium, if it exists, must be at the
intersection of the zero profit locus and the price-consumption line.
Because the price-consumption line may jump across the zero profit
locus (recall section 3), a zero profit price eauilibrium may not
exist.
     %hen the zero profit price eauilibrium exists, the level of effort
is zero with accidents which decrease or leave undiarx the mtrqinal
utility of incorr at each level of inccne. This follis frciim the fact
that in   a price equilibrium,        individuals set the price, q ,          eal     to
their marthal rate of substitution:

           q=u'0p/(u'1           (l—p))

while from     the   zero   profit condition
           q=p/(l-p)
Hence, u' o    = u'1    ; i.e. there      is   full   insurance   at the zero      profit
price equilibrium. This          implies that if accidents         decrease   or    leave

unchar&1 the marginal utility of inca, then

           U0 U1 ,
which   in turn implies, from the first-order condition          effort, for

 (2.8), that effort must be zero and that the equilibrium price is
        p(0)
q*_—
       We ni identify a set of sufficient conditions for the non-
existence of a zero profit price equilibrium. tfine the full
insurance line (FIL) th be the locus of (a,/) for which U'0 = U'1
From the above discussion it follcs that if a zero profit price

                                           30
equili.briuiu exists, it lies at the point of intersecticzt of the ZPL ar
the FIL; we label this point E . Nri surcose that: i) the expected
utility uncti.on is event-ierent; ii               (e)
                                                         =   ..
                                            e.Jo

ard iii) urn p' (e) = -co Fran (iii) ard (2.11), it fo1l'zs that the
          eO
zero effort line is characterized by u0 = U1 . FurtherTtre, with
event-irdeperKient utility, the ZEL ard FIL coincide ard satisfy
a + 13 = d . A necessary cordition for E to be an equilibrium
is that the irdifference curves be convex near E . 3.it we have
already seen, that urder cordition (ii), irdifference curves are
nonconvex in the neighborhood of the zero effort line,    ard that E is
 on the zero effort line.
      TWO further points should be noted. First, convexity of the
 injifference curves near E does not ensure the existence of a zero
 profit price equilibrium; to establish existence, a global analysis is
 required. Secord, the non-existence of a zero profit price equilibrium
 does not imply the non-existence of a price equilibrium. In Arnott ard
 Stiglitz [1987a) we sh'i that a price equilibrium always exists, but
 may entail zero insurance or positive profits.
 7.3 Other uilibrium forms.
      The fact that an insurance firm cannot observe insurance purchases
 fran other firms does not itan that equilibrium must be a price
 equilibrium. Since the insurance firm can observe its in sales of
 insurance to an irxiividual, by insistir that the inlividual purchase a
 large quantity, it can attempt to discourage the irdividual from
 purchasir from other firms. We refer to equilibria in which fints

                                     31
offer only quantity contracts as Q-equilibria, ar equilibria in which
sate finte offer price contracts arxi other quantity contracts as B-
equilibria. In Arnott ar1 Stiglitz [1987a] we sh that Q-equilibria
an P-iilibria iray not exist; that is,        given any set   of   insurance

contracts,   each of which at least breaks even, there exists a new
contract which if of fere:1 would be xrdiase ar make a profit.
(The entry of this new contract would, hcever, result in other



                           Insert Figure 11



fint making a loss.)       The non-existence of      equilibrium      hinges
critically on the properties of the inccme-consurrtion lines.
      To see this, assume that utility is separable arI event-
iix3.eperxlent arxl consider the situation where there is a single

inc.iir,ent finn in the market which offers a quantity policy. When can
this be an equilibrium? If the incumbent's policy lies strictly inside
the feasibility set, there exists a small, supplemantaiy policy
(possibly with neqative insurance) which would be bought ar be
profitable. Thus, the incumbent's policy must lie on the ZPL . The
incumbent's policy must also lie on the price-consumption line.
Sur.cose, to the contrary, that the incumbent offers the policy G
which lies on the ZPL but not on the price consuiition line, as
illustrata in Figure 12. Then the surplelTentary policy GA will be
urchase (since A is bel the irdifference curve through G); an
                                  32
if G is ll encxh, it will make a profit, because the effort at
A is aly slightly lcMer than at G bit the inplicit price of policy
GA is significantly higher than that of    G. S1i profits at A are
rative, while the suleitntaiy policy makes a profit, policy G
makes a loss. Thus, if iilibrium exists with a s]nle incuntent firm
offerir a quantity policy, the policy itust lie at the point of
intersection of the ZPL aiti the prioe-oonsuiiptiOfl line. If the price-
consunption line does not intersect the ZPL, such an equilibrium does
not exist.    If the price-consumption line does intersect the ZPL, it
does so at the point E23 , ani E may be a Q-equilibriurfl. A necessary
coriiition for E to be a Q-equilibriUm is that no part of the inccane-
consultVtiOn line correspordirig to the price q* = P(O)(0)     belcM

 (i.e., corresponcth to a higher utility level) E lies in the
 interior of the feasibility set. This is illustrated in Figure 12.
 The contract B is preferred to E , arxl since B lies on the
 incre—cOflSUITPtiOfl line correspordi-r to price q* = -p(o) '
 theirxlividual will prefer B to B plus E .       Since   also policy
 B by itself is profitable, it upsets E
                                                   12
       When we further ircdify the analysis to allow for latent policies,
 a much richer set of equilibria emarges; an:I the set of equilibria
 inclrdes positive profit equilibria.
 8. Alications


       23pecall that the point E is the point of intersection of the
  zero profit locus ard the full insurance line, ard that
                                                      it
                                                          when the price-
                                                         does so at E
  consuitption line intersects the zero profit locus,
                                     33
    We have cast r presentation of the basic analytics of ural
hazard in the context of an explicit insurance market. In this
section, we wish to shcM that, with only a transformation of variables,
the analysis can be employed to cast light on issues in the principal
-agent literature. Thcigh the basic framawork of our analysis can be
applied in many contexts, the apprcriate uilibrium concept (the set
of admissible contracts) may well differ, because what is easily
observable in one market may not be so easily observable in another;
e.g., while it may be possible to restrict insurance p.ircthases from
other firs, it may not be possible to restrict employment with other
employers, or borrcMing from other creditors. In the discussion belcM,
we shci hc the iwdel can be reinterpreted to investigate sharecropping
ath credit contracts, but we do not consider the appropriate
iilibrium concept for each of the markets.
      First, consider the contract between a risk-neutral larxilord ar a
risk-averse laborer (e.g., Stiglitz [1974]) in a competitive market.
Shaild the laborer: i) rent the land, thereby receiving outplt less
rent; ii)   be paid   a   straight wage for farming   the   land; or iii) share

tpit with the landlord?            The output from     the   land   is    a random

variable    arx:1 (in the    sense of first-order      stochastic        dominance)

increases with the laborer's effort. Moral hazard arises in the
contract because the landlord is unable to observe the laborer's
effort. Suppose, for purposes of exposition, that there are only two
output levels, with the probability of the higher output level
increasing in the laborer's effort. Let M and xL denote the high
and 1cM c*.itpits respectively; R denote the landlord' s required average

                                       34
return on the lard;    ai i: denote the tenant's cx,nsunption in the
high- ai low- cxitpit events, respectively; ai e denote the tenant's
effort. Then with the transfonnation of variables xH - R <-> w,
xL <>d ,   yH<>w3 , yL <->w-d+a , the prciDlexn is identical to the one
analyzed in the paper. The rental contract correspors to no
insurance, the wage contract to full insurance, ar sharecro.pirg to
partial insurance. Cur earlier result that, where exclusivity can be
enforced, partial insurance is typical in equilibrium, corresporxs to
the result in the current context that, where the lariilord can be sure
that the worker will not obtain insurance against outp.it variability
fran a third party, sharecroppifl will typically occur.
     Secorxl, consider the starxard credit contract (e.g., Stiglitz ar
Weiss [1981)). The borrower obtains nney fran the ler1er ar uses
 only this iney to finance a project.            The project is either
 successful, yieldir return R , or unsuccessful, yie1dir a return of
 zero. Moral hazard occurs because the probability of success depers
 on the effort of the borrower, which is unobservable to the leixier.
 The borrower starts with wealth W. We contrast the consequences of a
 limited liability loan, with collateral C aixi interest rate i , with
 an unlimited liability loan with rate of interest r        The   limited
 liability loan increases consumption in the event that the project is
 unsuccessful, bit because i >       , it reduces consumption in the
 event the project is successful. Thus, the limited liability loan is
 essentially an unhilrLtted liability loan canbined with insurance. With
 the transformation, W+R-L (l+) <->w ,   R<->d




                                   35
      l+i) <->w-/3 , W-C, <->w-d+c , the problem is identical to the
W+R-L (

insurance problem analyzel in the paper. In the insurance context, the
exclusive contract           equilibrium always               (with separable, event-
in1eperent      utility)   entails positive insurance. The analogous result
here is    that a limit        liability     loan    always dczninates an un1imita

liability    loan. nother        analogous result is            that if the len:ler   can

enforce exclusivity        (in this context,      can ensure that       the borrower does
not    obtain an additional loan, or              additional     insurance against    the

failure   of   the project,     frcn   a third party) the equilibrium contract

will entail     credit rationing,      in the sense that at the

implicit price of i         iance q =                          the   borrower would
                                            L(l±r         ,


like to Obtain a larger loan, but is unable to firxl a lerer who

will agree to this.

       A similar analysis holds if          instead    of choosing an effort level,

the borrower has a choice of the riskiness of the two projects, both of

which require an investnnt L. One project has, say, a higher return

if    successful,   bit a lower probability of success. We assm that the

magnitte of the       return    cannot be observI (otherwise, in those cases

where the      project   was successful, the        lerer could        infer what project

the borrower had uixlertaken). If the borrower ur1ertaJces the safe(s)

project,    his   expect utility       is
             U(W +   RS - L(l+i))(lpS) ÷ U(W - C)p5
while if    the   borrower urslertakes the        risky       (r) project, his expect

utility is

             u(w+Rr_L(l÷i))(1_pr) +U(W-C)p'



                                             36
where p is the probability of the project failing.               The fixed-
project irK1ifference curves, shc*jn in Figure 13, are well-behaved. We
can define the switching locus along which the iniividual switches frcaii
the safe to the risky project,     •  Above the line (l'z collateral),

the in3.ividual unertakes the risky project. The zero profit locus for
the bank is that where the expected return to the loan (l-p) hr-p (Lr-C)
is equal to the opportunity cost of furs, L . As drawn, the
equilibrium, Z , will be characterized by rationing ard an exclusive
contract, where feasible. Since the implicit price of insurance is

                     Insert Figure 13

q=   L(1r)-c ,      while the iir1icit quantity is L(l+) —   C



 rationing has several behavioral inpilcations. Not only is the
 borrower unable to obtain as large a loan as he would like at the
 actuarially fair price, bit he is also unable to obtain the equilibrium
 loan with less collateral. Furthentre, even though there is an excess
 dr for loanable furis, lerders will not respord by raising the
 interest rate, i ,   since doing so has adverse incentive effects.


 9. Concli...iix   Comments

      If one believes, as we do, that incentive/itoral hazard problems
 are pervasive in our economy, then it is important to construct itdels
 exploring the existence ard properties of market equilibrium taking
 these problems into account. It would be nice if we could simply
 assi.m that the relevant functions had the necessary mathematical
                                        37
properties to al1i a convenient borriir of concepts, itthcds, and
results frun starxard ccanpetitive equilibrium analysis.    Such,
unfortunately, does not turn ait to be the case.
    The cbjective of this paper has been to develop the basic
analytics of the economics of itcral hazard. In spite of rnakir
standard convexity assumptions concernir the uix1erlyin utility
functions and technology, we have established that insurance
indifference curves are in general not convex and feasibility sets are
never convex. Effort may care discontinucsly as the paraneters of
the insurance contract are varied. Jnd even when strong conditions are
imposed on the forms of the underlying functions, price-consumption and
incat—consi.imption lines as well as dand curves may exhibit
discontinuities.
    We have suggested that these "perversities" have sate profc*.irxl
implications for the existence and nature of equilibrium. For
instance, equilibrium will be characterized by exclusive contracts
entailing quantity rationing, when these are enforceable. When they
are not, other contract foni will be seen. When only price contracts
are offered, there may be no equilibrium with insurance in which firms
make zero profits. And when each finn rations the quantity of
insurance it sells, bot cannot chserve the quantities sold by other
fint, no equilibrium may exist.
     Thc*igh we have ccLiched our analysis in terns of insurance markets,
the results have a direct bearing on all markets in which uncertainty
and incentive problens are both present; we illustrated this by shcing
hi the imxiel can be adapted to analyze labor and credit markets. The

                                   38
further investigation of the pervasive perversities which we have
urovered here, ai their fliçlications for equilibria urer a variety
of institutional settirs, retiain issues for future research.




                                 39
         Apeniix: A Brief Fview of the Earlier Literature
   It is unusual to have a literature reviecz at the er of a paper.
Hever, this paper is self-contained, ar it is easier to explain here
what contrib.ition earlier papers made.
       Pauly [1974] presented the basic two-c*.itcares moral hazard model.
He assun1 event-ilTlepelxlent utility ai convexity of irifference
curves in a- space. He identified ard explained the exclusive
contract equilibrium with servability ard the zero profits price
equilibrium with unobservability.
       Helpian arxl Laffont [1975] broke new grourd in recognizir the
non—convexities to which moral hazard can give rise. For the n-cxitcare
case, they proved the existence of an exclusive contract equilibrium
with observability, ar*:1 of a zero profit price equilibrium with
unobservability when irdifference curves are convex in the analog to
a-/3    space.   They also presented an example de.rronstratirg the non-
existence of a zero profit price equilibrium with unobservability when
irdifference curves are non—convex. They did not, hciever, investigate
the non-existence probl further, or consider alternative equilibrium
concepts.
    st of the subsequent literature has focussed on the principal-
agent prcbln with a continuum of c*itccais, on the assunptions of
convex irdifference curves ani continuity of effort in the paramaters
of the insurance contract.
     Stiglitz (1983] provided an overview of the authors' preliminary
work on moral hazard ard introduced the analysis of price equilibria.
Heliwig (1983] argued that in the case of uncbservability of insurance
 r*1rdases, there is a considerably larger set of cardidate equilibria
than the price equilibria; in particular, he csidered Q-equilibria
ar Sm fori of -equilibria for the case of two discrete effort
levels.
                                   BIBLIOGRAWY

1rnott, R.J., ar J .E. Stiglitz, "The Welfare Econanics of Moral
     Hazard," Q.ieen' s University Institute for Ecx)Iunic Research,
     Discussion Paper #635, (1986b).
Arnott, R. J., arx J. E. Stiglitz,
                                 "Equilibrium in Cctipetitive
     Insurance Markets with Moral Hazard," xniii. (1987a).

Arnott, R.J.,        arx1 J. E. Stiglitz, tRarcanization with Asymitric
     Information,"     nuiieo.   (1987b).

Heliwig, M.F. , "On  Moral Hazard arKi Non-Price Equilibrium in
     Ccinpetitive Insurance Markets," University of Bonn, Disc.ission
     Paper #109, (1983).

Helpnan, E., ath J. -J. Laf font, "On Moral Hazard in General
     Equilibrium," Journal of Econanic Theory, 10(1975), 8—23.
H1iitran, B., "Moral Hazard arx1 Observability," Bell Journal of
     Econcznics, 10(1979), 74—91.
Pauly, M. "Overprovision ar Public Provision of Insurance,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 88, 1974, 44—61.

Stiglitz,   J. E.,   "Incentives ar Risk Sharir   in Sharecroçpir,"
     Revieq of Economic Studies, XLI (1974), 219—255.
Stiglitz, J . E., "Risk, Incentives and Insurance: The Pure Theory
     of Moral Hazard," The Geneva Papers, 8(1983), 4—32.
Stiglitz,J. E., and A. Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
     Imperfect Information," American Economic Review, 71, (1981),
     393—410.
                                               vo




                                VI >Vo


                                                  a
0



    Figure 1:   For a fixed level of effort, indifference
                curves are convex. Lower indifference
                curves correspond to higher levels of
                utility.
/3
             V1 >V0
                                    •S

                   H,L
                                            To


                                               vt..


         HIGH
         EFFORT

                                        LOW EFFORT




     0                                           a


              :o aotiitis, arab1o uti lit;. erivatLor
              of   :odffrr. curv.
                  ZERO EFFORT




0                                                a


igure 3: Constant effort loci with a separable
         utility function.
/3
      ZEL                 v2>vI A'0



                                       V0


                                         VI

                                         V2




 0                                                       a




     Figure 4:   Sample indifference curves.   Separable utility.
                 iontinuum of effort levels.
/3


                                         $:q(a_a,)
                                                            VI
                                                             0




                                                              '0
                                                        ICL




                             ICH
     0 (4,0)                                            a




     Fcure     i tarlgert to 5ace indifference curve   at
             t-.c. points.
'3
                                    PCL

                                                           L
                                                         V0




                                                              jH
                                                                vo




                              PCH

                                                                a




     Figure 6:       from origin tangent to same indifference
                 Rat.'
                 curve at two points.
$
                                              VL




0                                                        a




    Fcure   7: without separability, effort ma: not be
                monotonic in insurance provided.
/3             e2>ê >    e1
                                                          ie
                                                           '0
                                                          Ve2
                                                           0


                                                           0




 0                                                              a


     - :oure   3:   With non—secarabl- utitLt1 and a :ontinuum of     effort
                    levels, some effort levels may   be dominated   and
                    effort may not be continuous.
$
                                                           (L)


                                           _____
                                            S
                                                 RESOURCE
                                                        CONSTRAINT

                                                    $
                                                    a




                                                                  a




    Figure :   The resource constraint and the feasibility set,
               two activitieS, separable utility.
18

                        e.          ''N,
                                    V0




 0                                            a




     Figure 10: Possible exclusive contract ecuilibria,
                two activities, separable utility.
      ZEL FIL                      ZPL

                                         V




0                                                  a


Ficure 11:   Possible non—existence of a zero profit price
             equilibrium.
                                   ZPL
/3



                                             V0

                             / /
                           //
                         /
                   / /
                 /
                                              IC—line for
                                              q* p(O)/( 1p(O))

 0                                              a


     Fiure 12:    .2 is utst by the supo1erritary ccrtra:t   A
                  E is Ubset by B
(i-p)L
                                ..pr)(j p)L_pt(L(I+p)C):0
            sr
                                V0



                                          ip)L_pS(L( I+p) -C) =0




    0                                   L( I+p)-C



     Figure 13: Credit rationing with   moral hazard   when
                 the lender cannot observe the riskrness
                 of the £:ro:ect chosen cv the borrower.
