NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STATE OF NEW KEYNESIAN ECONOMICS:
A PARTIAL ASSESSMENT
Jordi Galí
Working Paper 24845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24845

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

I am grateful for comments to Klaus Adam, Adrien Auclert, Davide Debortoli, Mark Gertler,
Gordon Hanson, Greg Kaplan, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Tim Taylor. Christian Höynck and
Cristina Manea provided excellent research assistance. I have benefited from the financial support
of the Generalitat de Catalunya (AGAUR Grant 2017SGR1393) and the Ministerio de Economía,
Industria y Competitividad (Grant ECO2017-87827). The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The State of New Keynesian Economics: A Partial Assessment
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 24845
July 2018
JEL No. E32,E52
ABSTRACT
I provide an overview of recent developments in monetary economics, with an emphasis on
extensions of the New Keynesian framework that assume a zero lower bound on the short term
nominal rate, as well as models with household heterogeneity.

Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat

In August 2007, when the first signs emerged of what would come to be the most
damaging global financial crisis since the Great Depression, the New Keynesian
paradigm was dominant in macroeconomics. It was taught in economics programs all
over the world as the framework of reference for understanding fluctuations in
economic activity and inflation and their relation to monetary and fiscal policies. It was
widely adopted by researchers as a baseline model that could be used flexibly to analyze
a variety of macroeconomic phenomena. The New Keynesian model was also at the
core of the medium-scale dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium (DSGE) models
developed and used by central banks and policy institutions throughout the world.
Ten years later, tons of ammunition has been fired against modern macroeconomics in
general, and against dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models that build on the
New Keynesian framework in particular. The criticisms have focused on the failure of
these models to predict the crisis, a weakness often attributed to their lack of a financial
block that could account for the key factors behind the crisis, whose origin was largely
financial. 1 Other aspects of the New Keynesian model and its extensions that have been
the target of criticism include the assumptions of rational expectations, perfect
information, and an infinitely-lived representative household.
Those criticisms notwithstanding, the New Keynesian model arguably remains the
dominant framework in the classroom, in academic research, and in policy modeling. In
fact, one can argue that over the past ten years the scope of New Keynesian economics
has kept widening, by encompassing a growing number of phenomena that are analyzed
using its basic framework, as well as by addressing some of the criticisms raised against
it. Much recent research, for instance, has been devoted to extending the basic model to
incorporate financial frictions in the basic the model, as described in Gertler and
Gilchrist (2018) in their contribution to the present symposium. In addition, the New
Keynesian model has been the framework of choice in much of the work aimed at
evaluating alternative proposals to stimulate the economy in the face of the unusual
circumstances triggered by the crisis, including the use of fiscal policy and
unconventional monetary policies. 2
The present paper takes stock of the state of New Keynesian economics by reviewing
some of its main insights and by providing an overview of some recent developments.
In particular, I discuss some recent work on two very active research programs: the
implications of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and the interaction of
1

See, e.g., Lindé et al. (2016) for an evaluation of the empirical performance of a standard mediumscale DSGE model during the financial crisis and its aftermath, as well as a discussion of the kind of
changes needed to improve that performance. Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013) evaluate the
forecasting performance of DSGE model during the Great Recession, and conclude that a version of that
model augmented with financial frictions and external information compares well with Blue chip
consensus forecasts, especially over the medium and long run.
2
See, e.g. Blanchard et al. (2017) for an analysis of the effectiveness of fiscal policy to stimulate the
recovery of the euro area economy using a DSGE model as a framework of reference. Del Negro et al.
(2016) use a standard DSGE model augmented with liquidity frictions to evaluate some of the
quantitative easing undertaken by the Fed in the wake of the financial crisis.

1

monetary policy and household heterogeneity. Finally, I discuss what I view as some of
the main shortcomings of the New Keynesian model and possible areas for future
research.

The New Keynesian Model: A Refresher
Modern New Keynesian economics can be interpreted as an effort to combine the
methodological tools developed by real business cycle theory with some of the central
tenets of Keynesian economics tracing back to Keynes’ own General Theory, published
in 1936.
The hallmark of the approach to modeling economic fluctuations pioneered by real
business cycle theorists is a reliance on dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium
frameworks. At some level, these features seem natural ingredients of any model that
seeks to explain economic fluctuations, and as such they have been fully adopted by
New Keynesian economics. (To put it differently: It is easy to imagine the criticisms
that modern macro would receive if it relied on models that were static rather than
dynamic, deterministic rather than stochastic, and partial rather than general
equilibrium!) In practice, the real business cycle approach takes the form of a set of
equations that describe, in a highly aggregative manner: i) the behavior of households,
firms and policymakers, (ii) some market clearing and/or resource constraints, and (iii)
the evolution of one or more exogenous variables that are the ultimate source of
fluctuations in the economy. More controversial may be the assumption, widely found
in both real business cycle and New Keynesian models, that the behavior of households
and firms (and, in some instances, of policymakers as well) is the outcome of an
optimization problem, solved under the assumption of rational expectations (though a
strand of the recent literature, not reviewed here, has examined the consequences of
relaxing the latter assumption).
What does New Keynesian economics add to the standard real business cycle
apparatus? One can pinpoint three significant modifications. First, it introduces nominal
variables explicitly--prices, wages, a nominal interest rate. Second, it departs from the
assumption of perfect competition in the goods market, allowing for positive price
markups. Third, it introduces nominal rigidities, generally using the formalism proposed
by Calvo (1983), whereby only a constant fraction of firms, drawn randomly from the
population, are allowed to adjust the price of their good. The assumption of imperfect
competition is often extended to the labor market as well, with the introduction of wage
igidities (nominal or real).
The resulting framework has two key properties. Exogenous changes in monetary
policy have non-trivial effects on real variables, not only on nominal ones. In addition,
and more importantly, the economy’s equilibrium response to any shock is not
independent of the monetary policy rule in place, thus opening the door to a meaningful
analysis of alternative monetary policy rules.
2

To build some intuition for how this framework leads to a breakdown of monetary
policy neutrality, it is useful to lay out a simple version of the New Keynesian model
(with sticky prices but flexible wages). It is composed of three relationships.
First, the dynamic IS equation states that the current output gap is equal to the
difference between the expected output gap one period in the future and an amount that
is proportional to the gap between the real interest rate and the natural rate of interest.
The “output gap” is the difference between output and the potential or “natural” output.
Natural output and the natural rate of interest are the values that those variables would
take in equilibrium if prices were fully flexible. In algebraic terms, the relationship is
~
yt = Et {~
y t +1 } − σ −1 (it − Et {π t +1 } − rt n )

where ~
y t is the output gap (given by the difference between log output y t and log
natural output y tn ), it is the nominal rate, π t denotes inflation, and rt n is the natural rate
of interest.
Second, the New Keynesian Phillips curve, states that inflation depends on expected
inflation one period ahead and the output gap. 3 Thus, it adds an expectation term to the
conventional Phillips curve, and can be written out as:

π t = βEt {π t +1} + κ~yt
The third relationship is an interest rate rule, which describes how the nominal rate of
interest is determined. This condition is typically linked to the conduct of monetary
policy. Thus, an interest rate rule frequently used in the literature as an approximation to
the conduct of monetary policy in advanced economies (at least in normal times) is a
Taylor-type rule in which nominal interest rates traditionally rise and fall based on the
current inflation rate and detrended output (for example, Taylor 1993), but in which
monetary policy at a given time can be tighter or looser than the historical pattern. This
relationship can be written as
it = φπ π t + φ y yˆ t + vt

where ŷt denotes the log deviation of output from steady state, and vt is an exogenous
monetary policy shifter following some stochastic process.

3

See Woodford (2003) or Galí (2015) for a detailed derivation of these first two equations and a
discussion of the underlying assumptions. The first equation can be derived by combining the Euler
equation describing the optimal consumption behavior of the representative household with a goods
market clearing condition requiring that output must equal consumption. The second equation can be
derived in two stages. In a first stage, a relation between inflation, expected inflation and the markup gap
(that is, the log deviation of average markup from the desired markup) can be derived by aggregating the
optimal price setting decisions of firms subject to constraints on the frequency with which they can adjust
prices. That relation is combined with a labor supply equation, a goods market clearing condition and an
aggregate production function to obtain a simple relation linking the markup gap to the output gap, thus
giving rise to the relationship in the text.

3

Figure 1 represents the equilibrium of the above economy. The AD schedule (after
“aggregate demand”) combines the dynamic IS equation and the interest rate rule,
giving rise to an inverse relation between inflation and the output gap, for any given
expectations. The NKPC schedule represents positive relation between the same tow
variables implied by the New Keynesian Phillips curve, given inflation expectations.
The economy’s equilibrium is determined by the intersection of the two schedules
(point E0).
A New Keynesian model based on these three relationships yields several interesting
insights. As noted earlier, the model implies that monetary policy is not neutral. In
particular, this non-neutrality has (at least) two dimensions.
First, an exogenous monetary policy shock will affect not only nominal variables, but
also real ones (like output). In particular, an exogenous tightening of monetary policy
(that is, a persistent increase in vt ) raises both nominal and real rates, leading to a fall in
output and inflation, while leaving the natural rates unchanged. In the research
literature, Galí (2015) discusses the implied response of a calibrated New Keynesian model
to different types of shocks. In particular, the model’s predictions regarding the effects of
monetary policy shocks are in line (at least qualitatively), with much of the empirical
evidence on the effects of those shocks, as found among others in Christiano et al. (1999).

Second, monetary nonneutrality in this context also arises because the response of
output (and other real variables) to a nonmonetary shock—that is, a shock that changes
the natural levels of output and/or of the interest rate, y tn and rt n --is not invariant to the
monetary policy rule adopted by the central bank. Interestingly, when the interest rate
rule shown above is calibrated in a way consistent with US evidence for the post-1982
period, the model implies responses to technology shocks consistent with the empirical
evidence, including a countercyclical response of employment (for example, see Galí
1999; Basu et al. 2006).
Other insights generated by the New Keynesian model pertain to its normative
implications for the conduct of monetary policy. One finding in that regard has to do
with the insight that if the central bank applies a rule which adjusts the policy interest
rate sufficiently strongly in response to variations in inflation and output (a condition
known as the Taylor principle) then the economy will have a unique equilibrium. 4
Otherwise, the equilibrium is locally indeterminate, opening the door to fluctuations
driven by self-fulfilling revisions in expectations (sometimes known as “sunspot
fluctuations”). Clarida et al. (2000) provide evidence suggesting that the local
uniqueness condition may not have been satisfied during the pre-Volcker era,
potentially giving rise to unnecessary instability and providing an explanation for the
macroeconomic turbulence of that period.
4

As shown by Bullard and Mitra (2002), the required condition takes the form

κ (φπ − 1) + (1 − β )φ y > 0 .
4

Beyond simple rules like the Taylor-type rule described above, the literature has sought
to characterize the optimal monetary policy, defined as the policy that maximizes
welfare for the representative household. One useful formulation suggests that the
optimal monetary policy should consider three sources of welfare losses: i) fluctuations
in the gap between output and its efficient level (i.e. the so-called welfare-relevant
output gap); ii) fluctuations in inflation, which generate losses due to the misallocation
of resources caused by the associated price dispersion; and iii) an average (i.e. steady
state) level of output which is itself inefficiently low, due to uncorrected real distortions
(e.g. monopolistic competition).
In the special case in which the natural level of output corresponds to the efficient level
of output at all times, then welfare losses result only from fluctuations in the output gap,
𝑦�𝑡 , and fluctuations in inflation, 𝜋𝑡 . The optimal policy in that special case requires that
inflation be fully stabilized at zero. Notice that the New Keynesian Phillips curve
implies that such a strict inflation targeting policy has an important byproduct: it
stabilizes the output gap at zero, thus making output equal to its natural (and, by
assumption, efficient) level. This property is sometimes referred to as the Divine
Coincidence (for discussion, see Blanchard and Galí 2005) As a result, welfare losses in
this setting will be zero and the economy attains its first-best allocation.
However, the previous extreme result holds only when the flexible price (or natural)
equilibrium allocation is optimal—that is, when nominal rigidities are the only
distortion in the economy. More generally, the presence of real frictions is likely to
drive a wedge between the natural and efficient levels of output. As a result, the steady
state itself may inefficient, or the presence of real frictions may imply an inefficient
response of natural output to some shocks, or both. As a result, a trade-off emerges
between price stability and the attainment of an efficient level of economic activity, thus
giving rise to a nontrivial optimal monetary policy problem. It turns out that the optimal
policy—along with its associated output gap and inflation outcomes—depends on the
assumptions regarding the extent to which the central bank can credibly commit to a
state-contingent plan. Standard treatments of the optimal monetary policy problem and
its consequences have focused on the extreme cases of full discretion (period-by-period
re-optimization) and full commitment (a once-and-for-all choice of an optimal plan,
which is subsequently followed through even if the policymaker may be tempted to
renege from it, the so-called time-inconsistency problem). 5
The study of the optimal interest rate policy in the context of the New Keynesian model
has yielded several interesting insights, and in particular about the nature of the gains
from commitment and the kind of inefficient outcomes or biases implied by
discretionary policies. For example, the presence of an inefficiently low steady state
output, combined with the lack of commitment, generates a (suboptimal) positive
inflation bias, similar to that uncovered by Kydland and Prescott (1980) and Barro and
5

See Clarida et al. (1999) for an analysis and discussion of the resulting optimal monetary policy
problem under discretion and under commitment. For an analysis of some intermediate cases see
Schamburg and Tambalotti (2007) and Debortoli and Lakdawala (2016).

5

Gordon (1983) in the context of an earlier generation of monetary models with nonneutralities. Most interestingly, even when the steady state is efficient, gains from
commitment arise in the presence of shocks that imply an inefficient response of natural
output, as would arise in the presence of certain real imperfections. Those gains result
from the ability of a central bank with commitment to influence expectations of future
inflation and output gaps, which makes it possible to smooth over time the deviations
from the first best allocation, thus reducing the implied losses. By contrast, in the
absence of commitment, the central bank has to rely exclusively on its ability to affect
the current output gap, which leads to excessive fluctuations in both inflation and the
gap between output and its efficient level, and hence to larger welfare losses. The
resulting excess volatility associated with the discretionary policy is sometimes referred
to as stabilization bias, and it may coexist with an optimal average level of inflation (in
contrast with the case of an inflation bias).
While the notion of a once-and-for-all commitment to an optimal state-contingent
monetary policy plan is of course unrealistic as a practical policy strategy, the analysis
of the optimal policy under commitment establishes a useful benchmark that can be
used to inform the search for simpler rules that can approximate such a policy.
Specifically, the analysis of the properties of the equilibrium under the monetary
optimal policy with commitment often seem to imply a stationary price level, which in
turn provides a possible rationale for the adoption of a price level targeting interest rate
rule (as one example, see Vestin 2006).
Many other interesting insights regarding the optimal design of monetary policy have
emerged from the analyses of relatively straightforward extensions of the basic New
Keynesian model described above. A selection of examples of such extensions include
allowances for staggered wage setting (Erceg et al. 2000), some backward-looking price
setting (Steinsson 2003), open economy considerations (Clarida et al. 2002; Galí and
Monacelli 2005), deviations from rational expectations (Evans and Honkapohja 2003;
Woodford 2010), labor market frictions (Trigari 2009; Blanchard and Galí 2010),
uncertainty shocks (Basu and Bundick 2017), and others. The next two sections focus
on two specific extensions of the basic New Keynesian model that have drawn
considerable attention in recent years and triggered a good amount of research: the zero
lower bound on the nominal interest rate and the heterogeneity of households.

The Zero Lower Bound
The possibility of a nimble response of central banks to the recessionary and
deflationary forces triggered by the financial crisis was seemingly jeopardized when,
after being successively reduced, policy rates attained the lower bound of (nearly) zero
percent. The basic New Keynesian model, described in the previous section, ignores the
existence of the zero lower bound. However, a number of papers, originally motivated
by the Japanese experience with a liquidity trap starting in the 1990s, adopted the New
Keynesian framework to analyze the implications of a binding zero lower bound.
6

To illustrate some of the insights of that analysis let us consider the case of an efficient
natural equilibrium (that is, the gap between the efficient and the natural rate of output
is zero). In the absence of the zero lower bound constraint, the optimal policy implies
full stabilization of the output gap and inflation, as discussed above.
Now consider an economy which is at a zero inflation zero out gap steady state. Then a
one-off episode occurs, with a temporary, but persistent adverse shock to the natural
rate of interest, rt n , that brings the latter into negative territory. With a zero lower bound
constraint, there is an inability to match the drop in the natural rate of interest with a
commensurate reduction in the policy interest rate. Using the dynamic IS relationship
shown earlier, the result of a nominal interest rate stuck above its natural rate will
generate a persistent negative output gap (given the initial zero inflation). In turn, the
New Keynesian Phillips curve relationship shows that a negative output gap will be a
source of persistent deflation. Indeed, this leads to a higher real interest rate and, thus, to
an even larger gap between that variable and its natural counterpart, deepening further
the initial recession. An analysis of the optimal design of monetary policy in the
presence of a zero lower bound on the nominal rate closely related to this description
can be found in Jung, Teranishi and Watanabe (2003) and Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003). Both papers study the case of a fully unanticipated, once-and-for-all adverse
shock to the natural rates, which pushes the optimizing central bank against the zero
lower bound.
Figure 2, based on the analysis in Galí (2015), illustrates some of the implications of the
zero lower bound for the conduct of monetary policy. It simulates the response to an
unanticipated negative demand shock that lowers the natural rate of interest from its
normal steady state level of 4 percent to -4 percent (both in annual terms) between
period 0 through 5. In period 6 the natural rate returns to its initial value, something
which is assumed to be (correctly) anticipated as of period 0, when the shock hits. In the
absence of a zero lower bound, price stability and a zero output gap could be maintained
in the face of the adverse disturbance, if only the central bank were to lower the interest
rate to -4 percent for the duration of the shock, thus tracking the path of the natural rate.
However, the existence of the zero lower bound makes that option unfeasible.
Given this setting, the nature of the optimal interest rate policy depends on the extent to
which the central bank can commit to future actions. The line with circles plots the
response of the output gap, inflation, and the nominal interest rate under the optimal
discretionary policy—that is, a policy without commitment. In response to the adverse
shock, the central bank lowers the nominal rate to zero and keeps it there until the shock
goes away, and then returns the interest rate to its initial level of 4 percent, consistent
with price stability. Both output and inflation experience large declines in response to
the shock and take persistent negative values until the adverse disturbance vanishes,
when the central bank can fully restore price stability and close the output gap.
The line with crosses displays the equilibrium responses under the optimal policy with
commitment. In this case, the central bank credibly promises that it will keep the
7

nominal rate at zero even after the shock is no longer effective (in this simulated
example, for two periods longer). That policy leads to a small, but non-zero, output gap
and to inflation in subsequent periods, implying a welfare loss relative to the first best.
But that loss is more than offset by the gains resulting from the much greater stability in
earlier periods, when the disturbance is active. That optimal policy with commitment
can be interpreted as an illustration of the power of forward guidance policies, which
are policies that aim at influencing current macro outcomes through the management of
expectations about future policy settings. Such policies have been openly adopted by
central banks like the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve in the aftermath
of the Great Recession, in the face of the slow recovery. 6
The previous example illustrates the monetary policy implications of a fully
unanticipated, one-off temporary drop in the natural rate of interest to a negative level.
A number of authors have instead analyzed an economy where the natural rate of
interest is subject to recurrent shocks. In those economies, the possibility of hitting the
zero lower bound constraint in the future affects how the economy responds to shocks
(and to policy) even when the zero lower bound is not binding. Adam and Billi (2006,
2007) and Nakov (2008) study the implications of the zero lower bound for the optimal
design of monetary policy in a stochastic setting, with and without commitment, when
that constraint is occasionally (but recurrently) binding. Several insights emerge from
that analysis. First, the optimal policy implies a nonlinear response to shocks, with the
central bank reducing nominal rates more aggressively in response to adverse shocks, in
order to reduce the probability of a binding zero lower bound down the road and to
counteract the adverse effects of that possibility (and their anticipation) on aggregate
demand. Second, under commitment, the optimal policy calls for sustained monetary
easing even when the natural rate is no longer negative. Third, the gains from
commitment (relative to discretion) are much larger when the possibility of a zero lower
bound exists than in the absence of such a constraint. Finally, as stressed by Nakov
(2008) a large fraction of the gains from commitment can be reaped by adopting a price
level targeting rule. Because this rule targets the level of prices, rather than the
inflationary change in price level, it calls for a period of “catching up” after inflation has
been below its target level for a time—not just a return to the target level. Such a rule
also reduces the incidence of a binding zero lower bound considerably.
Rogoff (1985) made a case for appointing a "conservative" central banker (that is, one
that puts more weight than society on inflation stabilization), in the presence of a
conventional inflation bias. Nakata and Schmidt (2016) provide a new rationale,
connected to the zero lower bound, for such a policy, even in the absence of an inflation
bias. They show that, under an optimal discretionary policy, the anticipation of an
occasionally binding zero lower bound implies that on average inflation falls below
target and the output gap is positive, even when the zero lower bound is not binding.
Delegating monetary policy to a “conservative” central banker is generally desirable
6

See, e.g. Woodford (2013) for a discussion of the forward guidance policies implemented by different
central banks and their connection with the theoretical analyses in the literature.

8

since the latter will keep inflation closer to target (at the cost of an even larger output
gap) when the zero lower bound is not binding, with the anticipation of that policy
providing a highly welcome additional stimulus when the zero lower bound is binding,
and improving social welfare.

The Forward Guidance Puzzle
The forward guidance puzzle can be stated as follows: In the context of the basic New
Keynesian model, the effect on output of an anticipated change in the policy rate of a
given size and duration is independent of the timing of its implementation. In other
words, the effects of a temporary 1 percent increase in the policy rate 100 years from
now is predicted in the basic New Keynesian model to be the same as if the increase
were to take place immediately or in the near future. This forward guidance puzzle was
first discussed by Carlstrom et al. (2015) and Del Negro et al. (2015).
The reason behind that prediction is that the dynamic IS relationship presented earlier
implies no discounting of the expected output gap and, hence, no discounting of future
interest rates. To see this, iterate that dynamic IS relationship forward, noting that the
expected output gap in the next period depends on the expected interest gap one period
ahead and the expected output gap in following period, and so on. Moreover, assume
that the output gap is expected to converge to zero asymptotically, and that the price
level is rigid (with inflation equal to zero), then the forward guidance puzzle arises: the
current output gap depends on the sum of current and future interest rates, all of them
having the same weight.
The puzzle is amplified if we relax the assumption of fully rigid prices and let inflation
be determined by a New Keynesian Phillips curve relationship. In that case, the longer
is the horizon of implementation of a given change in the policy interest rate, the
stronger are its effects on output, and hence the larger and more persistent the response
of inflation. For any given path of the nominal interest rate, the persistent effect of
inflation works in the direction of changing the real interest rate in a way that further
amplifies the effects on output and inflation—leading to a strong nonlinear effect due to
the accumulation of feedback effects.
Several authors have sought to address the forward guidance puzzle with modifications
to the benchmark New Keynesian model. Typically, such modifications lead to some
kind of discounting by households. Examples of such modifications include the
introduction of finite lives (Del Negro et al. 2015), incomplete markets with bounded
rationality (Farhi and Werning 2016) or without bounded rationality (McKay et al.
(2016, 2017), lack of common knowledge (Angeletos and Lian 2018), and behavioral
discounting (Gabaix 2017).
With such modifications, the effects of anticipated changes in the policy interest rate on
current output do decline with the horizon of implementation, given the path of
9

inflation. However, once inflation is allowed to respond, this feature reduces the effect
on the output gap or inflation of any anticipated change in the real interest rate, but it
does not overturn the prediction that the size of such an effect increases with the horizon
of implementation.

Self-Fulfilling Deflation Traps and the Zero Lower Bound
Much of the analysis based on the New Keynesian model has a local nature:
specifically, it is carried out using a linear approximation to the equilibrium conditions
around a steady state consistent with the inflation target (which is typically zero). By
construction, that analysis limits our understanding of the economy’s behavior far from
the assumed steady state. Several papers have explored the properties of equilibria of
the New Keynesian model from a global perspective.
The work of Benhabib et al. (2001) triggered much of the research on this front. They
showed that a Taylor-type interest rate rule satisfying the zero lower bound constraint
and consistent with a locally unique equilibrium around the steady state associated with
the targeted inflation rate necessarily implies the existence of another steady state. They
label this other steady state as a “liquidity trap,” in which the interest rate is zero or
near-zero and inflation is below the targeted level and possibly negative. Furthermore,
and more worrisome, they showed that an infinite number of equilibrium trajectories
exist that converge to the liquidity trap steady state. Accordingly, a central bank’s
adoption of a Taylor rule is not a guarantee of stability, even if the rule satisfies the
conditions for a locally unique equilibrium. In a companion paper, Benhabib et al.
(2002) propose a set of alternative monetary and fiscal rules that can be activated when
the economy enters a path leading to the liquidity trap steady state. For example, in one
case the proposed rule features a strong fiscal stimulus in the form of lower taxes; in
another, a switch to a rule that would peg the rate of money growth. Under those rules,
any path converging to the liquidity trap would violate the intertemporal budget
constraints of the government and households, and can thus be ruled out as an
equilibrium path. 7
Several papers have provided “quantitative” applications of the multiplicity of global
equilibrium implied by the zero lower bound in the New Keynesian model. SchmittGrohé and Uribe (2017), Aruoba et al. (2017) and Jarocinski and Mackowiak (2017) use
a quantitative New Keynesian model with global multiplicity to interpret the prolonged
recession and persistently low inflation in many advanced economies in the wake of
7

Cochrane (2011) criticizes this approach to ruling out equilibria that deviate from the intended steady
state (including equilibria involving hyperinflations). Instead, he proposes the specification of policies
that are consistent with a unique equilibrium that remains well defined, near or farther away from the
intended steady state. A non-Ricardian fiscal policy, combined with a passive monetary policy, is an
example of an alternative fiscal-monetary regime that avoids the problems of global multiplicity of the
New Keynesian model with an active Taylor rule.

10

their financial crises, which persisted despite highly expansionary monetary policies
with near-zero policy interest rates. Those papers interpret the crises and subsequent
persistent slump as an equilibrium path converging to a liquidity trap steady state. For a
policy to exit the liquidity trap, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2017) and Jarocinski and
Mackowiak (2017) propose an exogenous path for the policy interest rate converging to
its value in the intended steady state. Under the equilibrium dynamics implied by the
liquidity trap, that policy is shown to raise inflation expectations and to stimulate
aggregate demand and output. The price level indeterminacy implied by the exogenous
path for the nominal rate can be eliminated by a switch to an active fiscal policy.
Benigno and Fornaro (2017) develop a model that includes downward nominal wage
rigidities and a zero lower bound constraint similar to that of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2017), but in which they embed an endogenous growth mechanism. Under some
conditions, two different balanced growth paths may be consistent with equilibrium.
One of those paths, which they refer to as a stagnation trap, is characterized by
involuntary unemployment and low growth, while the other features high growth and
full employment. Expectations about future growth prospects determine which
equilibrium obtains.
In this branch of the literature, monetary policy is described by some (generally suboptimal) Taylor-type rule. But the multiplicity of equilibria generated by the zero lower
bound is not restricted to that case: as shown in Armenter (2018) and Nakata and
Schmidt (2016), it also emerges under the assumption of a central bank optimizing
under discretion. 8 Even if such multiplicity is clearly suboptimal, there is little that a
central bank operating under discretion can do about it, because the zero lower bound
limits its ability to stabilize inflation. As a result, the central bank may find it optimal in
some circumstances to accommodate revisions in private sector’s expectations, thus
minimizing the damage given the unavoidable deviation from its stabilization targets.

Fiscal Policy and the Zero Lower Bound
In addition to its implications for the design of monetary policy, the zero lower bound
also has ramifications for the effects of other shocks, including fiscal policy shocks.
This is a consequence of a fairly general principle: In the presence of nominal rigidities,
the effects of any fiscal policy intervention are not invariant to the monetary policy rule
in place and, more precisely, to the (endogenous) response of nominal and real interest
rates to those interventions. By shaping that response, the presence of a zero lower
bound constraint has an impact on the effects of fiscal policy shocks.
Eggertsson (2011) and Christiano et al. (2011) analyze the interaction of fiscal policy
and the zero lower bound using a New Keynesian model as a reference framework. In
8

Earlier papers examining optimal discretionary policy under the zero lower bound constraint (e.g.
Adam and Billi 2007) implicitly make an equilibrium selection by constraining the equilibrium to stay in
the neighborhood of the targeted (zero) inflation steady state.

11

particular, Eggertson (2011) considers an environment in which an adverse demand
shock pushes the natural rate into negative territory and makes the zero lower bound
binding. In that context, he shows that a reduction in taxes on labor or capital income is
contractionary, whereas an increase in government purchases has a strong expansionary
effect on output. The reason is that tax cuts (as well as other supply side policies)
generate disinflationary pressures that are not matched by a policy interest rate cut,
leading to an increase in the real interest rate and a drop in aggregate demand. On the
other hand, an increase in government purchases has a stronger expansionary effect
under a binding zero lower bound than in “normal” times, because the inflationary
pressures generated by the fiscal expansion, combined with the absence of a nominal
rate adjustment, lead to a drop in the real rate, thus amplifying the effect of the fiscal
stimulus.
Christiano et al. (2011) analyze the determinants of the size of the government spending
multiplier in connection with a binding zero lower bound. In particular, they show that
the multiplier is very sensitive to how long the zero lower bound is expected to be a
binding constraint. When they extend the basic New Keynesian model to allow for
endogenous capital accumulation, the size of the government spending multiplier
becomes even larger, since investment –which is inversely related to the real interest
rate-- responds procyclically to the fiscal shock thus amplifying the effect of the latter.
Using an estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, they quantify the
value of the fiscal multiplier under a binding zero lower bound to be in a neighborhood
of 2 for an increase in spending lasting 12 quarters. This contrasts with a multiplier
smaller than one when the model is simulated under “normal” times, with the central
bank responding to a fiscal expansion according to a conventional Taylor rule.
Figure 3 illustrates the implications of the zero lower bound constraint in the face of a
negative aggregate demand shock (e.g. resulting from a reduction in government
purchases). Note that the AD schedule now becomes upward sloping when inflation
reaches a level that makes the zero lower bound constraint binding, given the interest
rate rule: Further reductions in inflation raise the real interest rate and lower aggregate
demand and the output gap. A leftward shift in the AD schedule, if sufficiently large,
pulls the economy into the region in which the decline in inflation cannot be offset by a
more than proportional reduction in the policy interest rate, thus amplifying the negative
impact of the shock on both inflation and the output gap.
The effectiveness of different fiscal policies at stimulating the economy under a binding
zero lower bound is not invariant to the reason why the constraint has become binding.
In the papers discussed above, the zero lower bound becomes binding as a result of an
adverse fundamental shock that is sufficiently large to push the policy rate against the
zero lower bound constraint, making it impossible for the central bank to stabilize
inflation and the output gap. Mertens and Ravn (2014) focus instead on expectational or
non-fundamental liquidity traps, which may emerge as a result of self-fulfilling
expectations, due to the global indeterminacy discussed in the previous subsection. In
the case of an expectational liquidity trap, they show that an increase in government
12

purchases has a small effect on output (smaller than in normal times), whereas a tax cut
is contractionary. The main factor behind those predictions is the differential effect on
inflation, which in this model is positive in the case of a tax cut, but negative for a
spending increase. Given that these predictions are exactly the opposite to those arising
in the case of a fundamental liquidity trap, it follows that a good diagnosis of the nature
of a liquidity trap is essential in order to evaluate the effects of a given fiscal policy
response.

Heterogeneity
The standard New Keynesian model, like most of its predecessors in the real business
cycle literature, represents an economy inhabited by an infinitely-lived representative
household. That assumption is obviously unrealistic. But of course, all models involve
some simplification of reality so as to focus on the specific issue at hand. In
macroeconomics, one specific question is how to explain aggregate fluctuations and
their interaction with monetary policy in a relatively compact and tractable manner. It
isn’t immediately obvious why the finiteness of human life is an aspects of reality that
will be important in building such a model. Similarly, individuals are heterogenous in
their economic behavior along a number of dimensions: education, wealth, income,
preference for leisure, risk-taking, perceptions of relevant time horizons, and many
more. For tractability, a macroeconomic model will of necessity leave out many of these
ways in which people vary. In this spirit, one can perhaps argue that a representative
household is a defensible starting point for a macro model.
This section will discuss a growing literature that argues that the representative
household assumption is less innocuous than may appear, even when the focus is to
understand aggregate fluctuations and macroeconomic policy. 9
An important problem (though not the only one) that arises with representative
household models is that in equilibrium there are neither savers nor borrowers, even in
the absence of financial frictions, since everyone is identical. Thus, in order to
understand whether the presence and nature of financial frictions have non-trivial
implications for economic fluctuations and monetary policy it is necessary to relax the
representative household assumption. A large (and growing) number of papers have
undertaken this approach in recent years, using a suitably modified New Keynesian
model as a reference framework.
Here, I will focus on the latest generation of New Keynesian models with
heterogeneous agents and financial frictions, generally referred to as HANK. 10 A first
9

The bulk of the recent literature on heterogeneity has focused on the household sector. For an
example of the implications of firm-level heterogeneity see Adam and Weber (2018).
10
Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017), Oh and Reis (2012, and McKay and Reis (2016) were among the first
contributions to this literature, focusing, respectively, on the effects of credit crunches, transfers and
automatic stabilizers.Subsequent contributions include Auclert (2017), Kaplan et al. (2018), Ravn and

13

feature shared by the recent wave of HANK models, and which differentiates them from
the baseline New Keynesian model, is the assumption of idiosyncratic shocks to
households’ labor productivity and, hence, to their wage. Those shocks are often
assumed to follow a stochastic process that is consistent with some features of the micro
data. Secondly, it is generally assumed that only a small number of assets can be traded,
and that some exogenous borrowing limit exists. As a result, households cannot
perfectly insure themselves against idiosyncratic risk. Furthermore, a (time-varying)
fraction of households face a binding borrowing constraint, which makes their
consumption respond strongly to fluctuations in current income. The previous features
imply that there is no simple dynamic IS equation like the one described earlier that can
be derived. However, the other two main elements of the basic New Keynesian
framework —the New Keynesian Phillips curve and the interest rate rule—are not
directly affected by the introduction of heterogeneity.
One of the main lessons emerging from the analysis of heterogenous agent New
Keynesian models can be summarized as follows: The presence of uninsurable
idiosyncratic shocks, combined with the existence of borrowing limits, implies that
different households, even if they otherwise appear identical before the shocks arise,
may have at any point in time very different marginal propensities to consume. As a
result, the macroeconomic effects of any aggregate shock will be amplified or
dampened depending on the way the shock (and the changes that it triggers) affects the
distribution of income and wealth across households.
Several recent papers provide an insightful analysis of that mechanism. Auclert (2017)
studies the different channels through which heterogeneity shapes the effect of an
exogenous monetary policy shock on individual and aggregate consumption. Two of
those channels are already present in the representative agent New Keynesian model
(henceforth, RANK, for short): i) intertemporal substitution, in response to changes in
real interest rates; and ii) the change in consumption induced by the resulting changes in
aggregate income, which is a source of a multiplier effect. A HANK economy, on the
other hand, provides three additional channels that occur as a consequence of the
redistribution that takes place in response to a monetary policy change: i) the earnings
heterogeneity channel is associated with the fact that some households see their income
increase more than proportionally to aggregate income, while others lose in relative
terms; ii) the Fisher channel refer to the fact that different households have at any point
in time different net positions in nominal assets, whose real value will be affected by the
change in the price level resulting from the monetary policy intervention; and iii) the
unhedged interest rate exposure channel arises because of likely differences across
households in the mismatch between durations of assets and liabilities (including
planned consumption among the latter).

Sterk (2017), Gornemann et al. (2016), Farhi and Werning (2016), Werning (2015) and Galí and Debortoli
(2017), among many others.

14

A key determinant of the impact of each of the three redistribution channels is given by
the size and sign of their covariance with marginal propensities of consumption across
households—that is, by the extent to which the redistribution caused by a monetary
policy intervention favors households with a relatively high or a relatively low marginal
propensity to consume. In principle, those covariances can be estimated using micro
data on households’ consumption, income and balance sheets. The evidence reported in
Auclert (2017) suggests that such redistribution channels are likely to amplify the
effects of monetary policy on aggregate consumption. To see this, consider an
expansionary policy which lowers real interest rates and raises output and inflation. We
know that households with relatively low income and wealth also tend to have relatively
high marginal propensities to consume. Furthermore, those households will tend to
benefit more from the expansionary policy for several reasons backed up by micro
evidence: i) their earnings increase more than proportionally during output expansions;
ii) they tend to have relatively large negative net nominal asset positions, and hence
experience a relatively larger increase in their net wealth (in real terms) when the price
level rises; and iii) they have a lower interest rate exposure (since since they tend to
have high current consumption and debt repayments relative to income) and thus benefit
more from the reduction in real interest rates. Thus, by redistributing income and wealth
towards high MPC households, the three channels above work in the direction of
amplifying the response of aggregate consumption to an interest rate reduction.
Interestingly, Auclert (2017) also shows that these empirical properties emerge, at least
in qualitative terms, as an equilibrium outcome in a standard incomplete markets model
(à la Bewley-Hugget-Aiyagari) calibrated to the US economy. Auclert’s analysis thus
points to the need to introduce realistic heterogeneity in monetary models in order to
capture better the effects of monetary policy, though further work is needed to assess
empirically the quantitative importance of each of those channels.
Werning (2015) develops a general framework to identify some of the channels through
which heterogeneity and incomplete markets imply a departure from the aggregate
implications of the standard representative agent approach. For example, he first
considers an economy with idiosyncratic risk but no borrowing or lending, and no
outside assets (e.g. government debt or physical capital), and in which household
income is proportional to aggregate income. In that setting, the relation between
aggregate consumption and interest rates turns out to be identical to that in the RANK
model. A similar “as if” result holds for an economy with borrowing and lending and
outside assets, if liquidity is acyclical, i.e. if asset prices and/or borrowing limits move
in proportion to income.
Werning’s (2015) framework can be seen as a useful benchmark to understand the
properties of different HANK models in the literature, in which some of the above
assumptions are relaxed. Two examples, discussed by Werning, provide an illustration
of that point. The model in Ravn and Sterk (2017) combines rigidities in price setting
characteristic of New Keynesian models with search and matching in the labor market.
In that framework, the rise in unemployment resulting from a tightening of monetary
15

policy leads to an increase in precautionary savings and, hence, an amplification of the
effects of monetary policy relative to a RANK economy. By contrast, McKay et al.
(2016) analyze a model with idiosyncratic shocks in which the effects of interest
changes are dampened relative to the RANK benchmark, as a result of a built-in
procyclical earnings risk (caused by the assumption of even distribution of
countercyclical profits among workers) and countercyclical liquidity (resulting from
constant government debt). The implied dampening of the response to monetary policy
is presented by McKay et al. as a possible explanation for the forward guidance puzzle
discussed in the previous section.
A distinct feature of the HANK model developed in Kaplan et al. (2018) that is the
coexistence of two assets: a low return liquid asset and a high return illiquid asset (think
of housing) whose conversion into the liquid asset is subject to convex transaction costs.
An implication of the latter assumption is the presence, at any point in time, of a sizable
fraction of households that are wealthy but consume in a hand-to-mouth fashion,
because the bulk of their wealth is held in the illiquid asset. The presence of those
households, combined with those who consume hand-to-mouth because they have low
incomes (and are subject to borrowing constraints), implies that a large fraction of the
population is highly sensitive to labor income shocks (idiosyncratic and aggregate) but
not very responsive to interest rate changes. As Kaplan et al. (208) show, this shift
dramatically changes the nature of the monetary policy transmission mechanism as
compared to the RANK model. In the HANK model, the direct effect of changes in the
interest rate on consumption (i.e. its effect conditional on an unchanged path for
aggregate income) is much less important than its indirect effect (resulting from the
induced changes in aggregate income). That property is in stark contrast with the
RANK model, in which the direct effect is overwhelmingly dominant, because the
representative household can substitute consumption intertemporally and, under any
plausible calibration, will have a very small marginal propensity to consumer out of
current income.
In addition, the analysis in Kaplan et al. (2018) highlights an important property of
HANK models: the aggregate effects of monetary policy shocks (or for that matter, of
any other disturbance) will be shaped by the fiscal policy response to it, and, in
particular, by the extent and nature of the redistributional effects of that response.
If we accept that some heterogeneity is useful, we still face a question of how much.
The two-agent New Keynesian model (TANK, for short) is a relatively simple way of
introducing heterogeneity. In this approach, a constant fraction of households is
assumed to have no access to financial markets and just consume their current labor
income, while the remaining fraction can buy and sell assets in an unconstrained way,
as in the basic New Keynesian model. There are no other sources of heterogeneity
within each type of households. Early applications of the TANK framework include
Galí et al. (2007) and Bilbiie (2008). Recent work by Debortoli and Galí (2018) seeks
to understand the extent to which TANK models can provide a tractable approximation
to their HANK counterparts. Both alternatives share a key feature missing from
16

representative agent models, namely, the fact that at any point in time a fraction of
agents face a binding borrowing constraint (or behave as if they did). But TANK
models assume a constant fraction of constrained agents, rather than allowing that
fraction to vary endogenously as in in richer HANK models. Also, TANK models
ignore the impact on agents' current decisions of the likelihood of being financially
constrained in the future. Finally, credit constrained households in HANK models have
a marginal propensity to consume below one, especially in response to positive shocks,
in contrast with hand-to-mouth households in TANK models, whose marginal
propensity to consume is one at all times. Of course, the main advantage of TANK
models relative to HANK models lies in their tractability, since there is no need to keep
track of the wealth distribution and its changes over time.
Perhaps surprisingly, Debortoli and Galí (2018) show that a simple TANK model
approximates well, both from a qualitative and a quantitative viewpoint, the aggregate
dynamics of a canonical HANK model in response to aggregate shocks. Firstly, a
properly calibrated TANK model approximates well the heterogeneity of consumption
between constrained and unconstrained households. Secondly, for standard calibrations
of the HANK model, consumption heterogeneity within the subset of unconstrained
households (which the TANK model abstracts from) remains roughly constant, since
those agents are able to limit consumption fluctuations by borrowing and saving.
After arguing that the TANK model constitutes a good approximation to richer and
more complex HANK models, Debortoli and Galí (2018) use the former model to
analyze the impact of heterogeneity on optimal monetary policy design. They show that
in a simple TANK model, the loss function of a benevolent central bank contains three
arguments. The first two capture the volatility of the output gap and inflation, and are
already present in the RANK model, as discussed above. The third one reflects the size
of fluctuations in an index that measure consumption heterogeneity. In other words, this
central bank finds it optimal to tolerate some deviation from inflation and output from
their respective targets in order to avoid overly large fluctuations in consumption
dispersion. For standard calibrations of the TANK model, however, the optimal policy
involves minimal fluctuations in inflation and the output-gap, and is thus nearly
identical to the one that would prevail in the basic New Keynesian model with a
representative agent.

Overlapping Generations
The assumption of an infinitely-lived representative household found in the standard
New Keynesian model has implications that go beyond those emphasized in the
literature discussed in the previous section. The latter has focused on the interaction of
idiosyncratic shocks and borrowing constraints as a source of heterogeneity in marginal
propensities to consume across households, with its consequent implications for the
transmission of monetary and fiscal policies. Less discussed but equally important are,
17

in my opinion, other implications of the infinitely-lived representative household
assumption.
Firstly, the assumption of an infinitely-lived representative consumer implies a tight
link between the real interest rate and the consumer’s time discount rate along a
balanced growth path. That relation all but rules out the possibility of a persistently
negative natural rate of interest, with the consequent challenges that the latter would
pose on a price-stability oriented monetary policy due to the zero lower bound on
nominal interest rates. Notice that in the examples from the literature on the zero lower
bound discussed earlier the natural rate is assumed to be negative temporarily and,
possibly, recurrently, but not permanently.
Secondly, the assumption of an infinitely-lived representative household rules out the
existence of rational bubbles in equilibrium. After all, if a rational bubble exists in
equilibrium, it must grow at the rate of interest and must necessarily be in assets held by
the representative household. But the optimal path for consumption and savings of a
representative household is inconsistent with holding assets in the long-run that grow at
the rate of interest, which rules out the possibility of a rational bubble in that
environment (for a proof, see Santos and Woodford 1997). On the other hand, there is a
widespread view among policymakers and commentators that bubbles, like the housing
bubble experienced in the 2000s, can play a role in financial crises and economic
fluctuations. There is also a persistent debate about how monetary policy should
respond to the emergence of those bubbles. The fact that the New Keynesian model
cannot even account for the phenomenon of bubbles seems like a potentially important
shortcoming of that framework.
Several recent papers have sought to overcome the limitations of the infinitely-lived
household assumption by introducing overlapping generations of finitely-lived
individuals in models with nominal rigidities. Thus, Eggertsson et al. (2018) develop a
“quantitative” overlapping generations framework with nominal rigidities in order to
understand the sources of the decline in the natural rate of interest in the U.S. economy,
and to analyze the implications of that decline for monetary policy. 11
Galí (2014, 2017a) develops two alternative models with overlapping generations,
monopolistic competition and sticky prices, and shows that asset price bubbles may
emerge in equilibria. 12 In both models, a necessary condition for the existence of such
bubbly equilibria is a natural rate of interest below the balanced growth path for the
economy. When bubbles exist, changes in their size can generate aggregate fluctuations,
even in the absence of shocks to fundamental. In that context, one can analyze the
11

A permanent negative natural rate may also arise in models with infinitely-lived agents in the
presence of heterogeneity and incomplete markets. See, e.g., Auclert and Rognlie (2018) for an
illustration of that possibility.
12
Galí (2014) assumes two-period-lived households and an inelastic labor supply (implying a constant
output in equilibrium). Bubble fluctuations imply a stochastic redistribution of consumption across
cohorts. By contrast, Galí (2017) introduces asset price bubbles in a perpetual youth model à la
Blanchard-Yaari, in which individuals die with a constant probability.

18

implications of alternative monetary policy rules on fluctuations and welfare, since the
evolution of bubbles is not independent of the interest rate. A central message of both
papers is that a “leaning against the bubble” monetary policy, modeled as an interest
rate rule that includes the size of the bubble as one of its arguments, is generally
suboptimal and dominated by a policy that focuses on stabilizing inflation. 13

The Road Ahead
The standard New Keynesian framework as it existed a decade ago has faced challenges
in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007-2009. Much of the work extending that
framework over the past few years has aimed at overcoming some of those challenges.
In the present paper I have described a sample of recent research that extends the
standard New Keynesian framework along different dimensions, with a focus on
adapting it to take into account the zero lower bound constraint on the nominal interest
rates, and household heterogeneity. 14
However, none of the extensions of the New Keynesian model proposed in recent years
seem to capture an important aspect of most financial crises—namely, a gradual buildup of financial imbalances leading to an eventual “crash” characterized by defaults,
sudden-stops of credit flows, asset price declines, and a large contraction in aggregate
demand, output and employment. Most of the extensions found in the literature share
with their predecessors a focus on equilibria that take the form of stationary fluctuations
driven by exogenous shocks. This is also the case in variants of those models that allow
for financial frictions of different kinds (for example, Bernanke et al. 1999; Christiano
et al. 2014). In those models, financial frictions often lead to an amplification of the
effects of non-financial shocks. Also, the presence of financial frictions can lead to
additional sources of fluctuations: for example, via risk shocks in Christiano et al.
(2014) or exogenous changes in the tightness of borrowing constraints in Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni (2017). Overall, it’s fair to say that most attempts to use a version of the
New Keynesian models to explain the “financial crisis” end up relying on a large
exogenous shock that impinges on the economy unexpectedly, triggering a large
recession, possibly amplified by a financial accelerator mechanism embedded in the
model.
There have been a few attempts to model economies that are less subject to the previous
criticism. As example, Boissay et al. (2016) analyze a real model with asymmetric
information in the interbank market, in which a sequence of small shocks may pull an
economy towards a region with multiple equilibria, including equilibria characterized
by a freeze in the interbank market, a credit crunch and a prolonged recession. A
monetary extension of such a framework would seem highly welcome.
13

Non-rational bubbles may exist also in economies with an infinitely-lived representative household.
See, e.g. Adam and Woodford (2013) for an analysis of optimal policy in the context of a New Keynesian
model with non-rational housing bubbles.
14
The discussion in this section draws heavily on Galí (2017b).

19

In another example, Galí (2017) explores the possibility of fluctuations driven by
stochastic bubbles in a New Keynesian model with overlapping generations. Stochastic
bubbles grow at a rate above the long-term growth of the economy, generating a boom
in output and employment. But these bubbles may collapse at any time with some
(exogenously given) probability, pulling down aggregate demand and output when they
do. Despite the highly stylized nature of the model, the implied equilibrium appears
consistent with the pattern of asset price booms followed by sudden busts (and the
induced recession) that has characterized historical financial crises. However, the
framework abstracts from any financial frictions and, in particular, from the important
role that high credit growth seems to have played in bubble episodes (Jordà et al. 2015).
It also leaves unexplained the factors that ultimately drive the innovations in the
aggregate bubble, as well as its eventual bursting.
As yet another example, Basu and Bundick (2017) analyze a nonlinear version of the
New Keynesian model where large and persistent slumps may arise as a result of the
strong feedback between aggregate demand and (endogenous) volatility, resulting from
the interaction of precautionary savings and a zero lower bound constraint. With a zero
lower bound constraint, there is no guarantee that the central bank will manage to
stabilize the economy on the downside, which in turn raises households’ perceived
volatility of future consumption (as well as its negative skewness), leading to higher
precautionary savings, a reduction in output, a higher probability of falling into a
liquidity trap and an additional feedback effect on volatility and skewness.
These are only examples of efforts to introduce mechanisms that may generate patterns
that one may relate, at least qualitatively, to those observed in actual financial crises. In
the years ahead, I expect further research along these lines, incorporating stronger
endogenous propagation mechanisms that may help account for large and persistent
fluctuations in output and inflation without the need to rely on large (and largely
unexplained) exogenous shocks.
But in the meantime, New Keynesian economics is alive and well. The New Keynesian
model has proved to be quite flexible, with a growing number of extensions being
developed by researchers in order to incorporate new assumptions or account for new
phenomena. Indeed, it is hard to think of an alternative macroeconomic paradigm that
would do away with the two defining features of the New Keynesian model: nominal
rigidities and monetary non-neutralities.

20

References

Adam, Klaus and Roberto Billi (2006): "Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment
with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 38, 1877-1905.
Adam, Klaus and Roberto Billi (2007): "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero
Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (3), 728-752.
Adam, Klaus and Michael Woodford (2013): “Housing Prices and Robustly Optimal
Monetary Policy,” http://adam.vwl.unimannheim.de/fileadmin/user_upload/adam/research/AW_AssetPrices.pdf
Adam, Klaus and Henning Weber (2018): “Optimal Trend Inflation,”
http://adam.vwl.unimannheim.de/fileadmin/user_upload/adam/Adam_Weber_Optimal_Inflation.pdf
Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian (2018): "Forward Guidance without Common
Knowledge," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Armenter, Roc (2018): “The Perils of Nominal Targets,” Review of Economic Studies
85(1), 50-86.
Auclert, Adrien (2017): “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” NBER
Working Paper no. 23451.
Auclert, Adrien and Matthew Rognlie (2018): “Inequality and Aggregate Demand,”
NBER Working Paper No. 24280.
Barro, Robert J., and David Gordon (1983): "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91, 4, 589-610.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball (2006): "Are Technology
Improvements Contractionary?," American Economic Review, vol. 96, no. 5, 14181448.
Basu, Susanto and Brent Bundick (2017): “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective
Demand,” Econometrica 85(3), 937-958.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uribe (2001): “The Perils of
Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory 96, 40-69.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uribe (2002): “Avoiding Liquidity
Traps,” Journalof Political Economy 110(3), 535-563.
Benigno, Gianluca and Luca Fornaro (2017): “Stagnation Traps,” Review of Economic
Studies, forthcoming.
21

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). "The Financial
Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in John B. Taylor and
Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, pp. 1341-93.
Bilbiie, Florin (2008): "Limited Asset Market Participation, Monetary Policy and
(Inverted) Aggregate Demand Logic," Journal of Economic Theory, 140(1), 162196.
Bilbiie, Florin and Ragot, Xavier (2017): "Optimal Monetary Policy and Liquidity with
Heterogeneous Households," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP11814.
Bilbiie, Florin (2017): "The New Keynesian Cross: Understanding Monetary Policy
with Hand-to-Mouth Households," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11989.
Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Galí (2010): “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Model with Unemployment,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 2(2), 1-30.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Christopher J. Erceg and Jesper Lindé (2017): “Jump-Starting the
Euro Area Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?" in
Eichenbaum, Martin, and Jonathan A. Parker eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2016. National Bureau of Economic Research, vol. 31, pp. 103-182.
Boissay, Frédéric, Fabrice Collard, and Frank Smets (2016). "Booms and Banking
Crises," Journal of Political Economy, 124(2), 489 – 538
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002): "Learning About Monetary Policy Rules,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, no. 6, 1105-1130.
Calvo, Guillermo (1983): "Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy s. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian (2015): “Inflation and
Output in New Keynesian Models with a Transient Interest Rate Peg,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 76, 230-243
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (1999): "Monetary
Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End ?," in J.B. Taylor and M.
Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1A, 65-148.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011): "When is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?," Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 78121.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno (2014): "Risk
Shocks." American Economic Review, 104 (1): 27-65.

22

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999): "The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37,
1661-1707.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): "Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 105, issue 1, 147-180.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (2002): “A Simple Framework for
International Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(5),
879-904.
Cochrane, John H. (2011): “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules,” Journal
of Political Economy 119(3), 565-615.
Debortoli, Davide and Aeimit Lakdawala (2016): “How Credible is the Federal
Reserve? A Structural Estimation of Policy Re-Optimizations,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 8(3), 42-76.
Debortoli, Davide and Jordi Galí (2017): “Monetary Policy with Heterogeneous Agents:
Insights from Tank Models,” CREi Working Paper, http://www.crei.cat/wpcontent/uploads/2018/03/dg_tank.pdf
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson (2012) "The Forward
Guidance Puzzle," FRB of New York Staff Report no. 574.
Del Negro, Marco and Frank Schorfheide (2013): “DSGE Model-Based Forecasting” in
G. Elliot and A. Timmermman (eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecasting, volume
2A, 58-137, Elsevier B.V.
Del Negro, Marco, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (2017):
“The Great Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s Liquidity Facilities,”
American Economic Review 107(3), 824-857.
Eggertsson, Gauti (2011): "What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, 59-112.
Eggertsson, Gauti, Neil Mehrotra and Jacob Robbins (2017): “A Model of Secular
Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper no. 23093.
Erceg, Christopher, Dale Henderson and Andrew Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics
46(2), 281-313.
Evans, George W. and Seppo Honkapohja (2003): “Expectations and the Stability
Property for Optimal Monetary Policies,” Review of Economic Studies 70(4), 807824.

23

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning (2017): “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality
and Incomplete Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 2381
Gabaix, Xavier (2017): "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model," NBER Working Paper
No. 22954.
Galí, Jordi (1999): "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?," American Economic Review, vol. 89, no.
1, 249-271.
Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli (2005): "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
Volatility in a Small Open Economy," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 72, issue 3,
2005, 707-734
Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido and Javier Vallés), “Understanding the Effects of
Government Spending on Consumption”, Journal of the European Economic
Association, vol. 5 (1), 2007, 227-270.
Galí, Jordi (2014): "Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles," American
Economic Review, vol. 104(3), 721-752.
Galí, Jordi (2017a): “Monetary Policy and Bubbles in a New Keynesian Model with
Overlapping Generations,” CREI Working paper, http://www.crei.cat/wpcontent/uploads/2018/01/nk_bubbles_dec2017.pdf
Galí, Jordi (2017b): “Some Scattered Thoughts on DSGE Models,” in R.S. Gürkaynak
and C. Tille (eds.), DSGE Models in the Conduct of Policy; Use as Intended,” CEPR
Press, 86-92.
Gornemann, Nils, Keith Kuester, and Makoto Nakajima (2016). "Doves for the Rich,
Hawks for the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy," International
Finance Discussion Papers 1167. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni (2017): "Credit Crises, Precautionary
Savings, and the Liquidity Trap," Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 14271467.
Jarocinski, Marek and Bartosz Mackowiak (2017): “Monetary Fiscal Interactions and
the Euro Area’s Malaise,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor (2015): “Leveraged Bubbles,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 76, S1-S20.
Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsutomo Watanabe, (2005): "Optimal Monetary
Policy at the Zero Interest Rate Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37
(5), 813-835.

24

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L.Violante (2018): “Monetary Policy
according to HANK,” American Economic Review 108(3), 697-743.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1980): "Rules Rather than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85, 3, 473-492.
Lindé, Jesper, Frank Smets and Raf Wouters (2016): “Challenges for Central Banks’
Macro Models,” in J. Taylor and H. Uhlig (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics
volume 2B, 2186-2262, Elsevier B.V.
McKay, Alisdair and Ricardo Reis (2016): “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the
U.S. Business Cycle,” Econometrica 84 (1), 141-194.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson (2016): "The Power of Forward
Guidance Revisited," American Economic Review, 106(10), 3133-3158.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson (2015): "The Discounted Euler
Equation: A Note," Economica, forthcoming.
Mertens, Karel R.S. and Morten O. Ravn (2014) : “Fiscal Policy in an ExpectationsDriven Liquidity Trap,” Review of Economic Studies 81, 1637-1667.
Nakata, Taisuke and Sebastian Schmidt (2016): “Gradualism and Liquidity Traps,”
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-092. Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Oh, Hyunseung and Ricardo Reis (2012): "Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response
to the Great Recession," Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S50-S64.
Rogoff, Ken (1985): “the Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary
Target,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(4), 1169-1189.
Santos, Manuel S. and Michael Woodford (1997): "Rational Asset Pricing Bubbles,"
Econometrica 65(1), 19-57.
Schamburg, Ernst and Andrea Tambalotti (2007): “An Investigation of the Gains from
Commitment in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(2): 302-324.
Smets, Frank, Kai Christoffel, Gunter Coenen, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno
(2010). “DSGE models and their use at the ECB,” SERIEs, 1(1-2), 51-65.
Steinsson, Jon (2003): “Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation
Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(7), 1425-1456.
Taylor, John B. (1993): "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," CarnegieRochester Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Trigari, Antonella (2009): “Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and Inflation
Dynamics,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41(1), 1-33.
25

Vestin, David (20016): “Price-level versus Inflation Targeting,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 53(7), 1361-1376.
Werning, Iván (2015): “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” NBER Working
Paper No. 21448.
Woodford, Michael (2010): “Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy with Near-Rational
Expectations,” American Economic Review 100(1), 274-303.
Woodford, Michael (2013): “Forward Guidance by Inflation Targeting Central Banks,”
downloadable at http://www.columbia.edu/~mw2230/RiksbankIT.pdf

26

5

5
0

0
-5
-5

-10
-15

-10
discretion
commitment
-15

0

2

4

6
output gap

8

10

-20

12

6

-25

0

2

4

6
inflation

8

10

12

0

2

4

6
natural rate

8

10

12

6
4

4
2
2

0
-2

0
-4
-2

0

2

4

6
nominal rate

8

10

12

-6

Figure 2
Discretion vs Commitment in the Presence of the Zero Lower Bound

