                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SHOULD THERE BE LOWER TAXES ON PATENT INCOME?

                                      Fabian Gaessler
                                      Bronwyn H. Hall
                                      Dietmar Harhoff

                                     Working Paper 24843
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24843


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2018, Revised June 2019




We would like to thank seminar audiences at the OECD, the Mannheim Tax Summer School
2017, the INNOPAT 2017 Conference, Harvard Business School, the College de France, and the
72nd Annual Congress of the International Institute of Public Finance (Lake Tahoe) for helpful
comments. Particular thanks go to Philippe Aghion, Jost Heckemeyer, Deborah Schanz, Joel
Slemrod, Mehmet Tosun, and Alfons Weichenrieder. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Fabian Gaessler, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Dietmar Harhoff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Should There Be Lower Taxes on Patent Income?
Fabian Gaessler, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Dietmar Harhoff
NBER Working Paper No. 24843
July 2018, Revised June 2019
JEL No. H25,H32,K34,O34

                                          ABSTRACT

A “patent box” is a term for the application of a lower corporate tax rate to the income derived
from the ownership of patents. This tax subsidy instrument has been introduced in a number of
countries since 2000. Using comprehensive data on patents filed at the European Patent Office,
including information on ownership transfers pre- and post-grant, we investigate the impact of the
introduction of a patent box on international patent transfers, on the choice of ownership location,
and on invention in the relevant country. We find that the impact on transfers is small but present,
especially when the tax instrument contains a development condition and for high value patents
(those most likely to have generated income), but that invention itself is not affected. This calls
into question whether the patent box is an effective instrument for encouraging innovation in a
country, rather than simply facilitating the shifting of corporate income to low tax jurisdictions.


Fabian Gaessler                                  Dietmar Harhoff
Max Planck Institute for Innovation              Max Planck Institute for Innovation
and Competition                                  and Competition
80539 Munich                                     dietmar.harhoff@ip.mpg.de
Germany
fabian.gaessler@ip.mpg.de

Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley
123 Tamalpais Road
Berkeley, CA 94708
and NBER bhhall@nber.org
    1. Introduction

During the past decades, a number of countries have introduced a range of policies designed to
encourage innovative activity by firms resident in the country. This policy focus has been driven by
increased awareness of the importance of innovation for economic growth and arguments that
firms left to their own devices would not invest enough in innovation from society’s point of view
(Arrow 1962; Westmore 2013). Among these policies are several that make use of the tax system.
The oldest implicit subsidy is widespread due to being incorporated in standard accounting
practices:1 R&D is generally expensed, which corresponds to accelerated depreciation given its
economic life (Hall 2005, inter alia). In addition to this, a number of countries have introduced an
R&D tax credits that provide a reduction in the cost of performing R&D.2

Recently several countries have implemented special treatment for the taxation of corporate
income that derives from the ownership of patents or, in some cases, other intellectual property
(IP). This policy instrument (often called a “patent box” or “IP box”) is generally intended to
encourage the location of innovative activity by multinationals in the country that introduces it.
However, many economists and other analysts have expressed skepticism about its effectiveness,
given the multiple avenues available to such companies for the shifting of income associated with
intangible assets (Griffith et al. 2014; Sullivan 2015). The patent box creates another route for
shifting income, because transferring ownership of a patent from one country to another that has a
more favorable tax treatment is a straightforward and relatively low cost procedure. In fact, one of
the reasons for its introduction has been the perception by governments that income from
intangible assets of all kinds is relatively easy to shift to low tax jurisdictions, and therefore taxing
such income at a lower rate provides an incentive for firms to keep their intangible assets in the
country. Although this may be the real rationale behind the introduction of such a tax instrument, it
is often argued by those proposing patent boxes that such a tax instrument is an innovation
incentive, as this argument is perceived as more defensible than a purely tax revenue‐based
argument.

Given the widespread use of R&D tax credits to incentivize innovative activity, one may well ask
whether the addition of a patent box is necessary or worthwhile. Clearly there are differences
between subsidizing R&D and subsidizing the income from patents: the first is an ex ante incentive
that targets a decision variable of the firm, whereas the second is ex post and will only be used when
R&D has been in some sense successful. Klemens (2016) points out a number of ways in which an
ex ante incentive may be more desirable. These include fewer incentives for shifting expenses to the
higher tax rate area, difficulties in allocating income to the patent, and less distortion towards
incremental development that generates income on the whole product versus invention of a

1These include the US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) (http://www.fasb.org/home) and
various International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) standards (https://www.iasplus.com/en/re‐
sources/ifrsf/iasb‐ifrs‐ic/iasb).
2 For details on this tax instrument, see various publications by the OECD (http://www.oecd.org/sti/rd‐tax‐
stats.htm), and for evidence on its effectiveness, see Hall and Van Reenen (2000) and Appelt et al. (2016).
Appendix Table B1 indicates which of the countries in our sample currently have some kind of R&D tax credit.

                                                     2
completely new product. To this one could add that a patent box provides an extra incentive for the
kind of R&D that least needs encouragement: R&D whose returns are appropriable via the patent
system. If the argument for subsidizing R&D and innovative activities is that they create spillovers
and public goods in the form of knowledge, it seems odd to encourage firms to direct their efforts
toward patentable inventions, unless it is thought that encouraging publication of an invention
would enhance spillovers enough to counteract the quasi‐monopoly position the patent creates.

A more substantive difference between R&D tax incentives and patent boxes is that R&D covers a
limited range of innovative activities that are more or less technological, and some successful
patented innovations are likely to come from other activities, especially in the service sector. On the
other hand, a limitation of the patent box is that it requires a patent or patents and some desirable
innovative activities may not be patentable. A final objection is that encouraging firms to patent
solely in order to receive a tax subsidy is perverse in an environment where there may already be
too many patents, in the sense that some of those patents would be found invalid if challenged (US
FTC 2016 and references therein). As Klemens (2016) says, “The patent box thus gives new life to
zombie patents,” by which he means patents that would not survive if challenged.3

One of the ways in which the patent box may induce nonproductive corporate behavior is that it
may encourage firms to transfer some or all of their patents to jurisdictions that offer favorable tax
treatment to income derived from patents. In this paper we investigate the extent to which this has
happened following the introduction of a patent box in several European countries. We look closely
at four questions:

    1. When a country introduces a patent box, is there an increase in the number of patents
       transferred to that country? Is there a decrease in the number transferred out of that
       country?
    2. How do the above effects change depending on the tax rates and specific provisions of the
       patent box?
    3. Does patentable invention in a country increase after the introduction of a patent box? That
       is, does this policy instrument have the desired effect?
    4. Are more valuable patents (patents that are more likely to generate income, via own profits
       or licensing) those that are transferred in response to the patent box?

To examine these questions, we use a new dataset created by Gaessler and Harhoff (2018) that
contains all registered patent ownership information changes of patents granted or validated in
Germany between 1981 and 2014. Given the high German validation and renewal rates, this dataset
effectively captures all transfers of granted European patents during their lifetime. We combine
these data with patent data from PATSTAT (April 2017 edition) and detailed data on the various
patent box measures that have been introduced in European countries during the past two decades.
We perform analyses at the aggregate (country) level and also at the level of individual patents,
where we use patent characteristics to examine which patents are transferred.


3Presumably the tax authorities would not want to get into the business of challenging patent box patents for
validity.

                                                     3
Given only 13 countries with patent boxes, with varying provisions and some introduced very near
the end of our estimation sample, our results are in some cases imprecise, in the sense that
standard errors are large enough to render them insignificant, but not able to rule out impacts. We
do have several fairly robust findings: first, the patent box does seem to reduce transfer of patents
out of a country considerably, by about 30 per cent. Second, the main provision of the patent box
that matters is the requirement that the patented invention be developed further in the country in
which the patent income is to be taxed at a lower rate. This provision causes transfers to be
insignificant, whereas without it, the difference in patent income tax rates between two countries
induces a fairly large amount of transfer. Third, if there is any impact on invention activities
(proxied by patent filings and R&D spending) from the introduction of a patent box, it is negative,
contradicting the argument that this tax instrument represents an innovation incentive. Finally, we
find that transferred patents are of relatively greater value by the conventional patent metrics.

These results suggest that the particular design of the patent box determines to what extent IP
rights are reallocated. Requiring that further development of the invention take place within the
country in order to enjoy the lower tax rate seems to mitigate transfers for purely tax reasons. This
finding provides support for the incorporation of such rules into the OECD Base Erosion and Profit
Shifting (BEPS) recommendations.

The structure of the paper is as follows. The next section provides a brief introduction to the design
of patent boxes, and Section 3 reviews the literature on corporate taxation, the patent box, and
international patent transfer. This is followed by sections describing the econometric models we
will estimate and the data we will use. The core of the paper follows in three sections that present
the results of our aggregate analysis of patent transfer and patentable invention, as well as a patent
level analysis of transfer choice. The paper concludes in Section 7.


    2. Patent box description

In our sample of 51 countries (the list is shown in Appendix Table B1), there are 13 that have
introduced some kind of IP or patent box between 1971 and 2014, and one (Ireland) that has
discontinued it.4 The potential effectiveness of an IP or patent box depends on its design, and on its
interaction with the rest of the corporate system. This makes the analysis of its effects somewhat
challenging, as the sample size is rather small once all the design features are controlled for.5 The
important distinctions are the following:

    1. Coverage – in some cases, all forms of intellectual property income are covered, rather than
       simply patents. This could include software, copyrights, trademarks, utility models, and



4The Irish patent box was discontinued as part of the national recovery bill following the 2008 crisis. A new
“knowledge box” that is compliant with OECD’s BEPS (Base Erosion and Profit Shifting) was introduced in
2015, after our sample ends. See http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/ for more information on BEPS policies.
5 Evers, Miller and Spengel (2014) and Alstadsæter et al. (2018) review the provisions of the regime for the
13 countries. The fact that these reviews do not always agree precisely as to the details of the patent box
indicates how complex the instrument can be.

                                                     4
       even trade secrets as well as know‐how in a few cases. There is also variation in coverage
       over royalties from others’ use of the firm’s IP and capital gains from their sale.
    2. Gross or net income – Belgium, Hungary, and Portugal allow IP‐related expenses to be
       deducted from ordinary income, which is a substantial tax advantage. Most schemes require
       these expenses to be deducted and the reduced tax rate applied to the net income from IP.
    3. Existing IP – schemes vary in whether they cover existing patents or only those newly
       obtained, in some cases requiring further development of the IP within the relevant
       country.
    4. Acquired IP – similarly, there is variation in the coverage of IP acquired from others, and in
       whether there is a further development requirement.

Because of the fear that the introduction of patent boxes would lead to wasteful tax competition
among countries without a concomitant increase in innovative activity, the OECD Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting (BEPS) project recommended in 2015 that there be a local development requirement
for the patent to be eligible. BEPS refers to such a requirement as a “nexus” requirement, that is, a
requirement for significant economic presence in the country. In the case of the IP or patent box,
this is interpreted as requiring some further development in the country in question for the income
associated with the patent to be eligible for a reduce tax rate. Although 2015 is later than the period
we study here, several countries in our sample already had such a further development
requirement if income from the patent was to be eligible: Belgium, Spain, the UK, the Netherlands,
and Portugal.

Another feature of many tax systems that will affect the ability of multinationals to use patent boxes
to reduce their tax burden are the rules related to controlled foreign company (CFC) income
(Deloitte 2014). These rules, which are common in large developed economies, require that if a
foreign company is 50% or more owned by a domestic company, its income should be taxed at the
domestic company rate if the foreign tax rate is less than the domestic tax rate by some amount.
The cutoff varies by country, but it is usually between half and three quarters of the domestic rate.
The rules surrounding the CFC regimes can be very complex, specifying types of income affected,
ownership rules, etc. Two things regarding the CFC rules are worth noting: First, when a country
has a CFC regime, the rules usually produce a black list that contains all of the “tax havens” in our
sample, at the very least. Second, following a Court of Justice of the European Union decision in
2006, these rules cannot be applied within the European Economic Area (EU 28 plus Norway,
Iceland, and Liechtenstein).6




6 Bräutigam et al. (2017) contains a useful discussion of how this impacted the IP boxes. Mutti and Grubert
(2009) explain how an MNC can mitigate the impact of the US CFC rules.

                                                    5
    3. Literature review

Over the past years, a considerable number of contributions have studied the relationship between
taxation and patents empirically. A smaller number have focused specifically on the impact of a
patent box on the location of patents. Almost none have examined other consequences of the patent
box. In this section we review the most relevant ones.7

Corporate taxation and patent literature
The first group of papers focuses on the impact of corporate taxation systems on the firm’s choice of
patent system and filing location. Karkinsky and Riedel (2012) are among the first to study patent
filing behavior of multinational enterprises (MNEs) with respect to tax differences. Given that
patents account for a sizable share of the asset value of a typical MNE and that transfers of these
assets are difficult for tax authorities to observe and monitor, they represent a major opportunity
for proﬁt shifting across tax jurisdictions. The results suggest that the corporate tax rate impacts
patent applications ﬁled by a multinational afﬁliate negatively. The effect is relatively large and
appears to be robust to a number of checks. In various specifications, the results indicate that an
increase in the corporate tax rate of one percent is associated with a reduction in the number of
patent applications of 3.5 % to 3.8%.

Boehm et al. (2015) add to the understanding of the patent location decision by studying the
divergence between inventor (invention) and applicant (ownership) country using EP patent filings
for 1990‐2007. They show that low‐tax countries tend to attract foreign‐invented patents from
high‐tax countries, especially if the patents are of “high quality” by the usual measures. The effects
are relatively small but significant, and are reduced slightly in the case where the inventor country
has implemented CFC rules. Note that although they distinguish between tax havens and other
countries as applicant locations, they do not analyze the full destination choice decision.

In contrast, Griffith et al. (2014) study a firm’s decision about the location of patent ownership and
distinguish among different location choices by using a random coefficients logit model. The firm’s
tax rate is not only affected by time and target country, but also by its home location, since
Controlled Foreign Company (CFC) rules introduce variation at the dyad level. The authors use data
on the statutory corporate tax rate and their sample consists of about 1,000 of the largest patenting
firms at the EPO during the period 1985 to 2005, covering about 70% of corporate patent
applications. In general, semi‐elasticities are more pronounced for smaller than for larger home
countries. In a simulation exercise, they find that the introduction of a patent box attracts patent
income, but also leads to a net reduction in tax revenues.

Patent box literature
We now turn to those papers that explicitly analyze the impact of the patent box instrument on
patent location and transfer. Alstadsæter et al. (2018) analyze the use of patent box regimes by the
2,000 largest corporate R&D performers worldwide for the period 2000‐2011. Using various
negative binomial models for the number of patents of a particular technology type located in a

7 In Appendix A, Tables A1 and A2 provide an overview of the empirical studies that we found directly
relevant to the study of patent boxes.

                                                  6
country by each of these multinationals, they find that the tax advantage of a patent box does
induce firms to locate their patents in a country. However, interpretation of the regressions is
problematic, since they include a dummy for the presence of a patent box and the highly correlated
indicator for the tax advantage of such a box.8 While the authors find a tax advantage for the firm
using patent boxes, there are small negative effects on local invention. However, if there is a local
development requirement, patent boxes seem to have a substantial positive impact on domestic
inventions by the observed firms.

Bösenberg and Egger (2017) look at patent filings and pre‐grant patent transfers as a function of all
the possible tax incentives that affect patenting. They use a country level dataset with
comprehensive information on R&D tax incentives for 106 countries between 1996 and 2012. The
two main measures they create are the effective marginal R&D cost due to its special tax treatment
(widely known as the “B index”, Warda 2002)9 and the effective average tax rate (EATR) on the
profit from R&D. They find that patent filings in a country respond to EATR but not to the B‐index
or the presence of a patent box, although the signs of these coefficients are as expected. Patent
trade responds to the EATR in the sending country and to the B‐index in both countries, with an
ambiguous sign on the B‐index for the destination country.10

Bradley et al. (2015) examine worldwide patent applications by inventors and applicants in a
country as a function of the patent box and its associated tax rate between 1990 and 2012. They
find that a lower patent box tax rate is associated with an increase in domestic inventor patenting,
but not with the propensity for inventor and owner countries to differ. They also find that regimes
allowing the use of acquired IP lower domestic inventor activity and conjecture that domestic
invention activity is substituted by the use of acquired IP from other countries.

Like Bösenberg and Egger (2017), Ciaramella (2017) studies pre‐grant ownership changes of EP
patents in response to the introduction of the patent box. The results suggest that a one per cent
increase in the tax rebate associated with the patent box would induce about a 10 per cent increase
in patent transfers to that country, and that the response of higher quality patents would be even
slightly more sensitive. She also confirms that patent box design matters: restricting the use of
acquired and existing patents and requiring further development of the patented invention both
discourage patent transfers in response to the availability of a lower tax rate.

Schwab and Todtenhaupt (2018) look at a different consequence of the introduction of a patent
box. They argue that because a patent box in one of the countries in which they have affiliates is
effectively a reduction in the cost of R&D capital that they face, it should increase their R&D activity

8 These variables represent essentially two different error‐ridden indicators of the same underlying concept.

As predicted, the marginally better measure enters positively and the other negatively (Hall, 2004).
9 Technically, the B‐index is the ratio of the after‐tax cost of R&D to the after‐tax profits of the firm, so it is

equal to unity when there is no special tax treatment for R&D, and is less than one in the case of special R&D
treatment. Thus it is not really the effective marginal tax rate on R&D, but is merely related to that tax rate.
This implies that the expected impact of the B‐index and the EATR on R&D are the same. A lower B‐index is
expected to encourage R&D, as does a lower effective average tax rate on the profits from R&D.
10 The regressions show signs of misspecification, as the Poisson and negative binomial results differ greatly
in their coefficients.

                                                        7
overall. They confirm this idea using a panel of multinational firms active in Europe during the
2000‐2012 period. Firms that are exposed to a patent box for one of their affiliates increase their
patent output by about 15 percent, but only if the patent box is not subject to a nexus requirement.

Finally, Mohnen et al. (2017) study the impact of the Dutch patent box on R&D person‐hours in the
firms that take it up. They use a differences‐in‐differences approach and find an increase in R&D in
response to the patent box, although by their estimates the increase is about half of the lost tax
revenue. This makes it a somewhat less attractive policy for inducing R&D when compared to the
approximately unit elasticity estimates for the R&D tax credit (Hall and Van Reenen, 2000).


     4. Models

A firm investing in innovation faces a number of decisions: 1) the location choice for its R&D
investments, 2) whether to file for patents on the result, 3) if so, the location of the first filing, and
4) the location of ownership of the patents. The tax treatment of R&D and patents will affect all
these decisions to varying degrees. The R&D location decision is likely to be most sensitive to the
availability of skilled personnel, the market size in the country, and possibly the (tax) cost of doing
R&D. Unless the patent box has a strong requirement that the associated R&D be done in the
country, this decision is unlikely to be driven by its availability.11 Similarly, patent coverage by itself
is driven by the need to exclude others in the country in question, the cost of such exclusion, the
adequacy of patent enforcement in the country, the availability of adequate trade secret protection,
and the like. Conditional on the existence of patentable inventions, the availability of a patent box
should matter mainly for the location of ownership of the patent and the ability to attach revenue to
that ownership. That is, patenting is driven by a set of considerations that are fairly orthogonal to
the choice of locus for patent ownership, with one exception. The exception is that more profitable
patents will be preferred for transfer to a lower tax jurisdiction.

Our analysis is performed at two levels of aggregation: country level and patent level. The first,
which aggregates all transfers to the sending country‐receiving country‐year level, allows us to
examine the impact of the tax variables and other country‐level variables on the decision to transfer
ownership of patents and the location to which to transfer them. The second allows us to examine
the choices at the individual patent level, which means that we can include patent characteristics in
our analysis.

In the aggregate analysis, we estimate a count data model for the number of patents transferred
from country S to country B in year t (or invented in country S but country B is chosen as the
location of the applicant):

                          E (# transfersS  B | X St , X Bt )   S   B  t  f ( X St , X Bt ) .        (1)

11However, it is interesting to note that the Dutch innovation box allows its use in the case where the firm has
obtained an R&D certificate, which is needed to use the R&D tax credit (Bongaerts and Ijzerman, 2016) report
that the vast majority of Dutch firms using the innovation box (82%) make use of this feature rather than
using income from a patent. This fact alone suggests that patent box schemes are unlikely to be as useful as
R&D tax credits in stimulating R&D.

                                                         8
The function f(.,.), which is intended to capture the relative attractiveness of country S and country
B as a location for the profits from patents, is proxied by a range of variables that describe the
changing tax environment in both countries over time, as well as other country characteristics. We
use a gravity model of the choice, where the dependent variable is the number of patents
transferred that year from one country to another, controlling for country and year fixed effects as
well as the two country’s GDP, population, R&D, and patenting activity. In effect this is a simple
trade model, applied to patent trade.

The general form of a gravity model is the following:

                                            Yijt   i j t  X kitk  X kjt
                                                                           k
                                                                               ijt .                              (2)
                                                              k        k


In our case i, j denote seller and buyer country respectively and t is the year of patent transfer. Y is
the number of patents transferred, Xi and Xj are the characteristics of countries i and j, and η is a
disturbance, which may be heteroskedastic. For estimation, and assuming that the disturbance η is
independent of the right hand side variables, the equation is transformed:

                                                                                              
                        Yijt  exp  ln  i  ln  j  ln t    k ln X kit    k ln X kjt ijt               (3)
                                                              k                k              

or

                                                                                                            
                E[Yijt | i, j, X it X jt ]  exp  ln  i  ln  j  ln t    k ln X kit    k ln X kjt  .   (4)
                                                                            k                k              



As suggested by Santos‐Silva and Teneyro (2006), this model can be estimated by pseudo‐
maximum likelihood, that is, Poisson with robust standard errors. They show that this estimator is
preferred for gravity models in terms of bias and has the additional benefit that zeroes in the
dependent variable are allowed, which is not true of the usual log linear treatment of the gravity
equation. See that reference for details. We use a random effects Poisson model with robust
standard errors clustered on the buyer‐seller country combinations for estimation. That is, there
are fixed country effects, but random effects for the country (buyer‐seller) combinations. This
model is more robust to misspecification than the alternative negative binomial model, and the
standard error estimates allow for the overdispersion, which is clearly present.12

The above analysis is to some extent simply descriptive, rather than being derived from the
applicant’s choice problem. A more complete model would need to be analyzed at the firm or patent
level. At any period in time, the firm faces the choice of keeping the patent where it is or
transferring it to another tax jurisdiction. The reasons for transfer include mergers/acquisitions,
asset sales, or tax considerations. Our focus is the latter, and we are forced to assume that the tax

12Experiments with the negative binomial model and its random effects version produced unstable results,
supporting the view that this distributional assumption was not justified.

                                                          9
effect is roughly orthogonal to the other causes of transfer, due to the absence of accurate data on
these other causes. An alternative interpretation is that our estimates encompass any tax advantage
motivations deriving from M&A activity. We address this question later when we focus in our
empirical work on intra‐group transfers across countries, which are arguably purely tax motivated.

Our second empirical model examines the choice of which patent to transfer. In principle, a firm
considering transferring ownership of a patent across countries faces a multitude of choices, and
would choose based on the tax rate on patent income in the home and potential transfer country,
the transfer cost, and whether it had a subsidiary in the country13. The underlying model of transfer
is described below and then we derive the (simplified) logit model that we actually estimated.

The after‐tax income (profit) derived from patent i held by entity j in country s at time t depends on
a set of value indicators Xi:

                                                its  (1   ts )( X i  )   its .                        (5)

τts is the tax rate on patent income in country s at time t. If the patent is transferred to country b, we
assume it will earn after‐tax income as follows:

                                                itb  (1   tb )( X i  )   itb .                        (6)

At time t, the patent will be transferred to country b if the following condition holds, where the
transfer occurs at a transactions cost C that depends on characteristics of the patent owner j:

                                      ( st   bt )  X i     ist   ibt  C j =Z j   .               (6)

However the above condition is sufficient only if there is a single country b to which the patent can
be transferred (this is related to the reason that the coefficients of W are not identified in a hazard
rate or simple logit model). To fully describe the problem in the case of several possible countries,
we need the following condition:

                                                       itb  Max  itk  ,                                 (6)
                                                                k b


which is recognizable as the specification of a random utility model, so it can in principle be
estimated by logit or nested logit if the disturbances are assumed to be extreme value distributed.
The version above is conditional on a transfer being made. To add the possibility that no transfer is
made, define Csj = 0 in the case of no transfer, and Ckj >0 otherwise, rewriting the equation as

                                              itb  Cbj  Max  itk  Ckj  .                            (6)
                                                               k b




13As we discuss in Appendix D, full estimation of a model of patent transfer as a function of the characteristics
of the patent (X), of the current country (Z), and the potential countries to which the patent might be
transferred (W) proved difficult to impossible, probably because we have limited variability in the tax
variables, especially those for the patent box.

                                                          10
In this derivation, we assume that the costs of the transfer are determined by the entity transferring
the patent, whether the buyer or the seller actually pay these costs.14 Note that attempting to model
that for the disturbances (which will contain country dummies and will also be clustered on owner
characteristics). For estimation, we specify these costs as a linear regression function of the patent
owner characteristics Z; the negative sign reflects the fact that our indicators are expected to be
associated with lower costs of transfer:

                                                        C kj   Z j    kj .                                                       (6)

Transforming equation (9) to a form that can be estimated by a simple logit model of transfer and
writing the costs of transfer as, we obtain the following:


                                       
                   Pr(transfer )  Pr  its  Max  itk  Ckj 
                                                 k s
                                                                                                                                 .   (6)
                                   Pr Max  (1     tk   ) X i    kj   itk   X i    ts X i   Z j    its   
                                          k s


The first term in this equation is clearly unobservable due to the presence of the disturbance, which
varies across the k possible transfer countries. This precludes identification of the coefficients of
characteristics of the recipient countries W. Therefore the only coefficients that can be identified
are those of the patent characteristics X and the owner characteristics Z. We control as best we can
for the unobservatble maximum across potential transfer countries using the applicant year and
country dummies (note that variation of the set of countries available for transfer is isomorphic to
the single current owner country because we include a closed set of 37 countries in our estimation
sample).

Transfer is more likely under the following conditions:

       1. Higher seller tax rates (interacted with the patent value indicators). For most countries and
          years, this is the corporate tax rate, while for countries that have introduced a patent box, it
          will be the patent box rate. For the government/non‐profit sector, the rate will be zero.
       2. The value of the patent in generating income is higher. That is, the value indicators X are
          larger.
       3. The cost of making the transfer is lower, which we proxy using the dummies for the type of
          patenting entity and its cumulative patent holdings (as an indicator of the salience of
          patents to the entity).
       4. The coefficients of the value indicators and the value indicators interacted with the tax rate
          should be equal and opposite.

All of these are measurable for the patents that are actually transferred. However, as noted the
characteristics W of the transfer country (including its tax rates) are not defined for those patents
that are not transferred. Therefore in the empirical analysis in Section 6 we focus on the impact of
the tax rate in the country from which the transfer is made (τits) and the value proxies (X) of the
patent.



14   We do not observe the price at which the transfer is made, so cannot allocate costs between the parties.

                                                               11
     5. Data

The data for our study come from PATSTAT (European Patent Office, April 2017 edition) and the
MPI 2018 patent transfer database (Gaessler and Harhoff 2018).15 For the aggregate country‐level
portion of the study, we add data from the Penn World Tables 9.0 (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer
2015), the OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators (OECD 2018), and the UNESCO Statistics
Database. Our tax information comes from OECD (2016) as well as various prior studies of the IP
box detailed below.

There are approximately 1.2 million registered ownership transfers of European patents (EP) in the
MPI 2018 patent transfer database. About two‐thirds of these transfers are within a group of firms,
while only about 12 percent are across countries. The most common transfers are to and from
Germany and the United States and Switzerland. Granted patents are far more likely to be
transferred and transferred patents are uniformly distributed across technology areas. In contrast
to other studies on patent transfers, the used data entails pre‐ as well as post‐grant patent. In fact, a
considerable share of transfers occurs after patent grant, when the rights holder presumably faces
lower uncertainty about the patent’s validity and commercial value. For more detail on the raw
data, see Gaessler and Harhoff (2018).

For the study here, we restrict the sample to transfers among 51 countries for which we have tax
information. Our sample includes 27 European countries, the US, Canada, Mexico, Chile, Israel,
Turkey, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Korea, and 14 “tax haven” countries or jurisdictions, mostly
in the Caribbean. It includes 95 percent of the international transfers in the database.16 The
complete country list is shown in Appendix Table B1, and the list of the patent box countries only in
Appendix Table B2.

We combine these data with tax data from Alstadsæter et al. (2018), Evers et al. (2015), and the
OECD on corporate taxation and the tax treatment for intangible assets including patent boxes.17
Figure 1a shows the distribution of corporate tax rates during the 2000‐2014 period for the 37
countries which have corporate taxation (that is, excluding the 14 tax havens) and Figure 1b shows
the distribution of the wedge between the rate on ordinary income and that on patent‐generated
income for those countries that have a patent box, during the years in which they have the box. The
median corporate tax rate is 28 percent and the median reduction for patents is around 18 percent.


15The Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition Patent Transfers Data 2018. For information on
data access, see: https://www.ip.mpg.de/en/research/innovation‐and‐entrepreneurship‐research/data‐
access.html.
16 101,091 transfers out of 106,642 over the 2000‐2014 period. A small share of patent transfers includes
cases of co‐ownership with multiple origin and/or destination countries. We account for this by using
fractional counts.
17  We checked the coding of the existing/acquired IP exclusions and the development conditions attached in
various sources. Determining the precise definition of eligible IP turns out to be difficult, and there is some
conflict among the various research papers. In addition, given the ability of firms to create local subsidiaries,
it is not clear that these restrictions bite in some cases. Unfortunately using more nuanced definitions of these
variables leaves us with no degrees of freedom to identify their effects.

                                                       12
The median tax rate on patent‐related income for those countries and years that have a patent box
is 7 percent.

                                                 Figure 1




     6. Results

Aggregate analysis – Patent transfers
Our initial exploratory analysis is at the aggregate level. We observe the number of patent transfers
from each of 51 countries to the other 50 countries (excluding within country transfers). For
estimation, we restrict the transfer sample to 2000‐2014, which is when most of the patent boxes
were introduced.18 The total number of observations in our data is therefore 38,250 = 15*50*51.19
Figures 2 and 3 show the aggregate EP patent transfers into and out of the countries that
introduced the patent box during the 2000‐2014 period as a function of the number of years before
and after its introduction. The figures also show the transfers of EP patents restricted to be within a
firm group. Both curves in Figure 2 show the expected increase in transfers during the two years
following the patent box introduction, with the within group curve increasing somewhat more. The
effect diminishes after 2 years, probably because the desired transfers have been completed, but
also because there are fewer countries with a patent box at longer lags. There is also a hint of patent
box anticipation three years prior to its introduction. It is difficult to get precise dates for all the

18 There are two exceptions: France (1971‐) and Ireland (1973‐2010, 2015‐). As our transfer data begins only

in 1981, France does not contribute to identification, and for Ireland identification comes from the box
removal rather than introduction. The recently re‐introduced patent box in Ireland is outside our sample
years.
19Two of the tax haven jurisdictions (Jersey and Aruba) have no patents to transfer, so the total number of
observations is actually 49*50*15 = 36,750. In addition, France has a patent box during the entire estimation
period, which means it will not contribute to identification of the patent box impact in the presence of the
country dummy.

                                                     13
countries as to when the patent box first became a real probability, but we do know that for the UK,
the legislation was actually in place long before the date when coverage began in 2013.20

Figure 3 shows that after the introduction of the patent box, patent transfers out of the country
with the box decline significantly, from a total of 2000 to 1000 over two years. This suggests at least
some success, if the goal was to keep intangible income within the country. However, both Figures 2
and 3 suffer somewhat from truncation due to the relatively recent date of introduction of some of
the patent boxes (notably that in the UK). In what follows, we estimate models for patent transfer
controlling for differences across countries and time.

                                              Figure 2




20See https://www.gov.uk/guidance/corporation‐tax‐the‐patent‐box. This document, dated January 2007,
describes the patent box to be introduced in 2013.

                                                  14
                                               Figure 3




As described in Section 4, we estimate a count data model for the number of patents transferred
from country S to country B in year t. We include a range of variables that describe the changing tax
environment in both countries over time, as well as some other country characteristics. The
statutory corporate tax rate of S (seller country) and B (buyer country) is included in most
regressions. This rate excludes any advantage due to the patent box. To model the patent box, we
used either a dummy for its presence, or the magnitude of the reduction from the corporate tax rate
(corporate tax rate less the tax rate on income attributed to patents). The other country
characteristics included are population, real GDP per capita, EP patent applications per capita, and
the R&D‐GDP ratio plus a dummy for those few observations where R&D spending was
unobtainable. The population and GDP numbers come from the Penn World Tables 9.0 (Feenstra et
al. 2015), while the R&D figures come from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics database (United
Nationals Institute for Statistics 2018) and are also available from the International Monetary Fund
statistical database.

In practice we found that excluding the 14 tax haven countries from the sample made little
difference to the estimates, so we focus here on the results that are based on the 37 country sample,
which includes all 13 countries that have introduced a patent box by 2014.21 These results are
shown in Tables 1 and 2. Results for the 51 country sample are shown in Appendix Tables B3 and
B4.



21The sample is 27 European countries, Australia, Canada, Chile, Israel, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, New
Zealand, Turkey, and the US.

                                                  15
We parametrize the tax rates f in a number of ways. In all versions we include the nominal
corporate tax rate of the buyer and seller countries. In the first version we include dummies for the
patent box in the buyer and seller countries in all the years when it was available (columns 1 and 5
of Table 1). In the second we include the magnitude of the difference between the ordinary income
and patent income tax rates for both countries (columns 2 and 6 of Table 1). In the third version we
explore the timing of the response to the introduction of the patent box: instead of including a
dummy for every year following its introduction, we include dummies only for the introductory
year and 3 lags (columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 of Table 1). The assumption is that the introduction of the
patent box triggers patent transfers, possibly with a lag, but that after that adjustment, there will be
no additional transfers, because new patents can simply be taken out with ownership residing in
the patent box country.

The first four columns of Table 1 show the results for Poisson random effects estimation of the
number of international patent transfers from one country to another on the tax variables and
complete sets of dummies for buyer and seller countries as well as year dummies, while the next
four columns add the various country characteristics.22 The country dummies already control to
some extent for the fact that the average number of patents, the size of the economy and its
technological intensity vary enormously across countries, so adding these characteristics to the
regression only controls for their change over time. We found that only the buyer country
population and per capita patenting entered the regression significantly. We also found that neither
of the general corporate tax rates entered the regression significantly, although the standard errors
are quite large.23

Columns 1 and 2 in Table 1 show that the patent box has an insignificant impact on patent transfer
to the country, whereas with the patent box has a strongly negative impact on transfer from the
country. Thus once we control for seller, buyer, and year, only changes in the potential seller’s tax
rates have any noticeable effect on the number of patents transferred, with the lower tax rates on
patent box income in the seller country discouraging the transfer of patents. The coefficient on the
seller’s patent box dummy implies a 28 per cent reduction in transfers due to the presence of a
patent box. Because the average difference between the corporate tax rate and the patent box rate
is 0.18 for those countries that have a patent box, the coefficient estimate of ‐1.52 implies an
average impact that is almost the same, 27 per cent.

As Figure 2 suggests, we might expect that the patent box impact on patent transfer is transitory,
because patent applications after the introduction of a patent box will simply be made from the
relevant jurisdiction. In column 3 of Table 2, this idea is explored by including dummies for the
patent box only in years 0 through 3 following the patent box introduction. The results show that
there may be a transitory impact of the patent box on transfers to a country which is strongest in

22 We cluster the standard errors by origin‐destination country pairs. Our estimation strategy means that the
average transfer effects (to and from) for each country are treated as fixed effects, while the average transfer
effect between specific pairs of countries is treated as a random effect, conditional on each country’s own
average transfer probability.
23Identification is marginal in the presence of country and year dummies, because the within variance of
corporate tax rates is about 10 per cent of the total.

                                                      16
year 2. That is, it takes some time after the patent box introduction for transfers to that country to
respond. However the sum of the 4 coefficients is insignificant, equal to 0.40 with a standard error
of 0.60, once again too large to draw strong conclusions. Our conclusion is that introducing a patent
box may encourage some patent transfer into the country, and also discourages patent transfer out
of the country. We also note that the encouragement effect could be larger but it is less well‐
determined than the discouragement effect. In general, the results when we include the country
variables for population, GDP, R&D, and patenting are very similar (columns 5 to 8).

Columns 4 and 8 of Table 1 show estimates where we restrict the transfers to those that are within
the group, that is, transfers within a multinational firm. In this case the results are quite similar,
with a hint that the impact on transfers out is slightly higher, whereas the impact on patent
retention is slightly weaker. However, it is quite clear that the regressions are almost at the limit of
what can be identified from these data.




                                                  17
                                                                  Table 1

                                               Inter‐country patent transfer flows
            Dependent variable: Number of patents transferred from seller country to buyer country during the year
                                                                     Within                                     Within
                                        All        All        All     group         All        All       All    group
    Variable                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
    Buyer corporate tax rate           0.64       0.81       1.11       0.36      ‐1.19      ‐0.99     ‐0.67      ‐1.21
                                      (1.29)    (1.28)      (1.35)    (1.88)     (1.30)     (1.28)    (1.32)     (1.67)
    Dummy for buyer patent box        ‐0.07                                       ‐0.17
     in all years after introduction  (0.15)                                     (0.13)
    Buyer patent tax rate wedge                  ‐0.03                                      ‐0.46
     in all years after introduction            (0.76)                                      (0.67)
    Dummy for buyer patent box                               0.00       0.00                           ‐0.07      ‐0.07
     in year of introduction                                (0.12)    (0.16)                          (0.11)     (0.14)
    Dummy for buyer patent box                               0.13       0.23                            0.05       0.13
     in year after introduction                             (0.23)    (0.27)                          (0.22)     (0.24)
    Dummy for buyer patent box                              0.40*     0.63**                            0.31    0.52**
     two years after introduction                           (0.24)    (0.26)                          (0.23)     (0.25)
    Dummy for buyer patent box                              ‐0.11      ‐0.21                          ‐0.20*     ‐0.32*
     three years after introduction                         (0.15)    (0.20)                          (0.12)     (0.17)
    Seller corporate tax rate          0.97       1.11       1.40       1.64       0.41       0.61      0.75       0.69
                                      (1.06)    (1.03)      (1.00)    (1.30)     (1.39)     (1.41)    (1.41)     (1.92)
    Dummy for seller patent box      ‐0.33**                                    ‐0.32**
     in all years after introduction  (0.13)                                     (0.13)
    Seller patent tax rate wedge               ‐1.52**                                     ‐1.36**
     in all years after introduction            (0.63)                                      (0.67)
    Dummy for seller patent box                              0.01       0.17                            0.00       0.17
     in year of introduction                                (0.23)    (0.28)                          (0.24)     (0.29)
    Dummy for seller patent box                            ‐0.32*      ‐0.24                          ‐0.34*      ‐0.24
     in year after introduction                             (0.19)    (0.22)                          (0.19)     (0.19)
    Dummy for seller patent box                            ‐0.23*      ‐0.19                           ‐0.22      ‐0.16
     two years after introduction                           (0.13)    (0.22)                          (0.18)     (0.28)
    Dummy for seller patent box                             ‐0.21      ‐0.16                           ‐0.20      ‐0.16
     three years after introduction                         (0.14)    (0.17)                          (0.15)     (0.16)
    Chi‐squared                             4157.9       4173.6      4243.1    3221.0      4309.3       4339.4   4370.2     3286.4
    Chi‐sq degrees of freedom                 92           92          98        98         100          100      106        106
    Poisson random effects panel regression with standard errors clustered on buyer‐seller country pairs.
    19,980 observations on 1,332 country pairs, 2000‐2014
    Coefficient significance is denoted by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
    All regressions include complete sets of dummies for the 37 buyer and seller countries and years.
    Regressions in columns5‐8 also include the buyer and seller aggregate patent applications, population, GDP per capita, and R&D
    intensity, all in logs.


In principle the decision to transfer IP from one jurisdiction to another should depend primarily on
the difference in tax rates in the two regimes, rather than on their absolute level. We pursue this
approach in Table 2. Denoting the statutory corporate tax rate as τ and the tax rate on patent
income as ρ, we define the following variables:

                                      difftax   S   B
                                                                                                                                     (7)
                                      diffbox  ( B   B )  ( S   S )  (  S   B )  ( S   B )


                                                                      18
These variables are defined in such a way that their expected coefficients are positive (the greater
the seller tax rate is relative to the buyer tax rate, the higher the likelihood of a transfer).

Table 2 shows the results of estimation with these variables, and additional results are shown in
Appendix Table B5. Neither difftax nor diffbox is significant by itself in predicting patent transfers.
The variable diffbox is also interacted with several other features of the tax system in the
regressions following: 1) whether existing patents are eligible (shown in Table B3); 2) whether
acquired patents are eligible (shown in Table B3); 3) whether there is requirement of further
development of the invention in the country; 4) whether CFC rules apply between the seller and
buyer country. Measuring the impact of all these results is challenging due to an absence of
sufficient variation across countries (see Table A1). Therefore we examine them one at a time.
Allowing existing and/or acquired patents to benefit from the patent box does not have a significant
impact on the number of transfers to that country, although the large standard errors do not
warrant strong conclusions.

In contrast, the requirement for further development of the patented invention in the buyer
country substantially reduces transfers, while countries without that requirement see an increase
in transfers from the patent box. We can compute the potential impact of a change in the patent box
tax advantage for systems with and without this feature, finding that the response to a 10 percent
increase in the tax advantage from a patent box is associated with an increase of about 14 percent
(standard error 6 percent) if existing and/or acquired patents are included and minus 6 percent
(standard error 10 percent) if they are excluded. This result is consistent with the profit‐shifting
results of Koethenbuerger et al. (2016).

CFC requirements imposed on the buyer country by the seller country also reduce the likelihood of
transferring patents, although if the gap in corporate tax rates is large enough, it is able to override
this impact. The point at which the CFC impact turns positive is a corporate tax rate difference of
about 11 per cent, so it is well within our data. Again, we caution that the confidence interval for
this point is quite broad, given the standard errors.

Columns 4 and 8 in Table 2 show the results for within‐group transfers, as in Table 1. They are
quite similar to those for all the international transfers, with the exception of the CFC rules, which
have a somewhat stronger impact when interacted with the patent box differential and a weaker
impact interacted with the overall corporate tax differential.




                                                  19
                                                                   Table 2

                             Inter‐country patent transfer flows ‐ exploring tax variables
          Dependent variable: Number of patents transferred from seller country to buyer country during the year
                                                                     Within                                   Within
                                      All         All        All     group        All        All      All     group
    Variable                          (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)
    Difference:                      0.18        0.35      ‐0.31       0.28      0.80       0.79     0.68       0.88
     seller corp tax‐buyer corp tax (0.88)      (0.90)     (0.95)    (1.24)     (0.98)    (0.97)    (0.98)    (1.28)
    Difference:                      0.60      1.36**       0.34       0.40      0.28       0.72     0.03       0.09
     buyer‐seller patent tax wedge  (0.49)      (0.63)     (0.56)    (0.74)     (0.50)     (0.62)   (0.57)    (0.73)
    D (dev condition on use)*buyer‐             ‐1.95*                                     ‐1.04
     seller patent tax wedge                    (1.03)                                     (0.94)
    D (CFC rules apply to buyer)                          ‐0.37**     ‐0.22                        ‐0.37**     ‐0.24
                                                           (0.17)    (0.27)                         (0.15)    (0.22)
    D (CFC) * seller‐buyer corp                           3.32***      1.21                         2.34*       0.65
     tax difference                                        (1.13)    (1.77)                         (1.36)    (1.67)
    D (CFC) * buyer‐seller patent                           1.27     2.22*                           1.37      2.26*
     box difference                                        (1.04)    (1.26)                         (1.02)    (1.24)

    Chi‐squared                             4,036.6      4,052.4     4,158.6   3,056.8    4,271.7       4,295.0   4,405.3   3,538.3
    Degrees of freedom                         90           91          93        93         98           99        101       101

    Poisson random effects panel regression with standard errors clustered on buyer‐seller country pairs.
    19,980 observations on 1,332 country pairs, 2000‐2014
    Coefficient significance is denoted by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
    All regressions include complete sets of dummies for the 37 buyer and seller countries and years.
    Regressions in columns 5‐8 also include the buyer and seller aggregate patent applications, population, GDP per capita, and R&D
    intensity, all in logs.


These results lead us to two conclusions. Overall, the presence of a patent box may induce some
transfers to the jurisdiction, albeit with a bit of lag. However, the most significant impact of a patent
box is to prevent patents from being transferred, as intended by the tax authorities. The results also
show that if a country’s patent box does not require further development of the invention in the
country, more patent transfer to the country will be induced. Along with CFC rules, the
development requirement is more important in our data than whether or not pre‐existing or
acquired patents are included among the patents eligible for special tax treatment, although clearly
these rules are related.

Aggregate analysis – Inventive activity
The innovation policy argument for the introduction of a patent box is that it should encourage
invention and innovative activity in the relevant country. In this section of the paper we look at how
such activity changed after a patent box was introduced, using two indicators of inventive activity:
EP patent filings from inventors resident in the country and the level of business R&D spending.
The analysis is admittedly very aggregate, but still indicative of whether the patent box has an
impact on the level of innovative activity in a country.

Because of patent data truncation due to lags in PATSTAT (April 2017 edition), the filings in 2015
and 2016 are incomplete. This means that the window we can examine ends in 2014 which



                                                                     20
excludes several countries from the analysis. 24 In addition, in the case of France, there is no pre‐
patent box data. In Figures 4 and 5 we show the simple trends around accession time for all the
countries in our dataset that have introduced a patent box and for which we have data before and
after its introduction. In the case of EP filings these countries are Belgium, Cyprus, Hungary,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland. For R&D, we lose
Cyprus, Malta, and Liechtenstein due to lack of R&D data. Figures B1‐B4 in the appendices show the
graphs for each country.

                                                Figure 4




24 The patent boxes in Portugal and the UK are too new, and for France and Ireland we have no data prior to

the box introduction.

                                                    21
                                               Figure 5




The two graphs are quite similar: both show a slow increase until the date of the patent box
introduction and then the curve is either flat or declines slightly. Note, however, that the years of
patent box introduction cluster around 2007 and 2008, so we cannot be sure that the flat trend is
not due to the effects of the great recession. To explore this, and also to control for country
differences, we estimate some simple aggregate patent regressions for the log of filings by inventors
in a country as a function of the existence of a patent box, the statutory corporate tax rate, the
population, real GDP, and a set of country and year dummies. In the case of the patent filings
regression, we also include the R&D‐GDP ratio of the country. The method of estimation for both
sets of regressions is ordinary least squares, because most country‐year cells have a large number
of counts and there are no zeroes.

The estimation results are shown in Tables 3 and 4. The first column in both regressions is
essentially a difference‐in‐difference estimation for the impact of the patent box, as the regression
includes only the patent box dummy and a complete set of country and year dummies. In both cases
the coefficient is negative and either insignificant or barely significant. The remaining columns add
various country and tax variables to the regressions, and use the size of the patent tax wedge
instead of the box dummy. Nothing changes the basic result, however. In both regressions, the two
patent box variables are insignificant or slightly significant but with the wrong sign: if anything, the
presence of a patent box reduces patentable invention in the country. Both inventor filings and R&D
depend positively on GDP per capita, and inventor filings also on R&D intensity.

As mentioned earlier, Alstadsaeter et al. (2015) look at the change in the number of inventors in
host and destination country in response to patent transfers at the company level, and find that
inventors in the destination country are more likely to increase when there is a further

                                                  22
development requirement for the use of a patent box with existing patents that are transferred. We
probe this further in in columns 4 to 6 of Table 3, which add the dummies for the inclusion of
existing patents, acquired patents, and requirement for separate development. None of these enter
significantly. The regression is also at the edge of identifiability, because of the relatively few patent
box observations, especially when we separate them into those with development restrictions. So
we conclude that our results are inconsistent with those of Alstadsaeter et al. (2015), although with
the caveat that standard errors are large. Another source of difference is that our estimates are
based on country aggregates and those of Alstadsaeter et al. on large R&D‐doing firms only, most of
which are multi‐nationals.

                                                             Table 3

                                            Inventor filings by country
                            Dep. Var. = Log EP patent filings from inventors in the country

                                                  (1)           (2)      (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)
      D (patent box)                            ‐0.21*        ‐0.13*
       in all years after introduction          (0.10)        (0.06)
      Patent tax rate wedge                                            ‐0.49*      ‐0.39         ‐0.05    ‐0.65*
       in all years after introduction                                 (0.24)     (0.58)        (0.46)    (0.29)
      D (including existing patents)                                               ‐0.13
       * patent tax wedge                                                         (0.62)
      D (including acquired patents)                                                             ‐0.76
       * patent tax wedge                                                                       (0.52)
      D (development restriction)                                                                           0.32
       * patent tax wedge                                                                                  (0.52)
      Corporate tax rate                                       ‐1.45     ‐1.43     ‐1.42          ‐1.34     ‐1.38
                                                              (1.12)    (1.14)    (1.14)         (1.14)    (1.16)
      Log population                                           ‐0.97     ‐1.00     ‐1.01          ‐1.01     ‐0.95
                                                              (1.19)    (1.21)    (1.23)         (1.20)    (1.23)
      Log GDP per capita                                     1.55***   1.51***   1.51***        1.53***   1.52***
                                                              (0.34)    (0.35)    (0.35)         (0.35)    (0.35)
      Log R&D expenditure over GDP                           0.70***   0.72***   0.72***        0.72***   0.72***
                                                              (0.19)    (0.19)    (0.19)         (0.19)    (0.19)
      Number of coefficients                      53            57       57         58            58        58
      R‐squared                                  0.98          0.99     0.99       0.99          0.99      0.99
      Standard error                             0.31          0.25     0.25       0.25          0.25      0.25
      Log‐likelihood                            ‐112.7         18.2     16.3       16.4          18.1      16.6
      555 observations on 37 countries for the years 2000‐2014.
      All regressions include a complete set of country and year dummies, as well as a dummy for missing R&D data
      (52 observations on 4 small countries).
      Method of estimation is least squares with robust standard errors, clustered by country
      Significance levels: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                               23
                                                     Table 4

                               Country‐level Business R&D spending
                               Dep. Var. = Log BERD (Business enterprise R&D)
            Variable                                 (1)        (2)        (3)               (4)

            Lagged log BERD                                                                0.78***
                                                                                            (0.03)
            Dummy for patent box                        ‐0.08
             in all years after introduction           (0.04)
            Dummy for patent box                                    0.00
             in year of introduction                               (0.03)
            Dummy for patent box                                    ‐0.04
             in year after introduction                            (0.04)
            Dummy for patent box                                    ‐0.05
             two years after introduction                          (0.05)
            Dummy for patent box                                    ‐0.03
             three years after introduction                        (0.04)
            Patent tax rate wedge                                               ‐0.41        ‐0.05
             in all years after introduction                                   (0.22)       (0.09)
            Corporate tax rate                          ‐0.06        ‐0.09      ‐0.05        ‐0.23
                                                       (0.46)       (0.46)     (0.46)       (0.14)
            Log population                              ‐0.08        ‐0.06      ‐0.07        ‐0.11
                                                       (0.52)       (0.57)     (0.52)       (0.13)
            Log GDP per capita                        1.60***      1.60***    1.59***      0.46***
                                                       (0.21)       (0.21)     (0.21)       (0.07)
            Observations                                 503          503        503          469
            R‐squared                                  0.996        0.996      0.996        0.999
            Standard error                             0.113        0.114      0.113        0.058
            32 countries 2000‐2014. All estimates include country and year dummies.
            Method of estimation is least squares with robust standard errors, clustered by country.
            Significance levels: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Our conclusion from this investigation of the impact of introducing a patent box on aggregate
innovative activity in a country is that we cannot see any impact, at least at the macroeconomic
level.




                                                         24
Patent level analysis
We now turn to an analysis of the choice of patents to transfer. We expect that the patents chosen to
benefit from reduced corporate taxes will be those that generate greater income for their owner
than other patents. Data on the income generated by individual patents is not available to us, but
previous work has shown that several measurable patent characteristics are associated with the
economic value of patents (Harhoff et al. 2003; Hall et al. 2004). Therefore we proxy for patent
value using some of these measures, as discussed below. We also expect that corporations,
especially multinational corporations, will be more likely to take advantage of this kind of tax
planning. In what follows, we will distinguish between transfers made to countries with lower tax
rates for patent income and other international transfers, and between those made within a
corporate group (which are arguably more targeted towards tax benefits) and arm’s length
transactions due to sale, either of a patent portfolio, or of the entire firm.

Our sample is the approximately 2.5 million EP patents filed between 1991 and 2014; of these
patents 4.2 percent were subject to an ownership transfer across countries between 2000 and
2014. 25 We focus on the first time that the patent is transferred, and drop the few cases where
there is more than one transfer. Figure 5 shows the share of transfers as a function of the filing date
of the patent, together with the number of EP patents transferred by transfer year. In the
subsequent analysis, we exclude transfers to and from tax havens. This restriction reduces the
number of transfers from 100,936 to 91,351.

Due to the large size of the sample, and the low probability of a transfer in any year (about 0.3%),
we draw a random 10 per cent sample of the non‐transferred patents for comparison. King and
Zeng (2001), among others, show that with known sampling probability, logit coefficient estimates
are unaffected by this procedure, with the exception of the intercept. A consistent estimate of the
intercept is given by the following:

                                                            1    y  
                                           0  ˆ0  log                                           (7)
                                                              1  y  

where ̂ 0 is the estimated intercept, ψ is the population share of transferred patents, and y is the
share of the transferred patents in the sample. For our 10 per cent sample, this correction factor is
equal to 2.3.26 Note that for rare events, the correction factor is approximately equal to the log of
the oversampling probability ( y / ψ).




25Of course, not all patent applications in the recent years that will eventually be granted have been granted
by April 2017, the date of our PATSTAT data.
26   Log [((1‐.00317)/.00317) (0.0309/(1‐0.0309))] = Log(315.5*.0317) = 2.302  Log(10).

                                                      25
                                                  Figure 6

                                  International transfers of EP patents
            8.0%                                                                      10000

                                                                                      9000
            7.0%
                                                                                      8000
            6.0%
                                                                                      7000
            5.0%
                                                                                      6000

            4.0%                                                                      5000

                                                                                      4000
            3.0%
                                                                                      3000
            2.0%
                                                                                      2000
            1.0%
                                                                                      1000

            0.0%                                                                      0
                   1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
                                   Share of EP patents transferred, by filing date
                                   Transfers in current year (RHS)
                                   Transfers in current year excl. tax havens (RHS)


As discussed in Section 4, we chose to estimate a simple logit model of the choice to transfer a
patent as a function of the patent characteristics X and the patent owner characteristics Z. The
patent characteristics we consider are those that are familiar from the literature on patent value:

      Patent family size (docdb measure) – larger sizes are associated both with application in
       multiple jurisdictions and with more complex continuation/divisional structures, used by
       firms that anticipate value from the application.
      Number of claims – frequently positively associated with value, although results can be
       ambiguous, as many dependent claims may also represent breadth restrictions.
      Number of forward citations (5‐year) – the number of times the patent has been cited in
       subsequent patent filings at the EPO during the first 5 years after the application.
      Number of inventors named on the patent – a larger number of inventors may imply greater
       expense devoted to the invention, in expectation of a greater payoff.

Although all of these value proxies have been shown to be correlated with the underlying value of
the patented invention (Harhoff et al. 2003), they vary in different ways, depending on the
technology, type of owner, and specificity of the invention. For example, patent family size is likely
to be related both to the technology area (complex divisional structures are more likely in
pharmaceutical innovation) and to whether the patent owner operates in multiple international
markets. Like Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004), we use factor analysis to extract the first common
factor from these four variables and use that as our indication of the private value of the patented
invention. We first computed the residuals from a regression of each of the four variables on
application year, applicant country, and a set of 34 technology class dummies to control for known
differences across time and space, and then extracted the first factor from an analysis of these

                                                      26
residuals. We found that removing the dummy variable effects had little effect on the estimated
results from using this patent value proxy, although it did improve the explanatory power of our
regressions slightly.

We have a limited number of patent owner characteristics Z, as they are entirely based on the
patent data. They are the following:

      The size of the applicant’s patent portfolio at the time of the current patent application,
       which reflects the saliency of patents in the firm’s strategy.
      An MNC dummy for whether the owner is research active in more than two countries (as
       indicated by patenting from that country at least once during the entire period).
      A dummy for whether the owner is a corporation (as opposed to an individual, university,
       non‐profit, or governmental entity). This dummy excludes the MNC dummy above, which
       also indicates a corporation.

All of these characteristics are non‐time‐varying. We also include dummies for the applicant
country, the technology area of the patent at the 34 area level, and the analysis year in all of the
regressions..

Simple statistics for these variables are shown in Appendix Table C1. Using a non‐parametric rank
sum test, we find that the distribution of the value‐related variables (family size, citations, claims,
number of inventors, and the value indices) for the patents that are transferred is significantly to
the right of that for patents that are not transferred. The transferred patents also have slightly
fewer applicants and their applicants have smaller portfolios, but they are more likely to belong to
corporations that patent in multiple countries. Also note that because the distribution of the
independent variables is quite skew, we use logarithms of the variables in all the estimations (with
the exception of the dummies). Correlation matrices for the variables are shown in Appendix Table
C2, with and without the year, country, and technology means removed. These correlations are not
especially large, with the exception of that between the dummy for multinational patenting
corporations and cumulative patent holdings; controlling for year, country, and technology via
dummies reduces them slightly.

Table 5 shows the result of estimating a logit model for the probability of international transfer
using equation (6). The marginal impact on the probability of a transfer is shown in the last column.
Keeping in mind that the sample probability of a transfer is 0.033, the effects are fairly large. For
the most part, the signs of the coefficients are consistent with the predictions above and the test for
equality between the value coefficient and the negative of the tax rate‐value interaction easily
passes, with a p‐value of 0.804. None of the predictors of transfer cost matter. However, the tax
rate in the selling country has a strong positive impact on the probability of a transfer, in addition
to the impact from the interactions with patent value. We display the distribution of the tax rate
effect with respect to patent value in Figure 7a below.




                                                  27
                                                      Table 5

                             Logit model of the probability of a transfer
                                                                                           Marginals
              Variable                             Mean            (1)             (2)       for (2)
              Selling country tax rate *          ‐0.00002       ‐0.265         ‐0.323*     ‐0.0100*
               patent value index                                (0.196)        (0.195)     (0.0060)
              Patent value index                    0.00        0.341***       0.359***    0.0111***
                                                                 (0.053)        (0.054)     (0.0170)
              Selling country tax rate              0.323                       1.137**     0.0352**
                                                                                (0.469)     (0.0146)
              Log (cumulative patents)              5.25           0.023          0.023       0.0006
               for patent owner                                   (0.031)       (0.031)     (0.0010)
              Patent owner a multinational          0.614          0.118          0.118       0.0050
               research firm                                      (0.092)       (0.092)     (0.0028)
              Patent owner a corporation,           0.283         ‐0.034         ‐0.033      ‐0.0008
               not multinational                                  (0.052)       (0.052)     (0.0016)
              Log likelihood                                    ‐381,438.8    ‐381,318.6
              Chi‐squared                                         1,910.3       1,910.4
              Degrees of freedom                                     88             89
              R‐squared                                            0.052          0.053
              2,800,073 patent‐year observations; 91,351 transfers
              Heteroskedastic standard errors clustered on 72,998 patent owners.
              All equations include seller country, year, and tech dummies.


Figure 7a shows the marginal effect of the seller’s tax rate on the probability of transfer as a
function of the patent value index, together with its 95 per cent confidence intervals and a
histogram of the patent value data. The figure shows that in the area of most of the data, the
estimated impact ranges from 0.025 to 0.05 with a standard error of about 0.01. For an example, at
the mean of the distribution of patent quality, the impact of a seller tax increase of 20% would be
0.007 = 0.2*0.035, which corresponds to an increase of the average transfer probability for our
over‐sampled data equal to 0.7%. Over the complete population of EP patents, the increase would
be 0.07% on an average transfer probability of 0.34%, a semi‐elasticity of about 0.2. From the
regression and the graph, one can also see that as the index of patent value grows, the tax rate
impact falls, as a smaller tax change is needed to induce the transfer of valuable patents.




                                                           28
                                   Figure 7a: Marginal tax rate effect




               -2         -1           0            1            2      3           4              5
                                                 Patent value index

                      Marginal tax effect as function of patent value       p05
                      p95                                                   Number of patent obs



Figure 7b shows a similar plot, this time of the marginal effect of patent value as a function of the
statutory tax rate on patent income. The histogram of the tax data makes it clear that the
observations are concentrated in a few cells, which are however widely enough spread to yield
identification. Over the populated tax rate region of 0.2 to 0.4, the marginal effect of value ranges
from 0.009 to 0.007. At the mean marginal effect of 0.008, an increase in the value index from ‐1.0
to 1.0 would imply an increased likelihood of transfer of about 0.016 = 2*0.008. This translates into
a semi‐elasticity of about 50% for the transfer probability.

Although both these marginal effects have nontrivial standard errors, over the region of the
observed data they are clearly significant and suggest that both the potential seller’s tax rate and
the value of a patent influence the probability of an international transfer. The results also imply
that there is a tradeoff between tax rates and value in the relationship, as predicted by the model
and also as one would have expected, given profit‐maximizing firms that wish to avoid taxation of
those profits.




                                                          29
                                 Figure 7b: Marginal patent value effect




             0              .1                .2              .3       .4               .5
                                              Patent income tax rate

                      Marginal value effect as function of tax rate    p05
                      p95                                              Number of patent obs




Table 6 explores the variation across the different types of transfers: whether they are potentially
tax‐motivated or not, whether they are within a corporate group or arm’s length. The first two
columns report the results of multinomial logit estimation with three possible choices for each
patent: no transfer (the left‐out category), transfer to a patent box country, and transfer to a
country without a patent box. The next two columns report a similar multinomial logit estimation
where we distinguish between arms’ length and within group international patent transfers. We
define intra‐group transfers as those that are dependent or hierarchical in the data of Gaessler and
Harhoff (2018). The no transfer choice is again the left‐out category. The final four columns report
results for a five‐choice multinomial logit where group membership has been interacted with the
patent box.

Looking first at the standard errors on the tax rate variables, we note that they are very large, and
as a consequence in all cases we easily accept the constraint that the coefficient of patent value and
the tax rate‐patent value interaction are equal and opposite, as implied by the simple model (p‐
values all much larger than 0.5). But there is simply not enough variability in the tax rates once we
split by the patent box for any strong conclusions. The main result of interest is that multinationals
and other corporations are more likely than other entities to transfer patents to a country that
introduces a patent box, as one would expect. In addition, multinationals are much more likely to
make within‐group transfers in response to the patent box, and also in response to higher tax rates
in the “selling” country.

                                                          30
                                                                     Table 6

                                    Multinomial Logit model of the probability of a transfer
                               Transfer to pat box/no           Arms' length vs within
Dependent vaiable                  pat box country                 group transfer              Type of first International transfer of patent (1‐4)
                                             Country                                             Not a                        Not a
                               Patent box without               Not within Within a              group,        Group,        group,       Group,
Variable                        country patent box               a group    group              no pat box no pat box        pat box      pat box
Number of transfers              20,265      71,352               41,688    49,929               33,759         37,593        7,929       12,336

Selling country tax rate *        ‐0.211       ‐0.468**         ‐0.531***      ‐0.312            ‐0.559**        ‐0.385       ‐0.345         ‐0.088
 patent value index              (0.333)        (0.208)           (0.206)     (0.301)             (0.233)       (0.319)       (0.337)        (0.500)
Patent value index              0.300***       0.425***          0.425*** 0.387***              0.450***       0.415***      0.304***        0.296*
                                 (0.099)        (0.056)           (0.057)     (0.081)             (0.066)       (0.081)       (0.096)        (0.153)
Selling country tax rate           0.333         0.823             0.666      1.051**              0.673          0.834       ‐0.615          0.918
                                 (0.917)        (0.503)           (0.637)     (0.512)             (0.719)       (0.618)       (1.203)        (1.327)
Log (cumulative patents)           0.040         0.011          ‐0.098*** 0.110**               ‐0.113***      0.118***       ‐0.035          0.083
 for patent owner                (0.081)        (0.026)           (0.026)     (0.047)             (0.020)       (0.041)       (0.105)        (0.108)
Patent owner a multi‐           0.657***         0.033             0.021      0.341**              0.019          0.103        0.058        1.193***
 national research firm          (0.186)        (0.093)           (0.082)     (0.156)             (0.080)       (0.166)       (0.227)        (0.261)
Patent owner a corp,             0.232**         ‐0.08             0.012       ‐0.115             ‐0.016        ‐0.196*       0.169*         0.272*
 not multinational               (0.097)        (0.056)           (0.038)     (0.105)             (0.042)       (0.115)       (0.101)        (0.157)
Log likelihood                         ‐419,587.4                     ‐433,406.1                                      ‐472,233.9
Chi‐squared                              8,529.6                        3,629.5                                        18,113.7
Degrees of freedom                         176                            176                                            352
R‐squared                                 0.066                          0.066                                          0.078
Sample is all granted EP patents with filing date between 1990 and 2014 that are transferred between 2000 and 2014 and a 10 per cent sample of
patents not transferred.
2,727,759 patent‐year observations; 91,617 transfers
Heteroskedastic standard errors clustered on 74,643 patent owners.
A complete set of country, year, and technology dummies are included in the estimation.
All right hand side variables are in log form, with the exception of the multinational and corporation dummies.
In columns 1‐2, the two types are whether or not the transfer is to a patent box country . In columns 3‐4 the two types are whether or not the transfer
is within group. In columns 5‐8 the types of transfer are defined by the interaction of the group membership dummy and whether or not the transfer
is to a patent box country. The left‐out category is always no transfer.


Our first not very surprising conclusion from examining the patent level decision to transfer
ownership internationally is that more valuable patents (with value measured by the usual proxies)
are more likely to be transferred, regardless of whether the transfer is tax‐motivated or not.
Second, lower taxes in the selling country discourage transfer, but at a diminishing rate as patent
value increases. Third, responsiveness to the patent box is much higher for multinationals, who are
induced by its presence to transfer their patents to group members in the patent box country.




                                                                          31
    7. Conclusions

This paper reports on a comprehensive analysis of the effects of the introduction of a lower
corporate tax rate on patent‐related income in 13 European countries during the 2000‐2014
period. Although this change to the corporate tax systems did seem to increase the international
transfer of patents into a jurisdiction, at least when there was no requirement for further
development domestically, we found relatively little responsiveness overall, although we did find
evidence that more valuable patents are those transferred and that multinationals tended to move
patents across their group members in response to tax changes. However, neither patented
inventions nor R&D investment increased in the countries offering a patent box. These last results
are important, as it suggests that the primary stated goal of introducing a patent box has not been
achieved.

Our literature review revealed a wide range of approaches to estimating the patent box effect as
well as somewhat inconclusive results. We found in our explorations that results had sizable
standard errors and were sensitive to specification, especially to the precise definition of whether
acquired or existing IP was covered by the box. With only 13 countries introducing a patent box,
and allowing for both year and country effects, the number of actual degrees of freedom for
identification is rather small. Identification is achieved by comparing the change in a country before
and after patent box introduction to the change in another country that did not introduce a patent
box, controlling for the common trend in the two countries. It is challenging then to distinguish two
countries, one of which has an existing patents exclusion, and the other which does not. That is
probably why there is so much variation in the results of the prior literature.

In spite of this extensive caveat, our results do lead to one conclusion about the design of these tax
instruments: requiring that further development of the invention take place within the country in
order to benefit from the lower tax rate does seem to mitigate transfers for purely tax reasons. This
provides support for the incorporation of such rules into the BEPS recommendations. In fact,
several countries have already modified their tax rules in this way.

Given the apparent effectiveness of R&D tax credits in increasing firm spending on research and
development reported in Hall and Van Reenen (2010) and Appelt et al. (2016), it is perhaps
surprising that countries have seen the necessity for the introduction of special tax treatment for
income derived from patented inventions. 1 There are (at least) two arguments: the first (benign)
one is that some patented inventions are produced with investment other than R&D but still have
features that may create public goods in the form of information, justifying a subsidy relative to
other investments. The second (less benign) one is that firms with commercially valuable patents
are able to use some of their profits for rent‐seeking in the form of a reduced tax on some of their
income. Put simply, a patent box subsidizes output rather than input, so it benefits mainly firms that
have had success with their invention. This may in turn be an encouragement to all firms to
undertake such invention, but it seems a fairly inefficient way to do so.


1Another disadvantage relative to R&D incentives is that such an instrument does almost nothing to alleviate
the ex ante liquidity constraint faced by innovating firms (Hall and Lerner 2010).

                                                    32
References

Alstadsæter, Annette, Salvador Barrios, Gaetan Nicodeme, Agnieszka Maria Skonieczna and Antonio
       Vezzani (2018). Patent boxes design, patents location, and local R&D. Economic Policy 33
       (93): 131‐177.

Appelt, Sylvia, Matej Bajgar, Chiara Criscuolo, and Fernando Galindo‐Rueda (2016), R&D Tax
       Incentives: Evidence on design, incidence and impacts, OECD Science, Technology and
       Industry Policy Papers, No. 32, OECD Publishing, Paris. Available at
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlr8fldqk7j‐enOECD

Boehm, Tobias, Tom Karkinsky, Bodo Knoll, and Nadine Riedel (2015). The Impact of Corporate
      Taxes on R&D and Patent Holdings. University of Hohenheim: Working Paper.

Bongaerts, Willem and Ivo Ijzerman (2016). The Secrets to the Success of the Dutch Innovation Box.
      Tax Notes International 2 May: 479‐483.

Bösenberg, Simon, and Peter Egger (2017). R&D tax incentives and the emergence and trade of
      ideas. Economic Policy 32 (89): 39‐80.

Bräutigam, Rainer, Christoph Spengel, and Frank Steiff (2017). Decline of CFC rules and rise of
       patent boxes: How the ECJ affects tax competition and economic distortions in Europe.
       Fiscal Studies 38 (4): 719–745.

Ciaramella, Laurie (2017). Patent Boxes and the Relocation of Intellectual Property. Available at
      https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2943435 Accessed February 2019.

Deloitte Consulting (2014). Guide to Controlled Foreign Company Regimes. Available at
        https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Tax/dttl‐tax‐guide‐
        to‐cfc‐regimes‐120314.pdf

Dinkel, Andreas and Deborah Schanz (2015). Tax attractiveness and the location of patents. LMU
        Munich: Arqus‐Diskussionsbeiträge zur quantitativen Steuerlehre, No. 188.

Dischinger, Matthias, and Nadine Riedel (2011). Corporate taxes and the location of intangible
       assets within multinational firms. Journal of Public Economics 95: 691–707.

Dudar, Olena, Christoph Spengel, and Johannes Voget (2015). The Impact of Taxes on Bilateral
       Royalty Flows. Mannheim: ZEW Discussion Paper 15‐052.

European Patent Office (2019). Patstat Database. Available at https://www.epo.org/searching‐for‐
      patents/business/patstat.html#tab‐1 Accessed February 2019.

Ernst, Christof and Christoph Spengel (2011). Taxation, R&D tax incentives and patent application
        in Europe. Mannheim: ZEW Discussion Paper 11‐024.

Evers, Lisa, Helen Miller, and Christoph Spengel (2015). Intellectual property box regimes ‐
       effective tax rates and tax policy considerations. International Tax Public Finance 22:502–
       530. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10797‐014‐9328‐x

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer (2015). The Next Generation of the Penn
       World Table, American Economic Review 105(10): 3150‐3182, available for download at
       www.ggdc.net/pwt

                                               33
Fink, Carsten, M. Khan and H. Zhou (2016). Exploring the worldwide patent surge. Economics of
        Innovation and New Technology 25(2): 114‐142.

Gaessler, Fabian and Dietmar Harhoff (2018). Patent Transfers in Europe – Data and Methodological
       Report. Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition, Munich.

Ginarte, Juan C., and Walter G. Park (1997). Determinants of patent rights: A cross‐national study.
       Research Policy 26: 283‐301.

Griffith, Rachel, Helen Miller, and Martin O’Connell (2014). Ownership of intellectual property and
         corporate taxation, Journal of Public Economics 112: 12‐23.

Hall, Bronwyn H. (2011). The Internationalization of R&D. In A. Sydor (ed.), Global Value Chains:
        Impacts and Implications, Ottawa, Canada: Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada,
        Government of Canada, pp. 179‐210. UNU‐MERIT Working Paper 2011‐049.

Hall, Bronwyn H. (2005). Measuring the Returns to R&D: The Depreciation Problem. Annales
        d'Economie et de Statistique N° 79/80: 341‐382.

Hall, Bronwyn H. (2004). A Note on Measurement Error and Proxy Variables. Available at
       https://eml.berkeley.edu//~bhhall/papers/BHH04_measerr.pdf

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe and Manuel Trajtenberg (2005). Market Value and Patent Citations.
        Rand Journal of Economics 36: 16‐38.

Hall, Bronwyn H., and Josh Lerner (2010). The Financing of R&D and Innovation,. In Hall, B. H. and
        N. Rosenberg, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Elsevier (April), pp. 609‐639.

Hall, Bronwyn H., and John Van Reenen (2000). How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A New
        Review of the Evidence. Research Policy 29: 449‐469.

Harhoff, Dietmar, F. M. Scherer and Katrin Vopel (2003). Citations, Family Size, Opposition, and the
       Value of Patent Rights. Research Policy 32(8): 1343‐1364.

Karkinsky, Tom and Nadine Riedel (2012). Corporate taxation and the choice of patent location
       within multinational firms. Journal of International Economics 88: 176–185.

King, Gary, and Langche Zeng (2001). Logistic regression in rare events data. Political Analysis 9(2):
        137‐163.

Klemens, Ben (2016). A Boxing Match: Can intellectual property boxes achieve their stated goals?
      US Treasury Office of Tax Analysis. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com
      /sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2822575

Koethenbuerger, Marko, Federica Liberini, and Michael Stimmelmayr (2016). Is it Luring
      Innovations or just Profit? The Case of European Patent Boxes. ETH Zurich: Working Paper.
      Published in German: Steuerliche Effekte europäischer Patentboxen, KOF Analysen 2018(1):
      73 – 82.

Lancaster, Tony (1990). The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data, Econometric Society
       Monograph. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.




                                                 34
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman (2004). Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
      Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators. Economic Journal 114: 441‐465.

Lester, John, and Jacek Warda (2018). An International Comparison of Tax Assistance for R&D: 2017
        Update and Extension to Patent Boxes. Calgary, Canada: University of Calgary School of
        Public Policy Research Report 11:13.

Mohnen, Pierre, Arthur Vankan, and Bart Verspagen (2017). Evaluating the innovation box tax
      policy instrument in the Netherlands, 2007–13. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 33(1):
      141‐156.

Mutti, John and Harry Grubert (2009). The Effect of Taxes on Royalties and the Migration of
        Intangible Assets Abroad. In Reinsdorf, M. and M. J. Slaughter(eds.), International Trade in
        Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization. NBER Conference Volume, University of
        Chicago Press, pp. 111‐137.

OECD (2018). Main Science and Technology Indicators. http://www.oecd.org/sti/msti.htm Accessed
      May 2018.

OECD (2016). Tax Statistics. English ISSN 2074‐4307. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/tax‐data‐en

OECD (2015), Countering Harmful Tax Practices More Effectively, Taking into Account
     Transparency and Substance, Action 5 ‐ 2015 Final Report. Paris: OECD Publishing. DOI:
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264241190‐en

Santos‐Silva, J. M. C. and Silvana Tenreyo (2006). The Log of Gravity. Review of Economics and
       Statistics 88(4): 641‐658.

Schwab, Thomas, and Maximilian Todtenhaupt (2018). Thinking outside the box: The cross‐border
      effect of tax cuts on R&D. Mannheim: ZEW Discussion Paper No. 16‐073. Available at
      https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2864304

Sullivan, Martin (2015). Economic analysis: Patent boxes, research credits, or lower rates?” Tax
        Notes 1 June. http://americansfortaxfairness.org/files/Tax‐Notes‐Sullivan‐Patent‐Boxes‐
        Research‐Credits‐or‐Lower‐Rates‐6‐1‐15.pdf

United Nations Institute for Statistics (2018). http://uis.unesco.org/en/topic/research‐and‐
       development Accessed February 2019.

US Federal Trade Commission (2016). Patent Assertion Entity Activity: An FTC Study. Available at
      https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/patent‐assertion‐entity‐activity‐ftc‐
      study/p131203_patent_assertion_entity_activity_an_ftc_study_0.pdf

Warda, Jacek (2002). Measuring the value of R&D tax treatment in OECD countries. OECD Science,
       Technology and Industry Review 27. Paris: OECD/OCDE.

Westmore, Ben (2013). Innovation and growth: Considerations for public policy. Review of
      Economics and Institutions 4(3): Article 3.




                                                35
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION




          36
Appendix A: Literature review tables

                          Table A1: Literature on corporate taxation and patent location

                                                                                   Dependent
Paper              Data           Level             #Obs     Years   Obs/year                        Independent variables                 Method
                                                                                   variable(s)
                                                                                   intangible        corp tax rate, tax diff btwn sub
                                                                                                                                      logit FE; OLS FE;
Dischinger &       European MNEs group                       1995‐                assets (D and      and parent, log sales, pop, R&D,
                                                    6,223              566                                                            IV and GMM on
Riedel (2011)      with intang.  member                      2005                  log ratio to      GDP, growth in GDP per cap,
                                                                                                                                      first differences
                                                                                      sales)         corruption index, unemployment
                                                                                                     corp tax, EATR, B‐index, GDP per
                   EP apps;
Ernst & Spengel                                              1998‐                                   cap, pubRD, Tertiary ed, GP           logit FE ; neg bin
                   AMADEUS        firm             80,484             8,048      EP patent filings
(2011)                                                       2007                                    index, Openness, Hi tech exports,     FE
                   match
                                                                                                     Emply, assets
                   EP apps;                                                                          corp tax rate, tax diff btwn sub
Karkinsky &        AMADEUS                                   1995‐                                   and parent, royalty rate, CFC
                                  firm affiliate   64,061             7,118      EP patent filings                                         OLS FE
Riedel (2012)      match; 18 EU                              2003                                    rules, R&D, GDP,corruption
                   countries                                                                         index, IP strength
                   EP apps;                                                                          GDP, RD/GDP, inventor presence,
Griffith, Miller                                                                                                                           random
                   AMADEUS                                   1985‐                filing country     tax rate, patent box rate, IP
& O'Connell                       patent           379,849            18,088                                                               coefficient
                   match; 18 EU                              2005                      choice        strength, industry‐location‐firm
(2014)                                                                                                                                     mixed logit
                   countries                                                                         size dummies
Boehm,             EP apps ‐                                                                         corp tax rate, pat quality, rule of
                                                                                 applicant/invent
Karkinsky,         corporate;                                1978‐                                   law, corruption, GDP and GDP
                                  patent           530,805            18,304     or divergence at                                          probit FE
Knoll, & Riedel    match to                                  2006                                    per cap; CFC; year country
                                                                                     pat level
(2015)             AMADEUS                                                                           industry FE
                                                                                                     Tax attractiveness (corp tax rate,
                worldwide                                                         D(pat abroad)      royalty rate, witholding roy rate,
                                                                                                                                           probit FE (ind &
Dinkel & Schanz patstat ‐ MNEs    group‐                     2005‐                 D (country)       all scaled); D(RD tax), D(transfer
                                                   62,717             7,840                                                                year)
(2015)          matched to        country                    2012                   N pats in        price), CFC, sales, GDP, RD per
                                                                                                                                           neg bin FE
                AMADEUS                                                              country         cap, distance, app‐reg, emp‐
                                                                                                     inventors
                                                                                                     royalty tax, tax difference,
                                                                       ~900                          corporate tax, IP box dummies,
Dudar, Spengel     royalty        country                    1990‐
                                                   ~20,000             ~60       royalty streams     CFC rules, TP rules, R&D, GDP,        Poisson PML
& Voget (2015)     payments       pairs                      2012
                                                                     countries                       POP in recipient country, trade
                                                                                                     between




                                                                       37
                                                Table A2: Literature on patent boxes
                                                                                     dependent
Paper            data           level            #obs      years   obs/year                        independent variables              method            pat box result
                                                                                     variable(s)
Alstadsaeter,    EP apps; ORBIS
Barrios,         data for EU    firm‐                                                             GDP, inventor presence, tax rate, random effects filings wrt box:
                                                           2000‐
Nicodeme,        scoreboard     technology‐    ~160,000             4444?       EP patent filings patent box rate, triadic pats, IP neg binomial; R ‐5.0 (semi‐
                                                           2011
Skonieczna and   firms in 33    industry                                                          strength, country dummies         coeff mixed logit elasticity)
Vezzani (2018)   countries
                                                                                                   B‐index, EATR, pat box dummy;
Bösenberg &      EP apps; 106   country‐                   1996‐                     filings and                                     Poisson FE         seller: 0.43***
                                               639; 9425           49; 2600                        researchers per cap, GDP, avg pat
Egger (2017)     countries      technology                 2012                       transfers                                      (year)             buyer: 0.23***
                                                                                                   characteristics
                                                                                 inventor patent                                                        domestic
                                                                                   apps; owner                                                          inventing
Bradley, Duchy,                                                                    patent apps; Patent box, pat box rate, other                         increases if
                worldwide                                  1990‐     ~70
and Robinson                    countries       1,487                             pats with inv tax vars, GDP, population, patent Panel OLS             rate falls; no
                patstat                                    2012    countries
(2015)                                                                             country not system quality                                           impact on
                                                                                 owner country,                                                         mismatch
                                                                                       etc                                                              owner‐inventor
                                                                                                                                                        Royalties
                                                                                                 royalty tax, tax difference,
                                                                                                                                                        increase if IP
                                                                     ~900                        corporate tax, IP box dummies,
Dudar, Spengel   royalty        country                    1990‐                                                                                        box covering
                                               ~20,000                ~60        royalty streams CFC rules, TP rules, R&D, GDP,       Poisson PML
& Voget (2015)   payments       pairs                      2012                                                                                         acquired and
                                                                   countries                     POP in recipient country, trade
                                                                                                                                                        self‐generated
                                                                                                 between
                                                                                                                                                        patents
                                                                    12,715
Koethenbuerger,
                                                85,944               (4,498                                                           diff‐in‐diff; ind‐ pat box used
Liberini &      MNCs from                                  2007‐                  stated profit    D(patent box),(new pat entrant),
                                subsidiaries    (30,798            matched,                                                           year, ctry‐year for profit
Stimmelmayr     Orbis                                      2013                    before tax      and interactions; assets, leverage
                                               matched)               2,942                                                           Fes                shifting
(2016)
                                                                   patenters)
                 MNCs from
                                                                                               patent box, R&D/GDP, GDP per                             pat box in
                 Orbis/AMADEUS
Schwab &                                                                                       cap, corp tax, GDP growth R&D                            other countries
                 with sub in                               2000‐                 worldwide pat                                     Poisson FE (firm
Todtenhaupt                    firm            271,251              20,865                     user cost. Real interest rate, firm                      has positive
                 patent box                                2012                     grants                                         & year)
(2016)                                                                                         age, assets, work cap, capital                           spillovers on
                 country match
                                                                                               intensity                                                domestic R&D
                 to PAtSTAT
                                                                                patent transfers
Ciaramella                                                 1997‐                                 pat box, corp tax rate, CFC; log                   buyer: 1.2***
                 EP apps        firm           329,398              ~16,000     during the exam                                   Neg Bin FE (year)
(2017)                                                     2015                                  GDP, distance, language, RD/GDP                    seller: insig
                                                                                phase at the EPO

Mohnen, Vankan                                                                                                                                          pat box
                                                           2007‐                  R&D person‐
& Verspagen    Dutch firm data firm                                 ~15,000                        use of patent box                  diff‐in‐diff      positive for
                                                           2013                     hours
(2017)                                                                                                                                                  domestic R&D




                                                                                38
Appendix B: Simple statistics and additional estimates for aggregate data
                                                                          Table B1
                                                                       Sample countries
                                     R&E                 Years                                                       Patents     Patents
                                     tax                 with                        Includes    Includes Develop‐ transferred transferred
                                    credit    CFC       patent     Gross or net       existing   acquired  ment     out 2000‐    in 2000‐   Diff‐
     Code      Country                @      rules^       box        income           patents    patents condition     2014        2014    erence
     AT        Austria                 x                                                                               2521        1135     ‐1386
     AU        Australia               x        x                                                                      1202         587      ‐615
     AW*       Aruba                                                                                                                 10        10
     BB*       Barbados                                                                                                 196        2269      2073
     BE        Belgium               x                   2007‐         gross             yes%      yes%     yes        1140        1639      498
     BM*       Bermuda                                                                                                  48          635      587
     BS*       Bahamas                                                                                                  29          157      128
     CA        Canada                x          x                                                                      3918        2172     ‐1745
     CH        Switzerland                               2011‐          net              yes        yes      no        6353        10521     4168
     CL        Chile                 x                                                                                  13           43        30
     CW*       Curacao                                                                                                  85          628      542
     CY        Cyprus                                    2012‐          net              yes        yes      no         139         197        58
     CZ        Czech Republic        x                                                                                  45          104        60
     DE        Germany                          x                                                                      13804       11633    ‐2171
     DK        Denmark                          x                                                                      1171         957      ‐214
     EE        Estonia                          x                                                                       10           20        10
     ES        Spain                 x          x        2008‐          net              yes       no%      yes         468         408       ‐61
     FI        Finland                          x                                                                      1466        3034      1567
     FR        France                x          x        1971‐          net              yes       yes#      no        4821        5136      316
     GB        UK                    x          x        2013‐          net              yes       yes%     yes        12825       5792     ‐7032
     GG*       Guernsey                                                                                                  0           93        93
     GI*       Gilbraltar                                                                                               12           86        74
     GR        Greece                x                                                                                  35           51        16
     HK*       Hong Kong                                                                                                21          339      318
     HU        Hungary               x          x       2003‐           gross            yes        yes      no         94          265      171
     IE        Ireland               x                1973‐2010                          yes       no%      yes         431        1695      1264
     IL        Israel                           x                                                                       930        1075      145
     IM*       Isle of Man                                                                                              23           63        40
     IS        Iceland               x          x                                                                       27          155      128
     IT        Italy                 x          x                                                                      1920        1281      ‐639
     JE*       Jersey                                                                                                                59        59
     JP        Japan                 x          x                                                                      4626        2817     ‐1809
     KR        South Korea           x          x                                                                       686         816      130
     KY*       Cayman Islands                                                                                           98         1587      1489
     LI**      Liechtenstein                             2011‐          net              no         yes      no         283         275        ‐8
     LU        Luxembourg                                2008‐          net              yes        no       no         500        2386      1886
     MC*       Monaco                                                                                                   66           50       ‐16
     MT        Malta                                     2010‐      not deduct.          yes        yes     no          32           95       63
     MX        Mexico                           x                                                                       82          200      118
     NL        Netherlands           x                   2007‐          net               no       yes%     yes        7826        11426     3600
     NO        Norway                x          x                                                                       466         867      401
     NZ        New Zealand                      x                                                                       182         107       ‐76
     PL        Poland                                                                                                   55           94        39
     PT        Portugal              x          x        2014‐          gross             no       no%      yes         48          147        99
     SE        Sweden                x          x                                                                      3153        3948      795
     SG*       Singapore                                                                                                186        1352      1167
     SI        Slovenia              x                                                                                  49           29       ‐20
     SK        Slovakia              x                                                                                  29           35        6
     TR        Turkey                x                                                                                  15           40        25
     US        US                    x          x                                                                      28878       21081    ‐7797
     VG*       Virgin Islands (British)                                                                                 87         1501      1414
               Total                                                                                                  101091      101091       0
     * denotes countries that are tax havens; most do not have GDP data on PWT either.
     # if held for at least 2 years. ^ CFC rules in 2014. % if further developed.
     ** GDP data not available from the Penn World Tables for this country.
     @Some kind of R&D tax credit (beyond expensing) available during the period.
     Sources: Tax info ‐ Evers et al. (2013), Deloitte (2014), Alstadsæter et al. (2015).
               Patent data ‐ authors'computations from Patstat April 2017.


                                                                                    39
                                                               Table B2

                                  Effective average tax rates for countries with a Patent Box
                                                                                                 Effective
                                                        Includes Includes Corp tax              average tax Effective
                                     Years with R&E tax existing acquired   rate    IP box rate rate ord. average tax
Code        Country                    IP box   credit@ patents patents (statutory) (statutory)   income    rate IP box
BE          Belgium                     2007‐      x      yes%     yes%      34          6.8        21.11      ‐26.95
CY          Cyprus                      2012‐              yes      yes      10          2.5        11.69        2.34
FR          France                      1971‐      x       yes     yes#      34          16         26.56       ‐6.41
HU          Hungary                     2003‐      x       yes      yes      20          10         14.25       ‐2.54
IE          Ireland                   1973‐2010    x       yes     no%      12.5          0         12.50        0.00
LI**        Liechtenstein               2011‐               no      yes     12.5         2.5         6.92        1.39
LU          Luxembourg                  2008‐              yes       no      29         5.84        21.92        5.47
MT          Malta                       2010‐              yes      yes      35           0         26.25        0.00
NL          Netherlands                 2007‐      x        no     yes%     25.5          5        18.75         3.75
PT          Portugal                    2014‐      x        no     no%      31.5         15        31.50       15.00
ES          Spain                       2008‐      x       yes     no%       30          12        22.50        ‐2.95
CH          Switzerland                 2011‐              yes      yes      21          8.8         9.50        2.74
GB          UK                          2013‐      x       yes     yes%      22          10         15.75        7.50
# if held for at least 2 years.
% if further developed.
** GDP data not available from the Penn World Tables for this country.
@Some kind of R&D tax credit (beyond expensing) available during the period.




                                                                    40
                                         Table B3

                      Inter‐country patent transfer flows
                       Estimates including 14 tax haven countries
 Dependent variable: Number of patents transferred from seller country to buyer
                                country during the year
                                                                        Within
                                         All          All          All  group
Variable                                (1)          (2)          (3)     (4)
Buyer corporate tax rate                0.54         0.71         0.96    0.17
                                       (1.26)       (1.25)      (1.32)  (1.81)
Dummy for buyer patent box             ‐0.05
 in all years after introduction       (0.15)
Buyer patent tax rate wedge                          0.08
 in all years after introduction                    (0.75)
Dummy for buyer patent box                                        0.00    0.01
 in year of introduction                                        (0.11)  (0.15)
Dummy for buyer patent box                                        0.15    0.26
 in year after introduction                                     (0.23)  (0.26)
Dummy for buyer patent box                                        0.38  0.60**
 two years after introduction                                   (0.23)  (0.26)
Dummy for buyer patent box                                       ‐0.11   ‐0.21
 three years after introduction                                 (0.14)  (0.20)
Seller corporate tax rate               0.57         0.70         1.00    1.42
                                       (1.14)       (1.12)      (1.11)  (1.40)
Dummy for seller patent box           ‐0.29**
 in all years after introduction       (0.13)
Seller patent tax rate wedge                       ‐1.40**
 in all years after introduction                    (0.65)
Dummy for seller patent box                                       0.02    0.17
 in year of introduction                                        (0.21)  (0.25)
Dummy for seller patent box                                     ‐0.30*   ‐0.20
 in year after introduction                                     (0.17)  (0.20)
Dummy for seller patent box                                      ‐0.19   ‐0.22
 two years after introduction                                   (0.13)  (0.20)
Dummy for seller patent box                                      ‐0.12   ‐0.03
 three years after introduction                                 (0.18)  (0.23)
Chi‐squared                             10166.2        10171.0           9754.7   7866.8
Chi‐sq degrees of freedom                 119            119              125      125
Poisson random effects panel regression with standard errors clustered on buyer‐seller
country pairs.
36,750 observations on 2,450 country pairs, 2000‐2014
Coefficient significance is denoted by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
All regressions include complete sets of dummies for the 37 buyer and seller countries and
years.


                                              41
                                           Table B4

       Inter‐country patent transfer flows ‐ exploring tax variables
                       Estimates including 14 tax haven countries
   Dependent variable: Number of patents transferred from seller country to buyer
                                country during the year
                                                                           Within
                                        All           All          All      group
Variable                               (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
Difference:                            0.03          0.18        ‐0.34        0.31
 seller corp tax‐buyer corp tax       (0.85)        (0.87)       (0.94)     (1.23)
Difference:                            0.63         1.35**        0.36        0.48
 buyer‐seller patent tax wedge        (0.49)        (0.61)       (0.55)     (0.73)
D (dev condition on use)*buyer‐                     ‐1.91*
 seller patent tax wedge                            (1.03)
D (CFC rules apply to buyer)                                     ‐0.23       ‐0.12
                                                                 (0.19)     (0.25)
D (CFC) * seller‐buyer corp                                       2.04        0.29
 tax difference                                                  (1.29)     (1.53)
D (CFC) * buyer‐seller patent                                     1.29      2.14*
 box difference                                                  (1.02)     (1.23)
Chi‐squared                          10060.2       10027.8      9661.6      7304.0
Degrees of freedom                     117           118          120         120
Poisson random effects panel regression with standard errors clustered on buyer‐seller country
pairs.
36,750 observations on 2,450 country pairs, 2000‐2014
Coefficient significance is denoted by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
All regressions include complete sets of dummies for the 51 buyer and seller countries and years.




                                                42
                                                     Table B5

                   Inter‐country patent transfer flows ‐ exploring tax variables
  Dependent variable: Number of patents transferred from seller country to buyer country during the year
                                                                                        Within    Within
                                   All        All        All         All        All     group     group
Variable                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)
Difference:                       0.18       0.05       0.16        0.35       ‐0.31      0.70      0.29
 seller corp tax‐buyer corp tax  (0.88)     (0.87)     (0.88)      (0.90)     (0.95)     (1.12)    (1.24)
Difference:                       0.60       0.96*      0.65      1.35**       0.33     1.82**      0.40
 buyer‐seller patent tax wedge   (0.49)     (0.50)     (0.54)      (0.63)     (0.55)     (0.85)    (0.74)
D (existing patents) * buyer‐                ‐1.40
 seller patent tax wedge                    (1.08)
D (acqired patents) * buyer‐                            ‐0.24
 seller patent tax wedge                               (1.10)
D (dev condition on use)*buyer‐                                   ‐1.95*                ‐2.29*
 seller patent tax wedge                                           (1.03)                (1.30)
D (CFC rules apply to buyer)                                                 ‐0.37**               ‐0.22
                                                                              (0.17)               (0.27)
D (CFC) * seller‐buyer corp                                                  3.31***                1.20
 tax difference                                                               (1.13)               (1.77)
D (CFC) * buyer‐seller patent                                                  1.27                2.22*
 box difference                                                               (1.04)               (1.26)
Chi‐squared                     4054.3      4131.0     4097.4     4072.5      4175.9    3183.1    3095.2
Degrees of freedom                 90          91         91         91          93        91        93

Poisson random effects panel regression with standard errors clustered on buyer‐seller country pairs.
19,980 observations on 1,332 country pairs, 2000‐2014
Coefficient significance is denoted by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
All regressions include complete sets of dummies for the 37 buyer and seller countries and years.




                                                          43
                                Figure B1

          Evolution of the patent box across 42 developed countries
                           No patent box   Patent box
100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

 0%
   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013




                                     44
Appendix C: Patent and applicant level data on transfers
Our analysis sample of (first) international patent transfers consists of 91,617 patents applied for
between 1991 and 2014, and transferred between 2000 and 2014.‐‐‐% of these transfers were to
countries with a patent box in effect. Patents are transferred internationally at all ages, but a large
number are transferred two years after the year of application, which coincides with the most likely
year of grant date (Figure C1).

                                              Figure C1




This is confirmed by Figure C2, which shows the distribution of the age at transfer relative to the
grant date for the 61% of the patents that have been granted, separately for arm’s length transfers
and those within group (i.e., within a multinational). For within group transfers, a large majority
take place before the grant (78%). Although the majority of the other transfers also occur before
grant (56%), they have a secondary peak two years after grant. In addition, all the transfers for the
patents not yet granted take place before grant, perforce. We also examined the distribution of
transfer age relative to grant for transfers to countries with and without a patent box at the time of
transfer. These look very similar (not shown).




                                                  45
Figure C2




   46
                                                    Table C1

                     EPO patents applied for 2000‐2014: Simple statistics
Variable                                      Mean#       St.dev.      Median      IQ range       Min         Max
                           Internationally transferred patents (N=91,617)
Family size                            8.191       0.573        8       1.83                        2          236
Number of claims                      14.546       0.551       15       1.82                        1          593
5‐year forward cites                   2.313       0.822        2       4.00                        1          142
Number of inventors                    3.346       0.438        3       2.50                        1           63
Value index                            0.189       0.663      0.11      0.86                      ‐1.72        4.25
Value index (dummies removed)%         0.145       0.615      0.08      0.79                      ‐2.13        3.88
Number of applicants                   2.016       0.062        2       1.00                        2           10
Cumulative applicant patents*          166.3       2.974     158.0     209.00                       2         39,584
MNC (multi‐country researcher)         0.655       0.475        1         1                         0            1
Corporation, not MNC                   0.251       0.434        0         1                         0            1
Individual                             0.077       0.267        0         0                         0            1
Government or non‐profit               0.017       0.128        0         0                         0            1

                     Patents that are not internationally transferred (N=237,100)@
Family size                              6.570      0.555         6        1.80      2                         428
Number of claims                         12.700     0.657        14        1.80      1                         396
5‐year forward cites                     1.934      0.757         2        3.00      1                         972
Number of inventors                      3.254      0.444         3        2.00      1                          55
Value index                              ‐0.061     0.654       ‐0.14      0.83    ‐2.03                       4.72
Value index (dummies removed)%           ‐0.044     0.598       ‐0.11      0.76    ‐2.18                       4.88
Number of applicants                     2.023      0.074         2        1.00      2                          21
Cumulative applicant patents*            168.5      0.741       199.0     140.54     2                        41,459
MNC (multi‐country researcher)           0.612      0.487         1          1       0                           1
Corporation, not MNC                     0.292      0.455         0          1       0                           1
Individual                               0.050      0.219         0          0       0                           1
Government or non‐profit                 0.045      0.208         0          0       0                           1

                                                  Difference in means#
                                               Diff        s.e.     T‐stat             Ranksum test ‐ chisq(1)
Family size                                   0.096       0.002       43.4                    104.6
Number of claims                              0.059       0.002       26.0                     45.9
5‐year forward cites                          0.078       0.003       24.8                     58.7
Number of inventors                           0.012       0.002       7.1                      18.4
Value index                                   0.250       0.003       97.4                    100.2
Value index (dummies removed)%                0.189       0.002       79.7                     81.3
Number of applicants                          ‐0.002      0.000       ‐6.5                    ‐16.9
Cumulative applicant patents                  ‐0.006      0.010       ‐0.6                     ‐2.2
MNC (multi‐country researcher)                0.042       0.002       22.8                     27.8
Corporation, not MNC                          ‐0.041      0.002      ‐24.0                    ‐26.2
Individual                                    0.027       0.001       27.3                     25.4
Government or non‐profit                      ‐0.029      0.001      ‐47.4                    ‐40.4
# The geometric mean is shown for all variables except the four sector dummies; the t‐test is conducted on the log
means for these variables.
* Cumulative patent applications by patent owner in the year 2000 or the year of patent filing, whichever is later.
@ 10 per cent sample of non‐transferred patents.
% This index is based on the first four variables with applicant year and country, and technology class means
removed.
The ranksum tests whether the distribution of the variable for the transferred patents is to the right of that for non‐
transferred patents.


                                                         47
                                                           Table C2
            All EPO patents applied for 2000‐2014: 328,717 observations#
                                          Correlation matrix
Family size                            1.000
Number of claims                       0.092     1.000
5‐year forward cites                   0.353     0.188      1.000
Number of inventors                    0.168     0.088      0.171     1.000
Number of applicants                  ‐0.001     0.003      0.006     0.114     1.000
Cumulative applicant patents          ‐0.001    ‐0.050      0.024     0.097    ‐0.050     1.000
MNC (multi‐country researcher)         0.058    ‐0.018      0.053     0.148    ‐0.103     0.513    1.000
Corporation, not MNC                  ‐0.042     0.002     ‐0.039    ‐0.107    ‐0.038    ‐0.423   ‐0.790    1.000
Individual                            ‐0.040     0.004     ‐0.047    ‐0.158     0.181    ‐0.205   ‐0.332   ‐0.161    1.000
Government or non‐profit               0.003     0.037      0.017     0.073     0.114    ‐0.051   ‐0.262   ‐0.127   ‐0.053   1.000
                       Correlation matrix with year, tech, country dummies removed
Family size                            1.000
Number of claims                       0.037     1.000
5‐year forward cites                   0.307     0.149      1.000
Number of inventors                    0.112     0.062      0.130     1.000
Number of applicants                  ‐0.012     0.005      0.004     0.109     1.000
Cumulative applicant patents           0.020    ‐0.038      0.018     0.081    ‐0.039     1.000
MNC (multi‐country researcher)         0.066    ‐0.020      0.039     0.121    ‐0.089     0.461    1.000
Corporation, not MNC                  ‐0.029     0.010     ‐0.017    ‐0.071    ‐0.047    ‐0.391   ‐0.780    1.000
Individual                            ‐0.036     0.007     ‐0.034    ‐0.130     0.179    ‐0.153   ‐0.286   ‐0.221    1.000
Government or non‐profit              ‐0.045     0.015     ‐0.011     0.036     0.096    ‐0.022   ‐0.257   ‐0.138   ‐0.060   1.000

All variables are in logs except the four sector dummies
# Sample is based on a 10 per cent sample of the non‐transferred patents and all of the transferred patents.


                                                           Table C3

                                      Variable means by type of transfer#
                                                     no             non‐group,          group,     non‐group,    group,
                                                 transfer@           non‐tax            non‐tax    tax‐related tax‐related

 Observations                                      237,100            33,759            37,593         7,929          12,336
 Family size                                         6.57              8.09              8.43           8.01           8.04
 Number of claims                                   12.70              14.64             14.77         14.06           13.90
 5‐year forward cites                                1.93              2.27              2.37           2.26           2.28
 Value index                                        ‐0.06              0.15              0.24           0.16           0.17
 Value index (dummies removed)%                     ‐0.04              0.13              0.17           0.09           0.14
 Number of inventors                                 3.25              3.19              3.48           3.36           3.40
 Number of applicants                                2.02              2.01              2.01           2.01           2.03
 Cumulative applicant patents*                       11.2               6.8              18.0           10.6           17.1
 MNC (multi‐country researcher)                      0.61              0.52              0.74           0.58           0.82
 Corporation, not MNC                                0.29              0.36              0.17           0.33           0.14
 Individual                                          0.05              0.09              0.08           0.08           0.03
 Government or non‐profit                            0.05              0.03              0.01           0.02           0.01

 # The geometric mean is shown for all variables except the four sector dummies
 * Cumulative patent applications by patent owner in the year 2000 or the year of application, whichever is later.
 @ 10 per cent sample of non‐transferred patents.
 % This index is based on the first four variables with applicant year and country, and technology class means
 removed.


                                                                48
Appendix D: Modelling international patent transfer

Overview
Estimation of a model of international patent transfer as a function of the characteristics of the
patent (X), the current country (Z), and the potential countries to which the patent might be
transferred (W) proved difficult, probably because we have limited variability in the tax variables,
especially those for the patent box. The body of the paper presents simple logit and multinomial
logit estimates, with standard errors clustered at patent owner level. This approach allows
correlation across time and patents owned by a single entity, but it does not identify effects
associated with the characteristics W of the countries to which a patent might be transferred, with
the exception of identifying those with a patent box.

We attempted to estimate a number of other econometric models as described in the following:

    1. A hazard rate model of transfer as a function of the patent characteristics X, seller
       characteristics Z, and possibly interactions of X with W. This kind of model allows for the
       absorbing nature of the first transfer. In principle, transfer to a patent box country versus a
       non‐patent box country could be explored using a competing risks hazard model, but this
       proved impossible due to lack of convergence.
    2. A multinomial probit model similar to the multinomial logit models in the text, which would
       allow for correlation among the alternatives.
    3. A multinomial logit model of choice with random coefficients on the case variables.2

With a suitable assumption on the distribution of ε, the model in the text will generate a hazard
function for the transfer from country s to country b. Alternatively, given its equivalence to a
random utility model, it will generate a multinomial logit or nested logit model under the extreme
value assumption. Transfer is more likely under the following conditions:

    1. The difference between the tax rates applying to patent income in the two countries is
       larger. For most countries and years, this is the corporate tax rate, while for countries that
       have introduced a patent box, it will be the patent box rate. For the government/non‐profit
       sector, the rate will be zero.
    2. The value of the patent in generating tax‐relevant income is higher. That is, the value
       indicators X are larger.
    3. The cost of making the transfer is lower, which we proxy using the dummies for the type of
       patenting entity and its cumulative patent holdings.

All of these are measurable for the patents that are actually transferred.

However, a major problem for hazard rate or simple logit estimation is that the potential tax rates
in the buyer country are unobserved if we do not observe a transfer. To ameliorate rather than
actually solve this problem, we computed average tax rates of patent income in each year across the
countries, excluding the country in which the patent is resident. The difference in tax rates in the
equation above was then the difference between the tax rate faced by patent income in the
potential selling country less the average tax rates across the potential buying countries. In the case

2 Fixed coefficients would result in as many coefficients as choices for each case variable, and is unlikely to be
identified.

                                                       49
of an actual transfer, we used the observed tax rate in the buying country instead, so as not to lose
too much precision in our estimates. This estimation strategy was unsuccessful, as one might have
expected.

If we believe that the country of patent ownership affects the profits available from a patent in ways
other than the tax rate faced by those profits, we can complicate the model as follows:

                                      its  (1  ts )( X i   Zs   it )

From this equation it is worth observing that case variables (those that are associated with the
patent and its original location/owner) are those indexed by i, j, and s. Such variables are identified
in the simple logit or hazard rate models. Alternative‐specific variables are those indexed by b,
possibly in product with case variables. These are not identified unless multinomial logit (possibly
nested) or multinomial probit with many alternatives are used.

The following case variables are suggested by the model:

       Patent quality measures, interacted with the patent tax rate of the seller.
       Characteristics of the selling country, interacted with the patent tax rate of the seller.
       Characteristics of the patent owner.

It is possible that one also might want to add the non‐interacted variables, and the interaction of
taxes with the patent owner characteristics. It is also possible to include dummies for the selling
country, and for the transfer years. For the tax rate, the sensible variable to use is the nominal tax
rate faced by patent income (which may be nothing like the actual tax rate faced by an individual
entity, but we do not have the information to compute that). The tax rate we use is the corporate tax
rate in the case of no patent box, or the patent box rate.

The alternative‐specific variables are the following:

       Patent quality measures, interacted with the patent tax rate of the buyer.
       Characteristics of the buying country, interacted with the patent tax rate of the buyer.

Again, it might be useful to add the non‐interacted variables. And note that these variables are not
available in the case of no transfer. It is also possible to include dummies for the buying country,
although identification may be difficult.

In what follows we present a set of hazard estimates corresponding to the logit estimates in the
body of the paper.3 For simplicity, we measure patent value as the first principal component of the
set of 4 value indicator variables (forward cites, claims, family size, and number of inventors). All
these variables have positive loadings on the first component, and we know that they measure
slightly different things, so it makes sense to use some kind of common aggregate.




3The multinomial probit models and random coefficient logit models did not converge, which is most likely
due to insufficient variation in the data on patent boxes.

                                                       50
Hazard rate estimation
The natural way to model the decision to transfer a patent internationally is with a survival or
hazard rate model.4 Because the regressors we will use in our initial analysis are constant over
time, the results from a hazard rate model will be similar to those from a logit probability model
with standard errors clustered across time, as was presented in the text. In the case of the Weibull
model with covariates that do not vary over time, the estimates will be identical (Lancaster 1990, p.
104). We present estimates based on a proportional hazard model here; the equivalent logit
estimates from the body of the paper are shown for comparison.

We model the decision to transfer a patent using proportional hazard rate models, where the
hazard of patent i’s transfer at time t is given by the following:

                    h(Xi , t ) º Pr(i transferred at t | i not yet transferred, Xi )
                                                                                     ,
                               = h(t )exp(Xi b )

where i denotes a patent and t denotes the time since the patent’s application date. h(t) is the
baseline hazard, which is either a non‐parametric or a parametric function of time since entry into
the sample. The impact of any characteristic x on the hazard can be computed as follows:

                      ¶h (Xi , t )                               ¶h (Xi , t )       1
                                     = h (t ) exp (Xi b ) b or                                =b
                          ¶x i                                      ¶x i        h (Xi , t )

Thus if x is measured in logs, β measures the elasticity of the hazard rate with respect to x. Note that
this quantity does not depend on the baseline hazard h(t), but is the same for any t.

Figure D1 shows the Kaplan‐Meier estimate of the cumulative hazard of an international transfer as
a function of patent age. The curve is smooth and shows the large jump between ages 1 and 2 that
we also observed in Figure C1. We estimated a number of proportional hazard models, all of which
were able to reproduce this curve easily (not shown). We use the Cox proportional hazard model
here, as it is the most flexible, and best accommodates the jump in the data at age 1 to 2.




4 As indicated above, ideally one would model the decision to transfer a patent to a particular country as a

function of that country’s characteristics as well as the patent characteristics, using a random coefficients
logit model as in Griffith et al. (2004), or perhaps a competing risks model. However, we found that there was
insufficient variability across countries in the patent box to obtain meaningful estimates using these methods.

                                                       51
                                                          Figure D1

                    Cumulative hazard of an international transfer for EP patents




Table D1 presents the results of Cox proportional hazard estimation of the same model as the logit
estimation, which is shown for comparison. Note that because hazard rate estimation requires that
all observations begin at least with the period before the transfer, the sample sizes are slightly
different from the logit model in the text (where a transfer is allowed in the first period). The
estimates are still very similar to the logit estimates, as they should be.

                                                          Table D1

                Cox PH and Logit models of the probability of an international transfer
                                                   Cox PH                     Logit
           Variable                             Mean           (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)
           Selling country tax rate *          ‐0.00005       ‐0.240      ‐0.309*            ‐0.208        ‐0.272
            patent value index                               (0.184)      (0.183)           (0.199)       (0.198)
           Patent value index                    0.000      0.304***     0.326***          0.325***      0.345***
                                                             (0.050)      (0.050)           (0.054)       (0.055)
           Selling country tax rate              0.325                   1.249***                        1.313***
                                                                          (0.430)                         (0.462)
           Log (cumulative patents)              5.25         0.026        0.026             0.025         0.025
            for patent owner                                 (0.027)      (0.027)           (0.032)       (0.032)
           Patent owner a multinational          0.614        0.063        0.062             0.124         0.123
            research firm                                    (0.081)      (0.081)           (0.096)       (0.095)
           Patent owner a corporation,           0.284        ‐0.042       ‐0.041            ‐0.040        ‐0.040
            not multinational                                (0.048)      (0.048)           (0.054)       (0.054)
           Log likelihood                                 ‐1,094,370.4 ‐1,094,215.9       ‐371,866.7    ‐371,708.1
           Chi‐squared                                       1,920.1      1,914.7           1,813.3       1,825.5
           Degrees of freedom                                   88           89                88            89
           R‐squared                                          0.016        0.016             0.057         0.057
           2,559,430 patent‐year observations for 2001‐2014; 91,351 transfers
           Heteroskedastic standard errors clustered on 72,998 patent owners.
           All equations include seller country, year, and tech dummies.
           Method of estimation is Cox proportional hazard in columns 1 and 2 and Logit in columns 3 and 4.


                                                               52
