                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HELPING CHILDREN CATCH UP:
               EARLY LIFE SHOCKS AND THE PROGRESA EXPERIMENT

                                     Achyuta Adhvaryu
                                     Anant Nyshadham
                                      Teresa Molina
                                       Jorge Tamayo

                                     Working Paper 24848
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24848


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2018




We thank Prashant Bharadwaj, Hoyt Bleakley, Victor Lavy, Atheen Venkataramani and seminar
participants at Hitotsubashi University, the SRCD Biennial Meeting, AEA Annual Meeting, PHS
Research Workshop, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, NBER, Michigan, USC, PAA, PacDev,
Cal State Long Beach, NEUDC, and the CDC for helpful comments. Adhvaryu gratefully
acknowledges funding from the NIH/NICHD (5K01HD071949). Molina gratefully acknowledges
funding from the USC Provost’s Ph.D. Fellowship, USC Dornsife INET graduate student
fellowship, and Oakley Endowed Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Achyuta Adhvaryu, Anant Nyshadham, Teresa Molina, and Jorge Tamayo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Helping Children Catch Up: Early Life Shocks and the PROGRESA Experiment
Achyuta Adhvaryu, Anant Nyshadham, Teresa Molina, and Jorge Tamayo
NBER Working Paper No. 24848
July 2018
JEL No. I15,I25,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

Can investing in children who faced adverse events in early childhood help them catch up? We
answer this question using two orthogonal sources of variation – resource availability at birth
(local rainfall) and cash incentives for school enrollment – to identify the interaction between
early endowments and investments in children. We find that adverse rainfall in the year of birth
decreases grade attainment, post-secondary enrollment, and employment outcomes. But children
whose families were randomized to receive conditional cash transfers experienced a much
smaller decline: each additional year of program exposure during childhood mitigated more than
20 percent of early disadvantage.

Achyuta Adhvaryu                               Teresa Molina
Ross School of Business                        University of Hawaii at Manoa
University of Michigan                         Saunders Hall 515A
701 Tappan Street                              2424 Maile Way
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                            Honolulu, HI 96822
and NBER                                       tmolina@hawaii.edu
adhvaryu@umich.edu
                                               Jorge Tamayo
Anant Nyshadham                                Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                        Soldiers Field, Morgan Hall 292
Boston College                                 Boston, MA 02163
Maloney Hall, 324                              jtamayo@hbs.edu
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
nyshadha@bc.edu
       Poor circumstance in early life often has long-lasting negative impacts (Almond and Currie, 2011;

Currie and Vogl, 2012; Heckman, 2006, 2007).1 What role can important change agents – parents,

communities, governments – play in lessening the burden of adverse events in a young child’s life?

Research has demonstrated that in many contexts, parents provide more time and material resources to

their more disadvantaged children (Almond and Mazumder, 2013). We ask: how much of a difference

does this extra investment make? That is, to what extent is remediation possible, and which behaviors

and policies can generate meaningful catch-up? This relates closely to recent work evaluating the

impacts of policies that provide support to disadvantaged children (Aizer et al., 2016; Chetty et al.,

2016; Conti et al., 2015; Gertler et al., 2014; Hoynes et al., 2016; Lavy and Schlosser, 2005; Lavy et al.,

2016).

       The answer to this question is neither theoretically obvious nor empirically straightforward. The

theory of dynamic human capital formation suggests that timing matters a great deal (Cunha et al.,

2010; Heckman and Mosso, 2014). Due to the decreasing degree of static (within-period) substitutability

of investments and stocks of human capital as individuals age, investing in children very early in their

lives yields the largest returns (Cunha et al., 2006; Doyle et al., 2009; Heckman, 2006); attempting

to correct for disadvantage in later childhood (say, adolescence) or adulthood may be economically

inefficient (Conti and Heckman, 2014; Heckman and Mosso, 2014). It is yet unclear at what ages this

drop in returns kicks in, and thus when the potential remediating effects of investments may disappear.

       Several influential studies argue that there is very little scope for catch-up when it comes to nu-

tritional deficiencies that occur before a child’s second birthday (Martorell et al., 1994; Victora et al.,

2008, 2010), but more recent evidence from longitudinal data suggests that catch-up on both physical

and cognitive dimensions is still possible after age 2 (Crookston et al., 2010, 2013; Lundeen et al., 2014;

Prentice et al., 2013). Evidence on whether later-life investments can help generate this catch-up is much

more limited. Some recent work has explored whether early schooling investments have heterogeneous

effects across the physical and cognitive ability distributions (Bitler et al., 2014; Cueto et al., 2016), but

due to non-trivial empirical difficulties, causal relationships have proved difficult to pin down.

       The main empirical challenge in answering this question rigorously is that investments following a

shock are, in general, endogenous responses. Investments and resulting outcomes are jointly determined

by parents’ preferences, families’ access to resources, and the like. Comparing the outcomes of two
   1
    Shocks to the early life environment – disease, poverty, maternal stress, nutritional or income availability, and conflict,
among many others – affect a wide range of adult outcomes (see, e.g., Adhvaryu et al. (2016); Almond (2006); Bleakley
(2007, 2010); Gould et al. (2011); Hoddinott et al. (2008); Maccini and Yang (2009); Majid (2015); Maluccio et al. (2009)).


                                                              2
people who faced the same shock but were privy to different levels of corrective investment will therefore

produce a biased estimate of the remediation value of investments if these investments are correlated

with unobserved determinants of the outcomes in which we are interested. As Almond and Mazumder

(2013) put it in their recent review, resolving this identification problem “may be asking for ‘lightning

to strike’ twice: two identification strategies affecting the same cohort but at adjacent developmental

stages. Clearly this is a tall order.”

      In this study, we attempt to overcome this difficulty. We demonstrate that recovery from early

life shocks is possible, at least with regard to educational attainment and employment outcomes, via

conditional cash transfers during childhood. We leverage the combination of a natural experiment that

induced variation in the extent of early disadvantage and a large-scale cluster randomized controlled

trial of cash transfers for school enrollment in Mexico. In our study’s agrarian setting, where weather

plays a significant role in determining household income (and thus the availability of nutrition and

other health inputs for children), we verify that adverse rainfall lowers the agricultural wage and affects

physical health. We then show that Mexican youth born during periods of adverse rainfall have worse

educational attainment and employment outcomes than those born in normal rainfall periods. Exposure

to adverse rainfall in the year of one’s birth – a crucial period for the determination of long-term health

and human capital – decreased years of completed education by more than half a year.

      However, for children whose households were randomized to receive conditional cash transfers

through PROGRESA, Mexico’s landmark experiment in education policy, each additional year of ex-

posure mitigated the long-term impact of rainfall shocks on educational attainment by 0.1 years. By

reducing the opportunity cost of schooling, PROGRESA enabled all children to stay in school longer

than they would have otherwise, but had the largest effects on those impacted by negative rainfall shocks

at birth. Each additional year of program exposure during childhood mitigated almost 20 percent of

early disadvantage. The negative effects of adverse rainfall become discernible after primary school,

with the largest impacts measured for completion of grades 7 through 9. The mitigative impact of

PROGRESA, as well as the main effect of the program, is also largest precisely in these years.

      Finally, although data limitations preclude the analysis of longer-term outcomes for much of our

sample,2 for the oldest individuals (who were 18 at the time of the 2003 survey), we find a similar pattern

of coefficients in regressions on continued education (after high school) and employment outcomes.
  2
    Attrition and low quality data in the 2007 wave of the survey make this wave unusable. Accordingly, we have post-
secondary schooling and employment outcomes only for 18 year olds in 2003, who are also impacted by both sources of
exogenous variation.


                                                         3
Adverse rainfall in the year of birth leads to a reduction of 17 percentage points in the probability of

working, but each additional year of PROGRESA exposure offsets nearly 8 percentage points of this

impact. At 2 years of program exposure, PROGRESA offsets more than 88 percent of the disadvantage

caused by adverse rainfall in the year of birth in terms of employment at age 18.

   Put another way, there is substantial heterogeneity in the treatment effect of PROGRESA across the

distribution of initial endowments, as determined by economic circumstance in early life. The effect of

conditional cash transfers on schooling in our case is driven in large part by the impact on disadvantaged

children. At the mean length of program exposure, children born in “normal” circumstances have

higher educational attainment (about 0.5 grades more). But program exposure increases educational

attainment for disadvantaged children by double this amount – slightly over 1 year. With respect to

employment at age 18, we find that PROGRESA has little to no effect on children born during normal

rainfall, with roughly the entire impact of PROGRESA exhibited for disadvantaged children.

   To study the mechanisms underlying the remediation we find, we build a simple extension to the

canonical model of schooling choice and lifecycle consumption that incorporates heterogeneity in the ini-

tial endowment and a role for conditional transfers that change the price of schooling. The model makes

clear that there are two primary mechanisms driving remediation. First, the value of the PROGRESA

transfer represents a larger proportion of forgone wages for low endowment individuals as compared to

high endowment individuals, as low endowment individuals have lower earning potential than their high

endowment counterparts, leading to a larger schooling response to the PROGRESA incentive among

low endowment individuals. Second, because high endowment individuals obtain more schooling than

do their low endowment counterparts, in the absence of the PROGRESA incentive, it is more diffi-

cult for a program like PROGRESA to increase the schooling of high-endowment individuals (vis-a-vis

low-endowment individuals) due to effort costs being convex in schooling levels.

   Our study furthers the understanding of a crucial aspect of the complex process of human capital

formation: how do early stocks of human capital and subsequent investments interact to determine

long-run outcomes (Cunha et al., 2010; Heckman and Mosso, 2014)? Our attempt to answer this

question exploits two orthogonal sources of variation: exposure to abnormal rainfall around the time

of birth and exposure to a large-scale randomized conditional cash transfer program. In this regard,

our work is most related to three recent working papers: Gunnsteinsson et al. (2016), who examine the

interaction of a natural disaster and a randomized vitamin supplementation program in Bangladesh;

Rossin-Slater and Wüst (2015), who study the interaction of nurse home visitation and high quality

                                                    4
preschool daycare in Denmark; and Malamud et al. (2016), who examine the interaction of access to

abortion and better schooling in Romania. Despite the vastly different contexts and types of programs

studied, the results in these papers, quite remarkably, mirror what we find in our work – an (at least

weakly) negative interaction effect – indicating that remediation of early-life shocks via investments can

indeed be successful.

      Part of the argument for targeting low-endowment children is the idea that the benefit is highest for

this group, but we do not have credible evidence that this is indeed the case. While there is substantial

evidence that early interventions for disadvantaged children can have large long-term impacts (Behrman

et al., 2009a; Chetty et al., 2016; Gould et al., 2011; Heckman et al., 2010, 2013; Hoddinott et al.,

2013a,b, 2008; Hoynes et al., 2016; Lavy et al., 2016; Maluccio et al., 2009), we know little about how

large are those benefits compared to those of similar interventions on less disadvantaged populations.

The ethical imperative for parents, communities, and the government to improve the circumstance of

disadvantaged children may be clear. But if benefits are highest for high-endowment children (i.e., if

“skill begets skill”), then this moral argument would be at odds with the economic drive to invest where

the return is largest.3 Our results show that in terms of schooling and employment outcomes, children

disadvantaged at birth are actually most responsive to incentives for later-life investments, producing

scope for remediation. This result is consistent with new evidence from the Head Start program in the

United States (Bitler et al., 2014).4

      Our empirical context is appealing because of the relatively high potential for external validity.

Adverse rainfall is likely the most common type of shock experienced by poor households in much of

the developing world (Dinkelman, 2013), and has large short- and long-term consequences (Maccini

and Yang, 2009; Paxson, 1992; Shah and Steinberg, 2013; Wolpin, 1982). Given the rising importance

of wide-scale cash transfer programs around the world (Blattman et al., 2013; Haushofer and Shapiro,

2013), it is important to learn here that these programs, if administered as successfully as PROGRESA

was in Mexico, can mitigate a sizable portion of the adverse impacts of poor rainfall at the time of

birth.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides background on the PROGRESA

program in Mexico. Section 2 describes the survey data and rainfall data we use. Our empirical strategy

is described in section 3 and results are discussed in section 4. In section 5, we outline a theoretical
  3
    In other words, there would be an equity-efficiency tradeoff for late stage child investments (Heckman, 2007).
  4
    In both contexts, it should be noted that what is being estimated is the return to an intervention for the most
disadvantaged among a low-income population, as both PROGRESA and Head Start already target poor households.


                                                        5
schooling model to shed light on what may be driving our empirical results. Section 6 concludes.



1        Program Background

1.1       Description of Program

In 1997, the Mexican government began a conditional cash transfer program called the Programa de

Educación, Salud y Alimentación (PROGRESA), aimed at alleviating poverty and improving the health,

education and nutritional status of rural households, particularly children and mothers. The program

provided cash transfers to poor families (mothers, specifically), conditional on certain education and

health-related requirements. Since then, the program has been expanded to urban areas and renamed,

first to Oportunidades in 2002 and most recently to Prospera in 2014.

        In this paper, we focus on the education component of PROGRESA, which consisted of bimonthly

cash payments to mothers during the school year, contingent on their children’s regular school atten-

dance (an attendance record of 85% is required to continue receiving the grant). Initially ranging from

60 to 205 pesos in 1997, subsidies were adjusted every year for inflation. In each year, the size of the

subsidy depended on the number of children enrolled in school and the grade levels and genders of the

children. As shown in Table 1, from seventh grade onwards, the grants increase with grade level, with

higher amounts for girls than boys.5 At the program’s onset, grants were provided only for children

between third and ninth grade (the third year of junior high school). In 2001, the grants were extended

to high school. Table 1 summarizes the monthly grant amounts for the second semester of 1997, 1998

and 2003.

        The health and nutrition component of the program involved conditional cash transfers intended

to incentivize healthy behaviors. For instance, in order for a household to receive a cash grant for

food, all members were required to visit the health facility a specified number of times per year and to

attend nutrition and health education lectures. The required number of visits varied by age and gender,

with pregnant women and infants required to go every 1-3 months, while anyone aged 5 and older only

required to attend 1 or 2 times per year. The program also provided nutrition supplements and other

preventative care for pregnant and lactating mothers and young children, and supported the improved
    5
    Given the lower rates of attendance of girls in rural Mexico, the policy’s intention was to provide additional incentives
to girls (Skoufias, 2005). However, as Behrman et al. (2005) note, girls tended to progress through schooling grades more
quickly than boys. Skoufias and Parker (2001), Skoufias (2005), Behrman et al. (2009b), and Behrman et al. (2011) cover
additional program details in depth.




                                                             6
provision of primary health care services in PROGRESA localities.

                Table 1: Monthly Amount of Educational Transfers to Beneficiary Households

                                                    1997                     1998               2003
                                                Boys    Girls            Boys    Girls      Boys    Girls


                           Primary School
                                  3rd year        60       60             70      70         105     105
                                  4th year        70       70             80      80         120     120
                                  5th year        90       90             100     100        155     155
                                  6th year       120      120             135     135        210     210
                           Junior High School
                                  1st year       175      185             200     210        305     320
                                  2nd year       185      205             210     235        320     355
                                  3rd year       195      205             220     625        335     390
                           High School
                                  1st year        -         -              -       -         510     585
                                  2nd year        -         -              -       -         545     625
                                  3rd year        -         -              -       -         580     660


                           Notes:
                            1. Amounts (in pesos) are for the second semester of the year
                            2. Grants extended to high school in 2001.




      PROGRESA was targeted toward poor households in poor localities. To determine which localities

would receive the program, a set of marginalized localities was identified using data from the 1990 and

1995 censuses. Within these selected localities, household-level eligibility for PROGRESA was deter-

mined based on the results of an income survey administered to all households in each locality. First,

household per capita income (excluding child income) was calculated, and households were categorized

as above or below a poverty line. Then, separately for each region, the program identified the household

characteristics that were the best predictors of poverty status, which were then used to construct the

index that ultimately classified households as poor (eligible for PROGRESA) or nonpoor.6

      For evaluation purposes, the program was implemented experimentally in 506 rural localities from

the states of Guerrero, Hidalgo, Michoacan, Puebla, Queretaro, San Luis de Potosi and Veracruz. 320

localities (the “treatment group”) were randomly assigned to start receiving benefits in the spring of

1998. 186 localities were kept as a control group and started receiving PROGRESA benefits at the end

of 1999. This randomized variation has allowed for rigorous evaluations of the program’s effects on a

wide range of outcomes, which we discuss below.

      Like the existing literature, we take advantage of the random assignment and treat PROGRESA as
  6
      Skoufias et al. (2001) contains more details about the selection of localities and households.


                                                                    7
an exogenous shock to the cost of schooling. We also exploit additional variation in years of treatment

exposure across cohorts. We follow the majority of previous studies in utilizing the extensive margin of

program exposure and ignoring actual receipt of transfers or grant amounts, which depend on fertility

and other endogenous characteristics and decisions of the household. However, it should be noted that

the vast majority of households eligible for the program actually did receive benefits (Hoddinott and

Skoufias, 2004).7 Because only households who were classified as poor by the program administration

were eligible to receive the benefits from the program, we focus, as most previous studies do, on this

subset of the population in our analysis.


1.2     Previous Literature on PROGRESA Effects

An enormous body of research has explored the effects of PROGRESA on a wide array of outcomes

(Parker et al., 2017). In Appendix Table A3, we attempt to summarize the key findings of this literature,

categorizing studies based on the age of the analysis sample – specifically, how old they were during

the years of PROGRESA being used to identify its effects. We also classify studies as education-

related, health-related, cognitive or behavioral, and consumption-related; it is clear that PROGRESA

was successful at improving outcomes across all of these dimensions. For school-aged children, however,

the main effect of PROGRESA was educational. In the first panel of Table A3, we show that existing

work on school-aged children has focused almost exclusively on education outcomes: in the short and

medium term, PROGRESA has been found to have improved educational attainment, grade progression,

and other measures of schooling success. That the benefits of PROGRESA for school-aged children

were primarily educational is not surprising: this age group was the only one directly affected by the

schooling subsidies and was too old to benefit from the main health benefits targeted toward much

younger children. Consistent with this, Table A3 shows that most of the effects that PROGRESA had

on health were concentrated among much younger (or much older) samples.

      As outlined in the introduction, the main question we seek to answer in this paper is whether later-

life investments can help remediate for disadvantage generated very early in life, and we are interested

in PROGRESA as an exogenous shock to later-life investments. We are therefore interested in studying

the outcomes of children who were school-aged when the program was rolled out, for whom there is

experimental variation in exposure to the schooling grant and for whom we observe schooling outcomes
  7
     Hoddinott and Skoufias (2004) report that only 5% of the households in treatment localities who were defined as
eligible to receive benefits and formally included in the program in 1998 had not received any benefits by March 2000.



                                                          8
past primary school. When interpreting our results, therefore, we view the education subsidy channel

as the main driving mechanism behind the results we find, not the health component or the actual cash

received.8 This is consistent with what has been documented in the literature – large education effects

for school-aged children but virtually no evidence of health effects for this age group – and with the

design of the program.

    .



2       Data

2.1     PROGRESA Data

The data collected for the evaluation of the PROGRESA program includes a baseline survey of all

households in PROGRESA villages (not just eligible poor households) in October 1997 and follow-ups

every six months thereafter for the first three years of the program (1998 to 2000). These surveys

collect detailed information on many indicators related to household demographics, education, health,

expenditures, and income.

    To evaluate the medium-term impact of the program, a new follow-up survey was carried out in

2003 in all 506 localities that were part of the original evaluation sample. By that time all localities

that had participated in the baseline survey as control localities had also received the treatment. Like

previous surveys, the 2003 wave contains detailed information on household demographics and individual

socioeconomic, health, schooling and employment outcomes. A follow-up survey was also conducted in

2007.

    For our primary analysis, we use data from the first survey and the survey carried out in 2003,

focusing only on households who were eligible for the program (“poor” households). We construct

different education outcomes using the information provided by the 2003 follow-up survey. Similarly,

based on the findings of Behrman and Todd (1999) and Skoufias and Parker (2001), we also construct

control variables related to parental characteristics, demographic composition of the household, and

community level characteristics using the baseline survey. Following Behrman et al. (2011), we drop

individuals who have non-matching genders across the 1997 and 2003 waves, as well as those who report

birth years that differ by more than 2 years. For those with non-matching birth years with smaller than
   8
     Though Appendix Table A3 shows that significant consumption effects have been documented, these are on the whole
relatively small in magnitude (Parker et al., 2017).




                                                         9
2 year differences, we use the birth year reported in the 1997 wave.

       We focus on individuals in poor households aged 12 to 18 in 2003. We restrict to these ages

because 12 year-olds are the youngest cohort for which there is differential exposure to PROGRESA in

treatment and control villages (see Table A1), while individuals over 18 are more likely to have moved

out of the household by the 2003 survey and are therefore not surveyed.9 While survey respondents

(usually mothers or grandmothers) are still asked some questions about non-resident individuals, these

responses are likely to introduce greater measurement error, potentially correlated with our regressors

of interest. To avoid this issue, which is particularly problematic for our employment outcomes (which

are missing for non-resident household members), we exclude individuals over 18 years old.

       This issue is also what limits our use of the 2007 survey, during which our sample individuals were

aged 16 to 22. Specifically, attrition is too high for us to continue to follow our sample individuals and

use their 2007 outcomes.10 However, for some of our supporting analysis, we use a number of child

development measures collected for younger children in 2007 (along with other physical, cognitive, and

behavioral outcomes measured during the 2003 survey for various sub-samples that do not overlap with

our sample of interest).


2.2      Rainfall Data

We exploit variation in early life rainfall to identify changes in early-life circumstances not correlated

with the initial conditions of the parents. We use rainfall data from local weather stations collected by

Mexico’s National Meteorological Service (CONAGUA) and match those rainfall stations to program

localities using their geocodes. Due to changes in the use of weather stations as well as irregular

reporting by some stations, there are some localities for which the nearest rainfall station has missing

observations during the period of time relevant for our study.

       To deal with this issue, we use data from all of the stations within a 20 kilometer radius of the

locality. Then, we take a weighted average of rainfall from these nearby stations, weighting each value

by the inverse of the distance between that station and the locality. Restricting to this 20 kilometer

radius ensures that we are using data from rainfall stations very close to our localities of interest. In fact,
   9
     As Figure A1 shows, the proportion of 19-year-olds not living in the household is over 40%, and this proportion
continues to grow with age.
  10
     We lose over half of our 2003 sample, partially due to household-level attrition, but primarily due to individual
migration (no proxy information is collected for those no longer living in the originally surveyed household) – likely to be
endogenous. This unfortunate feature of the 2007 data has resulted in its limited use in the literature: the few studies that
do use the 2007 data (for example, Behrman et al. (2008) and Fernald et al. (2009)) focus exclusively on PROGRESA’s
health effects on a much younger cohort, for whom migration is less of an issue.


                                                             10
the average distance between a locality’s coordinates and its nearest rainfall station is 7 kilometers.11

Using this procedure, 69 of the 506 localities were still missing rainfall measurements for our study

period. Thus, our final sample, after excluding individuals missing rainfall for their particular year

of birth, restricting to those from poor households in our desired age group meeting the data quality

requirements, consists of individuals from 420 localities.


2.3      Outcome Variables

Our main education outcome variables include educational attainment (in years), a dummy for grade

progression, and a dummy for having completed the appropriate number of grades for one’s age. Given

the fairly young age restrictions of our sample, the latter two variables are used as potentially more

appropriate variables for individuals who have yet to complete their schooling. Educational attainment

is constructed using information on the last grade-level achieved in 2003.12 “Grade progression” is

a binary variable equal to 1 if an individual progressed at least five complete grades between 1997

and 2003. We also define an indicator for age-appropriate grade completion. This is equal to 1 if an

individual completed the appropriate number of grades for their age. For an individual who is 7 years

old, we expect them to have completed one grade, for an 8 year-old, two grades, and so on. In order

to study differential effects by grade, we also use 12 dummy variables, each indicating whether the

individual completed at least 3, 4, and up to 12 grades of school.

       For individuals who are 18 years old in 2003, we also look at continued enrollment and employment

outcomes.13 Specifically, we create indicators for whether an individual is still enrolled in school (after

having received a high school degree). Similarly, we are interested in whether an individual was employed

in the past week, employed in the past year, and employed in a non-laborer job in the past year. This

last variable attempts to separate the lowest skill and least stable jobs from the rest of the employment

categories (by grouping those working as spot laborers with the unemployed).
  11
     The high density of rainfall stations, combined with the fact that we are using inverse distance weighting instead of
nearest neighbor matching, means that our data is not as prone to the problems with spatially misaligned data as the
examples explored in Pouliot (2015).
  12
     Students with complete primary education have a maximum of 6 years of educational attainment; junior high school
adds a maximum of three additional years; and high school three years more. College education adds a maximum of five
additional years and graduate work an additional one. We do not count years in preschool and kindergarten.
  13
     As shown in Figure A1, attrition is higher among this cohort, but we show in column 4 of Table 11 that attrition for
this cohort is not significantly affected by PROGRESA status or birth year rainfall.




                                                           11
2.4      PROGRESA Exposure Variable

Our two independent variables of interest represent two types of shocks: an early-life endowment shock

and an investment shock. The investment shock we use is the PROGRESA program. In particular,

we calculate the years an individual was exposed to PROGRESA, which depends on their locality

(treatment or control status) and age. Table A1 shows, for each birth cohort, the number of years

of exposure to PROGRESA by treatment status. We obtain this by first calculating the number of

months, dividing by 12, and rounding to the nearest year (because there is some ambiguity about the

precise month in which treatment households began receiving benefits).14

       For the majority of cohorts, the difference between treatment and control exposure is 2 years, but

the difference is only 1 year for the youngest cohort with any differential exposure at all (who aged

into the program) and the oldest cohort with differential exposure (because the control group aged out

at the end of 1999, and started receiving benefits when the program was expanded to include high

school in 2001). Creating a continuous years of exposure variable takes advantage of the variation in

exposure lengths across different age cohorts within the treatment and control groups, in addition to

the exogenous variation generated by the randomization of the PROGRESA program. In robustness

checks, we explore different variants of this PROGRESA variable: we use a simple treatment dummy,

as well as a years of exposure variable not rounded to the nearest month.


2.5      Rainfall Shock Variable

For our early life shock, we use rainfall as an exogenous shock to income during a child’s first year of life.

Our interest is not in the absolute level of rainfall, but rather a measure of rainfall that maps best to

household incomes at the time of birth (and therefore to a child’s biological endowment). Specifically,

we define a shock as a level of annual rainfall that is one standard deviation above or below the locality-

specific mean (calculated over the 10 years prior to the birth year). We use this relative measure instead

of an absolute measure of rainfall in order to capture the fact that the same amount of rainfall may

have different consequences for different regions based on average rainfall levels. As we discuss in detail

in section 3, both previous literature as well as our own data show that defining the shock variable in

this way captures the contemporaneous relationship between rainfall and agricultural wages: normal

years are associated with better outcomes than shock years. Importantly, defining the shock based on
  14
    Benefits should have begun in May 1998, but some households appear to have been initiated earlier (Skoufias, 2005)
while others appear to have experienced delays (Hoddinott and Skoufias, 2004).



                                                         12
comparisons to locality-specific means ensures that we are not simply comparing areas that typically

get a lot of rainfall to areas with more moderate rainfall, as these areas could be substantially different

on a number of dimensions. Instead, identification relies on comparing locality-years that received a lot

more (or a lot less) rainfall than is typical for that specific locality. The regressions in Appendix Table

A4, discussed in more detail in section 3, offer support for the exogeneity of these rainfall shocks.

    In our analysis, we use a “normal rainfall” dummy in order to represent the absence of a negative

shock (for ease of interpretation of the interaction coefficients). This dummy equals 1 if the rainfall in

an individual’s locality during their year of birth fell within a standard deviation of the locality-specific

historical mean. We use rainfall in an individual’s calendar year of birth in their locality of residence

in 1997.15 To calculate the rainfall levels, we simply sum all monthly rainfall during an individual’s

calendar year of birth. We do not use month of birth to define this annual shock because in our sample,

approximately 30% of individuals report different birth months in the 1997 and 2003 surveys.16

    In general, however, we recognize that it is difficult to pinpoint precise critical periods of develop-

ment, and we do not claim to be doing this in this paper. For example, rainfall shocks in one year could

in theory affect the income-generating abilities of households in subsequent years, which means that our

rainfall variable should be more broadly interpreted as a shock to a child’s early-life endowment rather

than a shock in any specific period.17 To answer our research question, all we require is that rainfall

shocks exogenously affect a child’s endowment, and we discuss evidence for this in section 4.1.

    It is important to note that this shock variable eliminates much (but not all) of the spatial correlation

that typically poses a problem in studies of rainfall, a highly spatially correlated variable. This is

illustrated in Figure 1, which maps all PROGRESA localities by their rainfall status. Black dots

represent localities that experienced a rainfall shock (according to our definition) in 1987, while gray

crosses represent those that experienced normal rainfall in that same year. We see a great deal of

variation within states, and even within clusters of neighboring localities, in the rainfall shock variable.18
  15
     The data does not include locality of birth, which would be the ideal geographic identifier in this context. We therefore
use locality of residence (as of 1997), which should be equivalent for most of the individuals in our sample, as migration is
minimal due to their young ages.
  16
     In robustness checks (not shown here but available on request), we calculate annual sums based on the month of birth
reported in the 1997 survey and find that rainfall summed over the 6 months prior to and 6 months after birth appear to
be the most important.
  17
     Serial correlation in rainfall shocks would also make it difficult to precisely identify the effects of shocks in consecutive
periods, but – like other papers that test for serial correlation in rainfall shocks (Kaur, 2014; Shah and Steinberg, 2017) –
we do not find that our rainfall shocks are serially correlated over time.
  18
     While it may be surprising to see some localities situated so close together take on different values for this shock
variable, we are able to detect these differences because of the large number of rainfall stations (most localities have several
stations within 20km) as well as our use of inverse-distance weighting, which assigns different rainfall values to even very
closely situated localities.


                                                               13
   We show only one year in Figure 1 for illustrative purposes, and chose 1987 because it is the birth

year of the largest number of individuals in our sample. This exercise also maps well to our estimating

equation, which includes birth year by state fixed effects and accordingly identifies using within birth

year variation. In the Appendix, Figure A2 uses rainfall from all birth years.

                      Figure 1: PROGRESA Localities by Rainfall Shock in 1987




   Since we ultimately care about the interaction between rainfall and PROGRESA exposure, it is

also important to note that for both treatment and control villages, we see still substantial variation in

rainfall shock status, even within small geographic areas, as shown in Figure 2. Another question related

to the interaction of these two variables is whether rainfall shocks in an individual’s year of birth could

affect the likelihood of that individual being eligible for PROGRESA, by affecting their household’s

long-run income-generating capabilities, for example. We do not find any significant differences in the

likelihood of being categorized as poor (and therefore eligible for PROGRESA) across individuals born

during rainfall shock years compared to normal years.


2.6   Summary Statistics

Table 2 reports summary statistics for individual-level variables from the 2003 survey for our sample of

interest: individuals aged 12 to 18 (and for employment outcomes, only those aged 18) living in house-

                                                    14
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Individual-Level Variables in 2003


                                      Full        Treatment       Control         Treatment -
                                     Sample        Villages       Villages     Control Differences

   12 to 18-year-olds
     Educational Attainment            6.79          6.85           6.69              0.15***
                                      (2.11)        (2.09)         (2.13)             (0.040)
     Grade Progression                 0.58          0.59           0.56             0.030***
                                      (0.49)        (0.49)         (0.50)            (0.0096)
     Appropriate Grade                 0.46          0.48           0.44             0.037***
     Completion                       (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)            (0.0094)

   Number of individuals              11829          7193           4636
   Number of localities                420           257            163

   18-year-olds
     Currently Enrolled w/            0.061         0.058          0.064             -0.0057
     HS Degree                        (0.24)        (0.23)         (0.25)            (0.012)
     Worked this Week                  0.50          0.51           0.48               0.029
                                      (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)             (0.030)
     Worked this Year                  0.53          0.54           0.52               0.028
                                      (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)             (0.030)
     Worked in Non-Laborer             0.35          0.36           0.35              0.0051
     Job                              (0.48)        (0.48)         (0.48)             (0.029)

   Number of individuals               1597          942            655
   Number of localities                 368          218            150
   Notes:
   Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). We do not cluster standard
   errors in these summary statistics but cluster at the municipality-level in all main results.
   Variable definitions:
   -Educational attainment: number of grades completed
   -Grade progression: 1( progressed 5 grades between 1997 and 2003)
   -Appropriate grade completion: 1(completed the age-appropriate grades of schooling, eg: 1
   for age 7, 2 for age 8, etc)
   -Currently enrolled w/ HS degree: 1(still enrolled in school after having received a high
   school degree)
   -Worked last week: 1(worked in the week before survey)
   -Worked last year: 1(worked in year before survey)
   -Worked in non-laborer job: 1(worked in year before survey at a job other than as a spot
   laborer)




                                                  15
             Figure 2: PROGRESA Localities by Treatment Status and Rainfall Shock in 1987



                   Treatment Localities                                                Control Localities




holds eligible for PROGRESA.19 Average educational attainment is 6.8 years for the pooled sample,

with individuals in treatment villages completing on average 0.15 more grades than control villages.

This difference is significant at the 1% level. Similarly, the proportion of children who progressed at

least 5 grades from 1997 to 2003 and the proportion that completed the appropriate number of school

grades for their age is significantly higher in the treatment villages. Note that employment outcomes for

18 year olds do not appear to be impacted significantly by treatment on average. In the next section,

we outline how we analyze these differences in more robust specifications, controlling for covariates and

taking into account heterogeneous impacts for individuals with different endowments.

       Table 3 reports summary statistics for the variables related to our two shocks, PROGRESA exposure

and rainfall. Years of PROGRESA exposure, annual rainfall during the year of birth, and occurrence of

a rainfall shock all vary at the locality by birth year level. Summary statistics are calculated accordingly

and reported in two panels, one for the full sample and one for a trimmed sample described below. By

experimental design, treatment villages were exposed to PROGRESA for longer than control villages.

On average, treatment individuals received 1.9 more years of PROGRESA: the treatment-control dif-
  19
     In this table, as in the rest of the analysis, we restrict to individuals who satisfy the data quality requirements described
in section 2.1.




                                                               16
         Table 3: Summary Statistics for Shock Variables


                                   Full         Treatment      Control         Treatment -
                                  Sample         Villages      Villages     Control Differences

A. Full Sample
 Years of PROGRESA                  4.84           5.57          3.69              1.88***
 exposure                          (1.17)         (0.73)        (0.72)             (0.030)
  Annual rainfall                  1182.4        1180.6         1185.3              -4.75
                                  (644.3)        (654.8)        (628.0)            (26.3)
  Normalized rainfall              -0.070        -0.054         -0.096              0.042
                                   (0.81)         (0.79)        (0.84)             (0.033)
  Rainfall Shock                    0.24           0.22          0.27             -0.048***
                                   (0.43)         (0.42)        (0.45)             (0.017)

Number of locality x birth-         2519          1536           983
year observations
Number of localities                420            257           163

B. Trimmed Sample
  Years of PROGRESA                 4.81           5.58          3.71              1.87***
  exposure                         (1.17)         (0.72)        (0.71)             (0.031)
  Annual rainfall                  1181.1        1171.1         1195.5              -24.4
                                  (644.0)        (654.8)        (628.0)            (28.1)
  Normalized rainfall              -0.067        -0.051         -0.089              0.038
                                   (0.84)         (0.83)        (0.86)             (0.037)
  Rainfall Shock                    0.28           0.27          0.29               -0.028
                                   (0.45)         (0.44)        (0.46)             (0.020)

Number of locality x birth-       2170            1282           888
year observations
Number of localities                344            203           141

Notes:
Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). We do not cluster standard
errors in these summary statistics but cluster at the municipality-level in all main results.
Variable definitions:
-Annual rainfall: Total annual rainfall in mm
-Normalized rainfall: Total annual rainfall, standardized using locality-specific, 10-year
historical mean and standard deviation
-Rainfall shock: 1(Normalized rainfall greater than 1 or less than -1)




                                                17
ference is 2 years for the majority of cohorts, but 1 for the youngest and oldest cohorts, as shown in

Table A1). Mean rainfall, both in raw levels and in normalized terms, is not significantly different across

treatment and control villages.

   However, there appears to be a small but statistically significant difference in the prevalence of a

one-standard deviation shock between treatment and control villages. Since PROGRESA treatment

was randomly allocated and rainfall is exogenous, this difference in the prevalence of a shock does not

necessarily indicate an identification issue (especially because, as we describe in section 3, we control

for the main effects of PROGRESA and rainfall and focus on the sign of the interaction). However,

this imbalance could be problematic if it resulted from a lack of common support across the treatment

and control rainfall distributions. Accordingly, we verify in Figure 3 that the rainfall distributions for

treatment and control localities indeed share a common support and are actually quite similar overall.

Moreover, looking at Figure 2, it is clear that though there are more shocks in the control group, the

spatial distribution of rainfall shocks are similar across the two groups (and both quite disperse).

            Figure 3: Normalized Rainfall Distributions in Treatment and Control Villages




                      Notes:
                      Rainfall levels are normalized using each locality’s location-specific 10-year
                      historical mean and standard deviation.




   Nevertheless, in order to alleviate concerns that this imbalance is driving our results, we also trim

the sample by excluding localities that could be considered outliers. That is, we drop any localities

that either experienced no rainfall shocks throughout the sample period or experienced rainfall shocks

in every year throughout the period, noting that such localities would not contribute to coefficient

                                                           18
estimates. As shown in Panel B of Table 3, this trimming results in a sample of balanced rainfall shocks

across treatment and control. Figure 4, which maps this trimmed sample, is not noticeably different

from Figure 2, emphasizing that this trimming did not substantially change the distribution of rainfall

shocks (by removing localities only from a particular area, for example). In the Appendix, we repeat our

main empirical analysis using the trimmed sample and show that our results remain nearly unchanged.

Figure 4: PROGRESA Localities by Treatment Status and Rainfall Shock in 1987, Trimmed Sample



               Treatment Localities                                    Control Localities




   Despite the randomized nature of the PROGRESA experiment, previous literature has found that

some household-level and locality-level characteristics are not fully balanced across treatment and con-

trol villages (Behrman and Todd, 1999). For this reason, in keeping with empirical methods used in

previous studies of PROGRESA impacts, we include a rich set of controls that are summarized in

Appendix Table A2. At the household level, the sample is fairly balanced across the groups with the

exception of household head age, several household composition variables, two parental education vari-

ables, and father’s language. At the locality-level, access to a public water network as well as garbage

disposal techniques are significantly different across treatment and control villages, at the 10% level.

We control for all of these household and locality-level variables in our regression analysis, which we

outline in the following section. In the Appendix, we run additional specifications that control for the

interaction of these unbalanced controls with the rainfall shock and find that this does not substantially

                                                   19
change our results.20



3         Empirical Strategy

We use rainfall during an individual’s year of birth as a shock to that individual’s biological endowment.

Maccini and Yang (2009) have shown that early-life rainfall shocks can impact adult outcomes like health

and educational attainment, and this operates through the positive impact rainfall has on agricultural

output in rural settings. Increased household income means increased nutritional availability for the

fetus or infant during a crucial stage of development, which could lead to improved physical health and

cognitive ability. Like the Indonesian villages in Maccini and Yang (2009), the PROGRESA villages

are also rural, suggesting that rainfall also serves as an important income shock to these communi-

ties. Bobonis (2009) confirms that negative rainfall shocks have a large negative impact on household

expenditures in our exact same setting in rural Mexico.

         Unlike in Indonesia, however, where the relationship between rainfall and income appears to be more

monotonic, Bobonis (2009) finds that expenditures can be negatively impacted by large deviations from

the mean in either direction. Specifically, he finds that rainfall shocks, defined as monthly rainfall above

or below one standard deviation from the historical mean, reduce household expenditures by 16.7%. In

the same setting as Bobonis (2009), but answering a very different question,21 we allow for droughts

and floods to both have negative impacts on household income. Using locality-level wages reported

by village leaders in the PROGRESA data, we show graphically that this is indeed the appropriate

relationship to use.

         Figure 5 depicts the relationship, using lowess smoothing, between average male wages from the

2003 surveys and rainfall in that same year, normalized using the locality-specific 10-year historical

mean and standard deviation. The clear inverted U-shape, which peaks at around zero, shows that

wages are highest around the locality mean but fall at the tails of the rainfall distribution. Motivated

by this figure and the prior literature, we define a negative shock as a realized rainfall level that is over

one standard deviation above or below the locality-specific mean calculated over the 10 years prior.

         Our investment shock, which is the total number of years of PROGRESA exposure, also depends on
    20
      Similar to the strategy used in Acemoglu et al. (2004), this ensures that the unbalanced characteristics do not confound
the estimate of our treatment-rainfall interaction.
   21
      Bobonis (2009) compared the effects of these rainfall shocks (exogenous drivers of overall household income) to the
effects of PROGRESA transfers (exogenous drivers of female-specific income) to test for Pareto optimality in intrahousehold
allocation decisions.



                                                             20
year of birth and locality of residence during the PROGRESA program. This years of exposure variable,

the rainfall shock described above, and their interaction form the basis of our empirical specification.

For the interpretation of our results, it is important that these variables truly be exogenous to the

endowment and investments. To provide support for the exogeneity of these variables, we check whether

individuals appear to be observably different across PROGRESA treatment and control villages, as well

as normal rainfall versus rainfall shock groups. In Table A4, we regress each of the individual, household,

and village-level characteristics that we use as control variables on our dependent variables of interest:

years of exposure to PROGRESA and the rainfall shock . Across a total of 80 coefficients, only 11

are significant at the 10 percent level (and only 6 at the 5 percent level), which is approximately the

number of significant coefficients we would expect to see by chance. Importantly, the vast majority of

coefficients are small in magnitude relative to the means.22

                                                Figure 5: Locality Wages




                 Notes:
                 Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals, calculated from 1000 bootstrapped samples.




       For individual i, living in state s and locality l in 1997, born in year t, their education or employment

outcomes yislt can be expressed as follows:
  22
     One exception is age, for which the coefficients are slightly larger in magnitude relative to the means. As we discuss
in section 4.4.4 and show in Table A9, these age imbalances do not appear to be affecting our main results.




                                                               21
                    yislt = β1 Rslt + β2 Pslt + β3 Rslt Pslt + α0 Xislt + µs x δt + islt               (1)


where Rslt represents a normal rainfall dummy, indicating that rainfall during the individual’s year of

birth was within one standard deviation of the ten-year locality-specific mean. In order for this variable

to be interpreted as a positive endowment shock (in the same way PROGRESA is seen as a positive

investment shock), we use a 1 to indicate a normal year (or absence of a shock) and 0 to indicate a shock

year. Pslt represents the number of years of PROGRESA exposure, which varies across treatment and

control villages as well as across different birth cohorts within villages. Our basic specification includes

state x birth year fixed effects (µs x δt ). In some specifications we add municipality fixed effects, which

is the smallest set of geographic fixed effects we can use, given that one of our primary sources of

exogeneity – the PROGRESA randomization – varies at the locality level.

   In equation 1, β1 represents the main effect of a positive early-life income shock, and β2 represents

the effect of a positive investment shock for individuals who did not experience a positive rainfall shock.

β2 + β3 represents the total effect of the PROGRESA shock on individuals who also experienced a

positive rainfall shock, and β3 therefore gives us the differential effect of PROGRESA for the higher

endowment individuals (who experienced a positive shock). If β3 is positive, this would suggest that

PROGRESA had a larger effect for higher endowment individuals than lower endowment individuals,

while a negative β3 would suggest the opposite: that PROGRESA helped to mitigate the negative

impact of an early life shock.

   In our base specification, we cluster our standard errors at the municipality level, which is a larger

administrative unit than the locality. In addition to this, we also show standard errors that adjust

for spatial correlation (unrelated to administrative boundaries) using the method described in Conley

(1999). As discussed in section 2.5, using a rainfall shock dummy instead of rainfall levels reduces

the spatial correlation in our independent variable of interest, but we correct our standard errors for

any spatial correlation that may remain. We show two sets of standard errors that allow for spatial

correlation. First, we allow for dependence between observations located less than 100km apart, but

no dependence between those further than that. Our second weighting function allows for dependence

between observations up to 500km apart. For both of these standard errors, we impose a weight that

decreases linearly in distance until it hits zero at the relevant cutoff point.


                                                       22
         In keeping with previous work on PROGRESA (Behrman et al., 2011; Schultz, 2004; Skoufias and

Parker, 2001), we include a rich set of controls in order to obtain more precise estimates of the treatment

effects and account for some significant differences across treatment and control villages that exist

despite the randomization. All of our specifications include controls for individual gender, household

size, household head age, household head gender, household composition variables,23 as well as locality

controls for water source type, garbage disposal methods, the existence of a public phone, hospital or

health center, and a DICONSA store in the locality.24 In the Appendix, we show specifications that

include interactions between the rainfall shock and each of the characteristics that are not balanced

across treatment and control.

         Although parental education and language (specifically, a dummy for whether the parents speak the

indigenous language) are important controls (Behrman et al., 2011; Schultz, 2004; Skoufias and Parker,

2001), these are missing for 30% and 10% of the sample, respectively. Similarly, distance to secondary

school and distance to bank are missing for 58% and 12% of localities, respectively. In order to include

these variables without reducing sample size, we control for missing values instead of dropping missing

observations. Parental education and parental language are represented by a set of dummy variables,

with the omitted category representing a dummy for missing.25 Similarly, distance to bank and distance

to secondary school are set to zero for missing observations but missing dummies for each variable are

added to the specification.



4         Results

In this section, we begin by discussing evidence that the rainfall shocks we have defined actually affect

the early life endowment. We then report and discuss estimation results from the strategy discussed

above, beginning with a graphical illustration of our educational attainment results. Finally, we discuss

a number of checks to address concerns about selective fertility, attrition, migration, and imbalance in

the prevalence of rainfall shocks across treatment and control.
    23
     These include counts of the number of children aged 0-2, children aged 3-5, males aged 6-7, males aged 8-12, males
aged 13-18, females 6-7, females aged 8-12, females aged 13-18, females aged 19-54, females aged 55 and over, and males
aged 55 and over.
  24
     DICONSA stores, operated by the Ministry of Social Development, are responsible for distributing the nutritional
supplements that are part of the health component of PROGRESA.
  25
     For parental education, the included dummies are less than primary school completion, completion of primary school,
and completion of secondary school; for parental language, the included dummies are a dummy for speaking the indigenous
language and a dummy for not speaking the indigenous language.




                                                          23
4.1      Rainfall Shocks and Health

A central part of our empirical strategy is the use of birth-year rainfall shocks as an exogenous driver of

the early life endowment. Tables 4 to 6 present evidence that helps validate our use of this variable. As

Bobonis (2009) has established and as is reflected in Figure 5, rainfall shocks affect expenditures and

wages. In Table 4, we show that this translates to effects on contemporaneous BMI (likely via nutrition)

as well. To study effects on BMI, we pool all individuals for whom BMI was measured across the 2003

and 2007 surveys. Specifically, height and weight were measured for sub-samples of children aged 2 to

6 in 2003, adolescents aged 15 to 21 in 2003, infants aged 0 to 2 in 2007, children aged 8 to 10 in 2007,

and adults aged 30 and older in 2007. For each individual, we calculate gender- and age-specific BMI

z-scores using WHO tables,26 and regress this variable on an indicator for a normal rainfall realization

(within one standard deviation of the locality-specific historical mean) in the individual’s locality of

residence in the relevant survey year (controlling for state-by-survey-year fixed effects and a host of

other individual and household-level controls, described in the table notes). In column 1, we see that

positive rainfall shocks in the survey year have positive effects on BMI for the entire sample. This

supports the idea that the higher wages and expenditures that result from good rainfall also translate

into higher nutritional intake. In column 2, we show that this result persists (and is much larger) for

children under two years old, for whom these measurements are a closer proxy to their initial health

endowment. In other words, this provides us with evidence that rainfall around the time of birth affects

the nutritional intake and therefore BMI of infants.

      We next ask whether these contemporaneous nutrition effects have longer-term implications for child

health. To answer this question, we use height data, collected for children aged 0-2 in 2007, aged 2-6

in 2003, and aged 8-10 in 2007. We calculate age- and gender-specific height z-scores (once again using

WHO tables) and create an indicator for stunted children, with heights falling more than 2 standard

deviations below their group-specific mean. We then regress this indicator on the rainfall shock variable

that we use in our main analysis – a dummy for a normal rainfall realization in the individual’s year of

birth. In columns 2 and 3, we see that there is a significant negative relationship between good rainfall

and stunting for children aged 2 and older. In other words, year of birth rainfall shocks have physical

health effects that persist into early childhood.

      Taking advantage of other measures of child development collected in 2003 (for 2-6 year-olds) and
 26
      We use the means and standard deviations for 20-year-olds, the oldest available age category, for all older adults.




                                                              24
   Table 4: Effect of Contemporaneous Rainfall Shocks on BMI

                                                                 (1)                 (2)


                                                             BMI z-score         BMI z-score




                        Normal Rainfall                         0.056                0.14
                        (in survey year)                       (0.033)*            (0.079)*

                       Observations                           9569              1157
                Mean of Dependent Variable                    0.56              0.54
                          Ages                                 All               0-1
                      Survey year(s)                       2003; 2007           2007
                                                         Birth year, state, survey year x
                          Fixed Effects
                                                                       state
          Notes:
          - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (***
          p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
          -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose survey-year rainfall was within
          one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
          - All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household
          size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language,
          and locality characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and
          locality distance include dummies for missing values. For adults in column 1,
          all parental variables are missing.
          - Column 1 includes all individuals whose height and weight were measured in
          either 2003 or 2007: 0-2 year-olds in 2007, 2-6 year-olds in 2003, 8-10 year-olds
          in 2007, 15-21 year-olds in 2003, adults 30 and older and mothers of young
          children in 2007. Column 2 includes 0-1 year olds in 2007.




     Table 5: Effect of Birth-Year Rainfall Shocks on Stunting
                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)

                                                   Stunted             Stunted             Stunted


               Normal Rainfall                      0.00016             -0.042              -0.037
                (in birth year)                     (0.026)            (0.019)**           (0.019)**

             Observations                              1227              1978                 1426
      Mean of Dependent Variable                       0.19              0.22                 0.087
                 Ages                                   0-2               2-6                 8-10
             Survey year                               2007              2003                 2007
             Fixed Effects                                        Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard
deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household
composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics.
Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing
values




                                                  25
2007 (for 8-10 year olds), we also explore whether other dimensions of health – cognitive and non-

cognitive skills – are affected by birth-year rainfall. During the 2003 surveys, a number of cognitive

development tests (Woodcock Johnson tests, Peabody Picture Vocabulary tests, and MacArthur com-

munication tests) were administered to a sample of 2-6 year-olds. In addition, mothers were asked to

rate their children’s behaviors using the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist. For cognitive measures,

we calculate z-scores for each of the cognitive tests and take the mean across all cognitive z-scores. For

the Achenbach checklist, we create a z-score after summing the responses to all checklist questions. In

2007, mothers of children aged 8-10 answered the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), a list

of questions about the behaviors of their children. Using existing recommended methods for scoring and

grouping questions, we create z-scores for externalizing problems, internalizing problems, and anti-social

problems (and an overall z-score that averages all three).

   Results are reported in Table 6, where we use the cognitive z-score (from 2003), the behavioral

z-score (from 2003), and multiple behavioral z-scores (from 2007) as our dependent variables, and run

regressions identical to the ones in Table 5. We find that birth-year rainfall had no significant effects on

cognitive or behavioral measures for 2 to 6 year-olds, but did (weakly) reduce the likelihood of behavioral

problems (externalizing problems, in particular) later in childhood. That income shocks in the year of

birth can affect non-cognitive development is consistent with the child development literature, which

documents that socioeconomic disadvantage is associated with altered maternal responses to infant

emotions (Kim et al., 2017) and, in general, with other reasons for negative mother-infant interactions

that could lead to behavioral problems later in childhood (Goyal et al., 2010).


4.2   Education Results

Having established that rainfall shocks are indeed relevant to early life endowments, we move on to

our main analysis. Figure 6 illustrates the intuition underlying our identification strategy, using lowess

smoothing to depict the non-monotonic relationship between rainfall at birth and educational attainment

across treatment and control households, as well as in the pooled sample. We first regress educational

attainment and normalized rainfall on our full set of controls (state-by-birth year fixed effects, and

all household and locality-level controls described in Section 3). We then plot non-parametrically the

relationship between the educational attainment residuals on the y axis and the normalized rainfall

residuals on the x axis. The solid line represents the relationship for the pooled sample, including both

treatment and control villages, which had varying degrees of exposure to the PROGRESA experiment.

                                                    26
  Table 6: Effect of Birth-Year Rainfall Shocks on Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes in Childhood

                                                          (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)          (5)               (6)
                                                                                                            Behavioral problems z-scores
                                                     Cognitive         Personality
                                                     measure z-        measures z-                         Externalizing Internalizing         Social
                                                                                            Overall
                                                       score              score                              problems      problems           problems


                 Normal Rainfall                         -0.015           -0.0020             -0.083               -0.12       -0.017            -0.11
                  (in birth year)                       (0.039)           (0.023)            (0.050)*            (0.065)*     (0.067)           (0.071)

                 Observations                            2032              2014               1488             1488            1488              1488
          Mean of Dependent Variable                    -0.052             0.034              0.061            0.014          -0.0084           -0.044
                     Ages                                 2-6               2-6               8-10             8-10             8-10             8-10
                 Survey year                             2003              2003               2007             2007            2007              2007
                 Fixed Effects                                                                  Birth year x state
    Notes:
    - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
    -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean

    -All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental
    language, and locality characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                        Figure 6: Years of Educational Attainment by Rainfall in Year of Birth




Notes:
All three lines represent the lowess-smoothed educational attainment residuals for the relevant group. Educational attainment and
normalized rainfall residuals are calculated after regressing each variable on state by birth-year fixed effects and the control variables
described in section 3. Normalized rainfall residuals are trimmed at the 5th and 95th percentiles.




                                                                                   27
       We also examine the same education-rainfall relationships separately for treatment and control

villages. The control group has an inverted U- shape, which reinforces the idea that extreme deviations

from mean rainfall are harmful for children. Comparing the dotted control group line to the dashed

treatment line, there are two important features to note. First, the treatment line is above the control

line across the entire range of rainfall deviations. Consistent with our summary statistics and previous

work on PROGRESA, education outcomes are improved for those exposed longer to PROGRESA.

Second, the distance between the treatment and control lines is smallest around a normalized rainfall

deviation of zero and grows larger in the tails. Furthermore, the treatment line is much flatter compared

to the control line, indicating that PROGRESA exposure successfully mitigates the impacts of extreme

rainfall at birth on educational attainment.

       The following tables report parametric regression estimates analogous to the graphical analysis

above. Before discussing the results of equation 1, we report in Panel A of Table 7 the results of

regressions that include only the main effects of rainfall and PROGRESA exposure. The first three

columns show the regression results from our base specification, which includes state-by-year fixed

effects and household and locality controls.27 For each coefficient of interest, we report three standard

errors: first, clustered at the municipality level; second, allowing for spatial correlation using a 100km

cutoff; and third, allowing for spatial correlation using a 500km cutoff. The results in column 1 show

that one year of PROGRESA exposure leads individuals to complete 0.13 more grades of schooling on

average: this effect is significant at the 5% level. Multiplying this coefficient by 1.5 years (the number of

years between the treatment and control villages’ first exposure to PROGRESA), we obtain a treatment

effect of 0.2 years, which is consistent with previous work by Behrman et al. (2009b, 2011), which also

estimated a treatment effect of 0.2 years using a slightly different sample.

       Individuals who did not experience a negative rainfall shock at birth show a similarly sized boost in

educational attainment of 0.10 years, marginally significant using the first two types of standard errors

reported. Since our sample includes children who may not have completed their schooling yet, we also

look at the two other variables that adjust for age. Grade progression is positively impacted by both

years of exposure and normal rainfall, although these coefficients are generally not significant at the 5%

level. In column 3, we see that PROGRESA and normal rainfall have positive and significant impacts

on appropriate grade completion.
  27
     Because these results are very similar to those from a simplified specification that only includes the state-by-year fixed
effects, gender, and household size, we only report results using the more complete set of controls.



                                                              28
                     Table 7: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education Outcomes
                                                (1)                 (2)               (3)                  (4)                  (5)          (6)
                                                                                  Appropriate                                            Appropriate
                                           Educational           Grade                                Educational         Grade
                                                                                    Grade                                                  Grade
                                           Attainment          Progression                            Attainment        Progression
                                                                                  Completion                                             Completion
Panel A: Main Effects Only

 Years of PROGRESA Exposure                     0.13               0.015               0.017              0.042                -0.0082       -0.0061
                                             (0.037)***          (0.0096)           (0.0074)**           (0.046)               (0.012)       (0.011)
                                             [0.026]***         [0.0063]**         [0.0064]***           [0.033]              [0.0085]      [0.0082]
                                             {0.021}***        {0.0054}***          {0.0066}**           {0.031}              {0.0077}      {0.0092}

          Normal Rainfall                       0.10               0.012               0.027              0.066           -0.00075           0.021
                                              (0.056)*            (0.014)            (0.012)**           (0.054)           (0.014)          (0.011)*
                                              [0.062]*            [0.015]            [0.013]**           [0.050]           [0.012]          [0.012]*
                                               {0.068}            {0.015}             {0.015}*           {0.049}           {0.012}          {0.012}*

Panel B: Main Effects and Interaction

 Years of PROGRESA Exposure                     0.22               0.030              0.031                0.15                0.011         0.014
                                             (0.055)***          (0.013)**          (0.011)***          (0.058)**             (0.015)       (0.014)
                                             [0.046]***         [0.011]***         [0.0097]***         [0.043]***             [0.011]       [0.011]
                                             {0.056}***          {0.012}**         {0.0091}***         {0.043}***             {0.011}       {0.011}

          Normal Rainfall                       0.65                0.11                0.12              0.70               0.12            0.14
                                              (0.28)**           (0.056)**           (0.051)**          (0.27)***         (0.057)**       (0.054)***
                                              [0.27]**            [0.058]*           [0.049]**          [0.23]***         [0.048]**       [0.048]***
                                               {0.34}*            {0.065}*           {0.047}**          {0.25}***         {0.046}**       {0.043}***

   Normal Rainfall x Exposure                   -0.11              -0.020             -0.019              -0.13             -0.024          -0.025
                                             (0.053)**           (0.011)*            (0.010)*           (0.051)**          (0.011)**      (0.011)**
                                             [0.053]**           [0.012]*            [0.010]*          [0.044]***         [0.0095]**     [0.0096]***
                                              {0.062}*            {0.013}           {0.0091}**         {0.045}***        {0.0086}***     {0.0081}***

          Observations                         11824              11216               11824              11824                 11216         11824
   Mean of Dependent Variable                   6.79               0.58                0.46               6.79                  0.58          0.46

            Fixed Effects                                   Birth year x state                                Birth year x state, Municipality
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses, Conley standard errors using a 100km cutoff are reported in square
brackets, and Conley standard errors using a 500km cutoff are reported in curly brackets. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental
language, and locality characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                                                                             29
   In the specification with municipality fixed effects, none of the main effects are significant at the

5% level. These results, however, do not allow the investment shock to have heterogeneous impacts on

individuals with different endowments.

   We allow for this in Panel B of Table 7 which displays the results from equation 1. Again, columns

1 to 3 show the results with the baseline set of controls, while columns 4 to 6 add the municipality

fixed effects. As above, we report three sets of standard errors, which are generally quite similar. For

educational attainment in column 1, the main effects of PROGRESA and normal rainfall are positive

and significant while the interaction is negative and significant, all at the 5% level (10% level when using

the 500km Conley standard errors). The same pattern holds for grade progression and appropriate grade

completion.

   Compared to the coefficients in Panel A, both the size and the significance of the main effects

increase with the inclusion of the interaction. The coefficient on PROGRESA exposure in Panel B

represents the effect of PROGRESA for those who experienced a negative rainfall shock. The fact that

this is larger than the main effects in Panel A suggests that PROGRESA had a larger impact on those

with a lower endowment, which is verified by the significant negative interaction terms. Looking at

the magnitude of our estimates, having normal rainfall during the year of birth increases educational

attainment by 0.65 years in column 1 (our base specification); and although PROGRESA increases

educational attainment for lower-endowment individuals by 0.22 years, it only increases educational

attainment for higher-endowment individuals by 0.11 years (still positive and significant), indicating

that educational outcomes respond less for children with relatively high endowments.

   Looking at the specification with municipality fixed effects in columns 4 to 6, the pattern of the

results is the same, with positive main effects and negative interaction effects, which here dwarf the

positive main effects of PROGRESA. In the regressions on grade progression and appropriate grade

completion, the main effects of PROGRESA are positive but not significant, likely due to lack of

variation in treatment and control status within municipalities. Although municipality fixed effects are

appealing in the sense that they control for location-specific unobservables on a finer level than state,

the fact that over half of the municipalities consisted of either all treatment or all control villages reduces

the amount of variation we can exploit. For this reason, we focus on the baseline specification (reported

here in columns 1 through 3) for the remainder of the paper.

   The large magnitudes of the interaction terms in all regressions suggests a large potential for policy

interventions like PROGRESA to remediate inequalities in endowments. At 2 years of exposure –

                                                      30
the average difference between treatment and control exposure – the program mitigated 35% of the

disadvantage caused by the rainfall shock at birth in years of completed schooling. For grade progression

and appropriate grade completion, the figures are similarly high: 37% and 32%, respectively.28

                 Table 8: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Schooling Completion by Grade

                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)            (10)
                                                        Primary School                                    Junior High School                             High School

                                       3 grades      4 grades       5 grades       6 grades      7 grades       8 grades      9 grades      10 grades     11 grades       12 grades


 Years of PROGRESA Exposure              0.0022         0.012          0.018          0.023        0.055         0.054          0.065          0.019         0.0056         0.014
                                        (0.0038)     (0.0051)**     (0.0071)**     (0.0087)**    (0.016)***    (0.016)***     (0.017)***     (0.010)*       (0.0078)       (0.014)
                                        [0.0037]     [0.0049]**    [0.0063]***    [0.0078]***    [0.012]***    [0.012]***     [0.013]***     [0.010]*       [0.0081]       [0.013]
                                        {0.0041}     {0.0060}**     {0.0072}**     {0.0090}**    {0.012}***    {0.012}***     {0.015}***    {0.0081}**      {0.0050}       {0.014}

         Normal Rainfall                 -0.012        0.0090         0.031          0.036          0.20          0.23           0.25          0.065         0.072           0.10
                                        (0.020)        (0.028)       (0.038)        (0.047)      (0.070)***    (0.072)***     (0.083)***      (0.052)       (0.037)*       (0.054)*
                                        [0.019]        [0.028]       [0.034]        [0.042]      [0.064]***    [0.069]***     [0.076]***      [0.044]      [0.035]**       [0.056]*
                                        {0.021}        {0.034}       {0.035}        {0.048}      {0.064}***    {0.067}***     {0.089}***      {0.042}      {0.029}**       {0.053}*

  Normal Rainfall x Exposure             0.0020        -0.0025        -0.0052       -0.0047        -0.032        -0.040         -0.046         -0.010        -0.0059        -0.018
                                        (0.0040)      (0.0054)       (0.0072)      (0.0090)       (0.014)**    (0.013)***     (0.016)***      (0.011)       (0.0071)       (0.017)
                                        [0.0037]      [0.0053]       [0.0066]      [0.0080]       [0.013]**    [0.014]***     [0.015]***     [0.0096]       [0.0078]       [0.018]
                                        {0.0040}      {0.0061}       {0.0067}      {0.0087}      {0.012}***    {0.013}***     {0.017}***     {0.0086}       {0.0055}       {0.017}

         Observations                    11824         11824          11824         11824          10068          8285          6618          5002           3231           1592
  Mean of Dependent Variable              0.97          0.93           0.88          0.78           0.56          0.52           0.45          0.14          0.097          0.058
             Ages                       12 to 18      12 to 18       12 to 18      12 to 18       13 to 18      14 to 18       15 to 18      16 to 18       17 to 18          18
         Fixed Effects                                                                              Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses, Conley standard errors using a 100km cutoff are reported in square brackets, and Conley standard errors
using a 500km cutoff are reported in curly brackets. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality
characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




       In Table 8, we look at schooling completion by grade. We create separate dummy variables for the

completion of 3 to 8 grades of school and estimate specification 1 using these dummies as the dependent

variables. We start with 3 years of school because this is the youngest grade directly affected by the

conditional cash transfers. In each column, we restrict the sample to individuals old enough to have

completed the number of grades used in the dependent variable, which means that we are looking at

smaller samples starting in column 5.

       In columns 2 to 9, we see that the impact of PROGRESA on completing grades 4 to 11 is positive and

significant, though the coefficient magnitudes are very small (especially relative to the means) up until

the beginning of secondary school. The size of this main effect is largest in magnitude for the 7th grade

of schooling, which Behrman et al. (2011) highlight as a critical transition period (between primary and
  28
       These proportions are calculated using the results from columns 1 to 3.



                                                                                      31
secondary school) during which many children drop out. Previous literature has documented that the

positive effects of PROGRESA on educational outcomes are concentrated among children who were in

late primary school when the program began (Behrman et al., 2009b; Schultz, 2004), which is consistent

with these by-grade results. Taken together, these suggest that our main results in Table 7 are being

driven by the older children in the sample.

   Similarly, the main effect of normal rainfall only becomes positive and significant starting in 7th

grade. Prior to this, the high completion rates suggest that endowments may not matter much during

this period, as the vast majority attend school and pass. Also starting in 7th grade, we see significant

negative interaction coefficients that offer support for the potential for interventions to mitigate the

effects of early life shocks by encouraging the completion of secondary schooling among those hit by

these shocks. As in Table 7, these interaction terms are over half of the size of the main effects of

PROGRESA.

   We are also interested in how our endowment and investment shocks interact to determine skill,

not just educational attainment. We thus look at the Woodcock-Johnson dictation, word identification,

and applied problems test scores as a potential proxy for ability. The tests were administered to a

sub-sample of individuals aged 15 to 21 in 2003. We find small effects (tightly bound around 0) of

PROGRESA, rainfall, and their interaction on these tests (see Appendix Table A5). This is consistent

with previous literature (Behrman et al., 2009b), which has found no main effect of PROGRESA on

test scores.

   The lack of any PROGRESA impact on cognitive scores could potentially be due to low school

quality – sitting in a classroom does not automatically imply improvements in cognitive ability. The

null effects of PROGRESA and rainfall on cognitive scores may be an indication that cognitive ability

is not the main component of the ability endowment that is driving our empirical results, which would

be consistent with our finding that physical health and non-cognitive skills seem to be more affected

by rainfall shocks than cognitive measures (see Table 6). That being said, these null effects could also

be a result of certain features of the data. For instance, the tests may have been unable to capture

sufficient variation in cognitive ability. In the letter-word identification test, for example, almost 30%

of the sample answered everything correctly (and over 50% only made 2 mistakes) in a test of 58

questions. In addition, the fact that these tests were only administered to a sub-sample of the original

study population means smaller sample sizes that could make it more difficult to detect effects. More

important, however, is the fact that treatment status is significantly negatively related to the probability

                                                    32
of an individual being in this sample at all (i.e., having a non-missing test score). Though it is unclear

what is driving this selection,29 it is very clear that these cognitive score results should be interpreted

with caution.


4.3      Employment Outcomes

                      Table 9: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Longer-Term Outcomes

                                              (1)                (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)                (7)

                                         Currently                                         Worked in           Enrolled or   Enrolled or       Enrolled or
                                                          Worked this     Worked this
                                        Enrolled w/                                       Non-Laborer           Currently    Worked this      Worked in Non-
                                                            Week            Year
                                        HS Degree                                             Job               Working         Year           Laborer Job


 Years of PROGRESA Exposure                 0.013               0.088         0.080             0.084              0.081          0.081              0.085
                                           (0.014)            (0.043)**     (0.038)**         (0.039)**          (0.046)*        (0.044)*          (0.043)**
                                           [0.012]            [0.043]**    [0.029]***        [0.031]***          [0.048]*       [0.035]**          [0.034]**
                                           {0.013}             {0.048}*    {0.016}***        {0.025}***           {0.058}      {0.027}***         {0.022}***

         Normal Rainfall                     0.10               0.21           0.17              0.22              0.21            0.21              0.26
                                           (0.053)*            (0.15)         (0.13)           (0.13)*            (0.15)          (0.14)            (0.13)*
                                           [0.053]*            [0.15]        [0.10]*          [0.096]**           [0.16]         [0.11]*           [0.10]**
                                          {0.047}**            {0.17}      {0.059}***        {0.072}***           {0.19}        {0.085}**         {0.063}***

   Normal Rainfall x Exposure              -0.017               -0.087        -0.077           -0.099             -0.079          -0.078            -0.100
                                           (0.017)            (0.044)**      (0.039)*         (0.040)**          (0.046)*        (0.044)*          (0.042)**
                                           [0.017]            [0.043]**     [0.030]**        [0.031]***           [0.049]       [0.037]**         [0.037]***
                                           {0.016}             {0.046}*    {0.018}***        {0.023}***           {0.055}       {0.031}**         {0.025}***

         Observations                       1597                1147          1143             1143               1145            1139               1138
  Mean of Dependent Variable                0.061               0.50          0.53             0.35               0.56            0.59               0.41

           Fixed Effects                                                                  Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses, Conley standard errors using a 100km cutoff are reported in square brackets, and
Conley standard errors using a 500km cutoff are reported in curly brackets. (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and
locality characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values.
-These regressions restrict to individuals aged 18 in 2003.




       We are also interested in whether the endowment and investment shocks we study have similar

effects on longer-run labor outcomes that are not directly tied to the PROGRESA cash incentive.

Unfortunately, much of our sample is too young for us to study impacts on their employment outcomes,30

but the oldest cohort – who were 18 at the time of the 2003 survey – were just old enough to be graduating
  29
     Because treatment status does not affect overall attrition, as we show in Table 11, it must be related specifically to
sub-sample selection or individuals’ availability for test-taking.
  30
     We do not use the 2007 survey because of significant attrition problems. We also cannot use individuals who are older
than 18 in 2003 as the fraction living outside of the original household and, accordingly, missing employment data, grows
large after age 18. See section 2.1 for more details.


                                                                            33
from high school and pursuing either further education or formal employment. In this smaller sample,

we estimate the effects of PROGRESA, birth year rainfall, and their interaction on a set of variables

related to continuing education and employment after high school.

   Our first dependent variable of interest is the continuation of education after high school: this is an

indicator equal to 1 if an individual is enrolled in school (including college or vocational training) and

has already completed 12 grades of school. In columns 2 and 3, we create dummies for employment in

the week of survey and in the past year. Column 4 attempts to separate those employed in low-skilled,

intermittent jobs from the pool of employed individuals by using an indicator equal to 1 if an individual

was employed and worked in a non-laborer job; that is, those who were working as spot laborers were

grouped in the same category as the unemployed. In the last 3 columns, we take the stance that both

continued enrollment and employment are “desirable” outcomes, and create dummies that combine

the continued enrollment variable with each of our employment variables. For instance, the dependent

variable in column 5 is an indicator equal to 1 if individuals report either being currently enrolled or

having worked that week.

   An important takeaway from this table is the consistent pattern of coefficients across all columns:

both main effects are positive, while interaction terms are all negative. Some of the coefficients are

imprecisely estimated, which is unsurprising given the much smaller sample sizes, but the overall pat-

tern clearly suggests that the mitigative effects of PROGRESA are not limited to school-aged out-

comes directly incentivized by the program. The results in columns 4 and 7 are particularly striking.

Normal birth-year rainfall significantly increases the probability of an individual being employed in

a non-laborer (i.e., higher skill and more stable) job, and PROGRESA also has a positive effect for

individuals who experienced negative rainfall shocks. But the effect of PROGRESA is essentially zero

for higher-endowment children. That is, PROGRESA has significant impacts on the probability of sta-

ble employment immediately following high school completion among disadvantaged children, but no

impact on children with higher endowments. Taken in sum, these results illustrate the ability of invest-

ments in adolescence to offset the impacts of insults in early life and the higher return to investments

for disadvantaged children.




                                                   34
                                        Table 10: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Fertility
                                                               (1)                    (2)                    (3)                  (4)                   (5)                    (6)
                                                        Locality-Level                                                   Individual-Level
                                                                                                    Birth spacing (in     Mother's ideal                                    Number of
                                                       Total number of          Number of                                                        Mother wants
                                                                                                     days) between         number of                                        additional
                                                           children           younger siblings                                                   more children
                                                                                                    younger sibling         children                                     children desired

          Years of PROGRESA Exposure                                                0.023*                  -13.8                 -0.12              -0.0040                 -0.073
                                                                                    (0.013)                (13.7)                (0.12)              (0.017)                 (0.052)

                   Normal Rainfall                            0.090                  0.10                   -29.1                0.067               -0.089                    -0.18
                                                              (0.16)                (0.066)                (80.0)                (0.52)              (0.074)                  (0.17)

            Nornal Rainfall x Exposure                                              -0.020                  6.37                 -0.018               0.022                   0.046
                                                                                    (0.013)                (15.5)                (0.10)              (0.015)                 (0.034)

                   Observations                               0.090                 11686                  7230                  2057                 2027                    2091
            Mean of Dependent Variable                        (0.16)                 1.98                 1107.9                 4.34                 0.091                   0.076

                     Fixed Effects                     Birth year x state                                                Birth year x state
   Notes:
      - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
      - For locality-level analysis, the unit of observation is birth-year-locality.
      -All specifications include locality controls and individual/household characteristics (gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition,
      parental education and language). For the locality-level variables, these are averaged at the locality-birth-year level.
      -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for locality birth years that experienced rainfall levels within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean.
      -The dependent variables in columns 4 to 6 are only available for a random subset of mothers.




4.4       Robustness Checks

4.4.1        Selective Fertility

In Table 10 we investigate how PROGRESA and rainfall shocks may have affected fertility, which could

lead to potential selection issues. One concern might be that negative rainfall shocks during a year may

affect the number of children that are born and/or survive to school-aged years. If this were the case,

the composition of individuals in our sample who were born in shock years would be different from

those in our sample born in regular years. In order to check this, we collapse to the locality by birth

year level and count the total number of children born in a particular year in each locality. We then

use this constructed panel to regress the total number of children born that year on our rainfall shock.

Column 1 of Table 10 reports results from this regression. We find no evidence of selective fertility or

selective child mortality.

   Our next test is to check whether PROGRESA, rainfall shocks, and their interaction had any impact

on mothers’ subsequent fertility decisions. Specifically, we might be concerned that a good rainfall shock

would increase the likelihood of having more children (or total fertility), or decrease the birth spacing

between children, just as exposure to PROGRESA may do the same (by lowering the opportunity cost of

having children). If this were the case, an individual’s exposure to PROGRESA or rainfall shocks would


                                                                                              35
also be related to intrahousehold allocation issues that may vary with the total number of siblings and

spacing between siblings. To check for this, we estimate equation 1, again at the individual level, using

number of younger siblings and birth spacing between next youngest sibling (in days) as dependent

variables. With one exception (which is very small in magnitude), the main effects and interaction

effects in columns 2 and 3 are all insignificant.

   In addition to investigating effects on actual fertility, we also ask whether PROGRESA or rainfall

affected planned or expected fertility. To answer this question, we use questions on expected and desired

fertility for the mothers of our sample children who were part of a detailed fertility questionnaire sub-

sample. We do not find that rainfall shocks (or PROGRESA) affected the total number of desired

children or the desire for additional children, as we show in the last three columns of Table 10.


4.4.2   Attrition

                           Table 11: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Attrition
                                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                                                                Meets Data          Non-missing         Non-missing
                                                            Household
                                                                                  Quality            education          employment
                                                           found in 2003
                                                                                Restrictions          variable            variable

                  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                    -0.0042            -0.0034              0.0034               -0.033
                                                               (0.0089)           (0.0038)             (0.0037)             (0.038)

                           Normal Rainfall                      -0.034              -0.030             0.0017                -0.13
                                                               (0.038)             (0.023)             (0.019)              (0.14)

                    Normal Rainfall x Exposure                  0.0065             0.0049             0.000028               0.039
                                                               (0.0076)           (0.0045)            (0.0037)              (0.040)

                          Observations                          14525              12917              12159                  1646
                   Mean of Dependent Variable                    0.89               0.94               0.97                  0.70
                              Ages                             12 to 18           12 to 18           12 to 18                 18
                          Fixed Effects                                                Birth year x state
               Notes:
               - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
               -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year
               historical locality-specific mean
               - The sample in column 2 restricts to households found in 2003, while columns 3 and 4 restrict to those that meet
               data quality restrictions.




   As in any longitudinal study, we must consider the extent to which selective attrition may be

confounding our results. In Table 11, we show that although attrition between the baseline and 2003

surveys was sizeable, it appears to be uncorrelated with our regressors of interest. In this table, we simply

regress various attrition indicators on years of PROGRESA exposure, the positive rainfall indicator,


                                                                          36
their interaction, and state by birth year fixed effects. In column 1, we investigate household attrition,

including all eligible individuals in the baseline survey who would have been aged 12 to 18 in 2003. We

do not find that our investment or endowment shocks influenced the likelihood of a household being

dropped from the 2003 sample. In column 2, conditional on the household being found in 2003, we show

that our regressors of interest do not significantly predict the likelihood of an individual being included

in our sample given the data quality restrictions we impose (matching genders across surveys and birth

year differences of less than 2 years). Finally, in columns 3 and 4, we investigate whether the shocks

predict the probability that an individual – who is found in 2003 and meets the data quality restrictions

– has non-missing education and employment variables (restricting of course to 18-year-olds in column

4). We do not find any evidence of either.


4.4.3      Migration

In addition to selective fertility and attrition, selective migration in response to rainfall shocks could

also be a concern. In particular, we might worry that permanent household-level migration responds to

rainfall shocks, which would mean that year-of-birth rainfall shocks might affect the probability of an

individual showing up in our PROGRESA localities in the first place. Unfortunately, we cannot study

the migration behavior of households that never made it into our sample. What we can do is check

whether rainfall shocks in 1997 affect the probability of a household participating in the 2003 survey:

this six-year gap between the shock and migration outcome would capture more delayed migration

responses, similar to what might have occurred for individuals whose household migrated before they

started school. Although migration is not the only reason a household could be missing from the sample

in 2003, it is likely the main one, and as we show in Table A6, we find no effects of 1997 rainfall shocks

on this migration-related outcome.

       Another potential issue is that rainfall shocks during an individual’s year of birth might affect the

temporary (rather than permanent) migration decisions of their parents. If a child grows up without a

father in the household as a result, this could generate effects on their development separate from the

mechanisms we have focused on in this paper. Therefore, in Table A6, we check to see whether rainfall

shocks at birth affect the likelihood of a child’s father being present in the household during the 1997

survey (the survey closest to the time of birth), and find no evidence of this.31
  31
    Of course, this variable does not fully capture a fathers presence throughout the child’s life, particularly in the early
years, which could still have been affected by year-of-birth rainfall shocks. Even if this were the case, however, we do not
view an absent father as a threat to identification but rather another potential mechanism through which adverse rainfall


                                                             37
4.4.4    Balance

We investigate further the implications of the small but statistically significant imbalance in rainfall

shock prevalence across PROGRESA treatment and control villages in our baseline sample. First, to

test whether our results are being driven by this imbalance, we repeat our analysis using the trimmed

sample described in Section 2, in which rainfall shock prevalence is the same across treatment and

control villages. This sample omits localities exhibiting shocks in every year, or no shocks in any year,

over the study period. As Table A7 shows, our results are virtually identical to the full sample results.32

    Another way to approach this issue is by comparing our original estimates to results obtained from

a weighted regression, where we use inverse probability weighting to re-weight the observations so

that the distribution of rainfall shocks is the same across treatment and control groups. As shown in

Table A8, the point estimates are almost identical to the results in Tables 7, 8, and 9, suggesting that

the statistically significant imbalance was too small in magnitude to substantially affect our original

estimates.

    We also conduct a robustness exercise regarding the unbalanced demographic characteristics across

treatment and control villages in Appendix Table A2, which we discuss in section 2 and which have

been identified in previous studies. Table A10 reports the results of regressions on our main outcomes

of interest, additionally controlling for interactions between the rainfall shock variable and each of the

control variables that are not balanced across treatment and control groups. The results are once again

very similar to the main results reported above.

    Finally, we address the imbalance in age across treatment villages and rainfall shock groups, which

was revealed by the balance checks conducted in Table A4. Because we include birth year fixed effects in

our regressions, we are not concerned about these imbalances affecting the estimation of the PROGRESA

and rainfall shock main effects. However, these imbalances could be affecting the estimation of the

interaction effect, if there is any heterogeneity by age. To address this problem, we use inverse probability

weighting to re-weight our sample so that the age distributions are balanced across treatment and control

as well as across individuals born during normal and shock years. The results in Table A9,33 if anything,

are stronger after using this weighting procedure, which suggests that our results were not a spurious
shocks could have affected later-life educational outcomes, likely much less important than the biological mechanisms
discussed in section 4.1.
  32
     Because our previous results revealed little difference across the three types of standard errors used, we only show
standard errors clustered at the municipality level in this table and for the remainder of this section.
  33
     We only report our educational outcomes here because the age-weighting is irrelevant for the employment outcomes
that involve only one age cohort.



                                                           38
consequence of this age imbalance.


4.4.5      Other Programs

One potential threat to validity is the rollout of other programs during the period between the birth

years of our sample individuals and our survey year, 2003. In particular, though we argue that the

occurrence of a rainfall shock is random, it is possible that a rainfall shock in a given year affects the

probability of a household or locality being the target of another program in subsequent years. This of

course is more of a concern in situations where localities are hit by repeated shocks, which are more likely

to affect future agricultural activity than a single shock. To this end, the exercise conducted in Table

A7 helps alleviate these concerns by showing that the exclusion of localities hit by multiple consecutive

shocks does not affect our results. We also directly address this issue by controlling specifically for

programs or reforms targeted to individuals based on agricultural activity.

       The Program for Direct Assistance in Agriculture (PROCAMPO) was a cash transfer program

introduced in 1994 in order to compensate for the anticipated negative effects of NAFTA on rural

incomes (Sadoulet et al., 2001). Land use in 1993 was used to determine eligibility for the program

as well as the size of all future payments: transfers were made per hectare of land that was used to

grow at least one of the following crops: corn, beans, rice, wheat, sorghum, barley, soybeans, cotton, or

cardamom. The 2003 survey asks whether anyone in the household receives PROCAMPO payments,

and we use this as an additional control in our next set of regressions.

       In general, the effects of the trade liberalization reforms that took place in the 1990’s likely varied

across localities, and one important source of variation in these effects were the types of crops grown

in each village. Price changes as a result of trade liberalization were clearly crop-specific, as were the

support policies implemented to protect farmers.34 In short, an important concern is whether trends

over time varied for localities growing different types of crops. To address this concern, we create

indicators for whether a locality reports corn, kidney beans, or sugar as one of their top three crops,

and interact these indicators with individual birth year dummies.

       Finally, we also control for the rollout of a land certification program (PROCEDE) that essentially

eliminated the link between land use and land rights in communally farmed agricultural communities

called ejidos. PROCEDE has been found to have affected migration decisions (De Janvry et al., 2015)
  34
    For example, import quotas for most traditional crops – except maize and beans – were eliminated in 1991. Similarly,
although tariffs for most commodities were phased out by 2006, transitional tariffs for maize, dry edible beans, milk, and
sugar were not scheduled to be phased out until 2008 (OECD, 2006).


                                                           39
and therefore might have also affected the returns to and opportunity costs of schooling. Controlling for

the age of an individual in the year their locality was certified,35 we address concerns that correlations

between PROCEDE’s rollout and rainfall shocks might be confounding our estimates.

    Appendix Table A11 addresses all of these concerns by running our main regressions with the

addition of several controls: an indicator for PROCAMPO recipients, crop variables interacted with

birth year dummies, and individual age during PROCEDE rollout. Our results are robust to these

adjustments.


4.4.6    Alternate Variable Definitions

We investigate the robustness of our results to other methods of defining our two main independent

variables of interest. First, we show that our results are robust to replacing our PROGRESA exposure

variable (rounded to the nearest year) with a simple treatment village indicator (Table A12) and a

years of exposure variable that is not rounded to the nearest year (Table A13). Our pattern of results is

preserved across both variables and all outcomes. In Table A12, the effects are slightly weaker for some

outcomes, which indicates that the additional cohort-level variation linked to the schooling incentive is

important.

    In our main results, we generate rainfall shocks by calculating historical means (and standard de-

viations) for each locality birth-year observation using locality-level rainfall over the 10 years prior to

each relevant year. In Table A14, we instead calculate these values using rainfall over the 20-year period

centered around the median birth year in the sample, from 1978 to 1998. Our results are robust to the

use of this longer time-frame that is consistent across all years.

    We have chosen the simple rainfall indicator that we use in the main results because it is parsi-

monious, captures non-linearities, and easy to interpret. However, we can certainly allow for greater

flexibility in this specification, which we do in Table A15. Here, we replace our simple indicator with

four dummy variables for normalized birth-year rainfall below the 20th percentile (“droughts”), between

the 20th and 40th percentile (“below normal”), between the 60th and 80th percentile (“above normal”),

and above the 80th percentile (“floods”) of the normalized rainfall distribution. Rainfall around the

median – 40th to 60th percentile – is the omitted category.36 Consistent with our main results, we see
  35
     We obtain this data from De Janvry et al. (2015), which restricts attention to ejidos that were certified after 1996.
Therefore, we are unable to distinguish between ejido localities certified in 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, and localities that were
not part of an ejido at all. For individuals in this category, we set the PROCEDE age variable to zero and include a
dummy for missing PROCEDE information.
  36
     Droughts and floods are roughly (though not exactly) equivalent to using the one-standard-deviation cutoff that we


                                                             40
that floods and droughts have negative effects on our outcomes of interest (larger in magnitude than

the insignificant effects of the “below median” and “above median” dummies). We also find that the

interactions between both droughts and floods with PROGRESA exposure are significant and indicative

of remediation, across the majority of education outcomes. There is very little precision in any of our

employment regressions, due to the very small sample sizes and much more demanding empirical speci-

fication. In terms of magnitudes, the drought main effects and interactions appear to be slightly larger

than the respective flood coefficients, but it is worth noting that the difference between the magnitudes

of these drought and flood effects (and their associated interaction effects) are not significantly different

from zero, which validates our use of a simple indicator that combines these two types of shocks.

    We focus on rainfall shocks in an individual’s year of birth, specifically, because we are interested in

shocks that affect a child’s endowment very early in life. A shock to the endowment during the year of

birth should provide the cleanest and earliest source of exogenous variation, but it is of course possible

that shocks during early childhood could also affect later-life outcomes. To investigate whether shocks

in other years of life had similar positive effects on later-life outcomes, and similar interactions with

PROGRESA, we add additional rainfall shock variables to our regressions and report the results in

Table A16. Specifically, we add indicators for normal rainfall realizations during an individual’s first,

second, and third year of life, along with their interactions with PROGRESA exposure. Consistent

with Maccini and Yang (2009), we find that year of birth rainfall is the only one that has consistently

large and significant effects across all of our education outcomes. Accordingly, PROGRESA’s ability to

remediate is only apparent with respect to birth-year rainfall and not rainfall in any other year. Like

in Table A15, the inclusion of a number of additional regressors to the employment regressions leads

to a general lack of precision in the last three columns, but it is important to note that – across both

employment and education outcomes – our three main coefficients of interest are almost identical in

magnitude to the estimates in Tables 7, 8, and 9.



5     Model and Interpretation

5.1    Model of Endogenous Schooling

Having established empirically that PROGRESA was able to help remediate for the disadvantage gen-

erated by a negative early life shock, we now use an endogenous schooling choice model to explore what
use for our main normal rainfall dummy.


                                                     41
might be generating this remediation. We extend the model in Card (2001) by allowing individuals to

have heterogeneous initial endowments that affect future earnings. We study how the optimal level of

schooling changes with the initial endowment and with exogenous education policies, like PROGRESA,

that attempt to reduce the opportunity cost of schooling.

      We assume that individuals have an infinite time horizon: they attend school during the first S

periods of life and work full-time for the rest of it. Individuals have an initial level of endowment, ω,

that affects the earnings function in each period. While in school, the utility in period t depends on

the level of consumption, u (c (t)),37 and the effort cost for the t-th year of schooling, φ (t): specifically,

in-school utility is equal to u (c (t)) − φ (t). Out of school, the utility is u (c (t)). Finally, individuals

discount future flows at a rate ρ.

      Conditional on schooling S and a consumption profile, life-cycle utility is

                                              Z       S                                   Z   ∞
                             V (S, c (t)) =               [u (c (t)) − φ (t)] e−ρt dt +           u (c (t)) e−ρt dt.
                                                  0                                       S

Let y (ω, S, t) be the earnings function at period t of an individual with initial endowment ω, S years

of schooling, and t ≥ S years of post-schooling experience. We assume that while in school, individuals

pay tuition costs minus the scholarship provided by PROGRESA at each period of time, T (t) − x (t),

and work part-time earning P (t) in period t. Individuals borrow or lend at a fixed interest rate R.

Thus the intertemporal budget constraint is

                  Z     ∞                     Z   S                                           Z    ∞
                            c (t) e−Rt dt ≤           [P (t) − T (t) + x(t)] e−Rt dt +                 y (ω, S, t) e−Rt dt.
                    0                         0                                                   S

      We now introduce two simple assumptions, similar to those used by Card (2001), that help us

characterize the optimal level of schooling.



      Assumption 1. y (ω, S, t) ≡ f (ω, S) h (t − S), where h (0) = 1 and f (·) is increasing with respect

to ω and S, and concave with respect to S, for all ω.



      A1 assumes that the log of earnings is additively separable in years of post-schooling experience,

and a function of an individual’s education and initial endowment. We also assume that the earnings

are increasing with respect to the initial endowment and the level of schooling, and exhibit decreasing
 37
      We assume that u (·) is increasing and concave.


                                                                        42
marginal returns to schooling for all levels of the initial endowment.



       Assumption 2 φ (t) is increasing and convex with respect to t.



       When u (c (t)) = log c (t) (as in Card (2001)), we show in the appendix (section B.2) that the optimal

level of schooling, S ∗ is uniquely defined by38

                                                                                           
                                    ∗          1      T −P −x                       ∗
                          Γ (ω, S ) −             +       ∗
                                                                   + ρφ (S ∗ ) e−ρS             = 0,                      (2)
                                             H (R) f (ω, S ) H (R)
                     fS (ω,S)                                                                           1        T −P −x
where Γ (ω, S) ≡      f (ω,S) ,   which is the marginal return to schooling. Let d (x, ω, S) ≡         H(R) + f (ω,S)H(R) +

ρφ (S) e−ρS , be the marginal cost of schooling standardized by lifetime earnings.39 The following lemma

describes how PROGRESA and the initial endowment affect the optimal level of schooling.



       Lemma 1. Suppose (A1) and (A2) hold.
                                                                                                           ∂S ∗
       (i) The optimal level of schooling is increasing with respect to PROGRESA x, i.e.,                   ∂x    > 0.

       (ii) If f (·) is log-supermodular with respect to (S, w),40 the optimal level of schooling is increasing
                                                         ∂S ∗
with respect to the initial endowment, ω, i.e.,          ∂ω     > 0.41


5.2       What drives remediation?

We now study how PROGRESA affects the optimal level of schooling, S ∗ , differently for individuals

with different levels of the initial endowment. We explore what factors determine whether we see

reinforcement (larger PROGRESA effects for higher-endowment individuals) or remediation (larger

PROGRESA effects for lower-endowment individuals). In other words, we study under what conditions
 ∂S ∗
∂ω∂x     is positive or negative in equilibrium. In Appendix section B.3, we explore remediation and
  38
     In order to simplify the discussion we follow Card (2001) and impose two additional assumptions: first, we assume
that tuition cost minus part-time earnings minus PROGRESA subsidy are constant over time. Second, we assume that
tuition costs minus PROGRESA are small relative to lifetime earnings.
  39
     Similar to Card (2001) we assume that the marginal cost of schooling standardized by the life time earnings is increasing
with S, i.e., dS = − (T −P  −x)fS (ω,S)      ∂
                                               φ (S) e−ρS > 0.
                                                          
                        f (ω,S)H(R)
                                        + ρ ∂S
  40
     In the proof of Lemma 1 we show that (ii) holds even if f (·) is not log-supermodular with respect to (S, w), e.g.,
suppose that f (·) is log-submodular with respect to (S, w). In this case, we need the marginal cost with respect to the
endowment to be negative and sufficiently large inabsolute value, to offset the negative effect of the endowment on the
                                                     ∂   fs (ω,S)
marginal return of schooling, i.e., dω (x, ω, S) + ∂ω    f (ω,S)
                                                                  > 0. For simplicity we assume for the rest of the paper that
f (·) is log-supermodular with respect to (S, w).
   41
      In the appendix, Lemma 2 presents a similar result to Lemma 1 related to the optimal income function in equilibrium,
f (ω, S ∗ ).




                                                                43
reinforcement in terms of equilibrium income, y ∗ .

       Whether PROGRESA generates reinforcement or remediation depends on,42


               ∂S ∗                                                   ∂2 
                                                                                       
                                   ∗                ∗                          ∗ −ρS ∗
                    = α1 ΓSω (ω, S ) − Θ (x, ω, S ) + α3 ΓSS − ρ 2         φ (S ) e         ,         (3)
              ∂ω∂x                                                   ∂ S
                                                                                     
                     ∂2                                     fω (ω,S)           fS (ω,S)
where ΓSω (ω, S) = ∂ω∂S Γ (S, x, ω), Θ (x, ω, S ∗ ) ≡ α4 f (ω,S)H(R)   + α2 f (ω,S)H(R)               Λx
                                                                                          , and, α1 ≡ Λ2 ,
                                                                                                                          S
         Λω
α2 ≡     Λ2S
             ,   α3 ≡   − ΛΛx Λ3 ω   and α4 ≡   − Λ1S   where Λ ≡ Γ (ω, S) − d (x, S). Note that αi > 0 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
                               S

Similarly, Θ (x, ω, S ∗ ) > 0, since f (ω, S) is increasing with respect ω and S.



       Proposition 1. Suppose (A1)-(A2) hold in equilibrium. If the expression in (3) is negative, PRO-

GRESA generates remediation – larger PROGRESA effects (on the optimal level of schooling, S ∗ ) for

lower-endowment individuals. If this expression is positive, PROGRESA generates reinforcement –

larger effects for higher-endowment individuals.



       To shed light on what factors may be driving the remediation that we find in our empirical analysis,

we discuss each term. We begin with the second term, Θ (x, ω, S ∗ ) – the weighted sum of two positive
                                         ∂S ∗
terms – which enters the                ∂ω∂x    expression (3) negatively and is therefore a key factor contributing to

remediation. This term captures how PROGRESA changes the cost of schooling (relative to foregone

earnings) differently for high-endowment and low-endowment individuals. The fact that this term is

positive means that PROGRESA decreases the relative cost of schooling more for lower-endowment

individuals, and therefore generates larger increases in optimal schooling for these lower-endowment

individuals compared to higher-endowment individuals. We explore the reasons for this in appendix

section B.1.1. Intuitively, PROGRESA has a larger effect on lower-endowment individuals because

the nominal value of the transfer is a larger share of their earnings compared to higher-endowment

individuals, who have higher foregone earnings.
                                                                    ∂S ∗                              2               ∗
       We now move on to the third term in the                     ∂ω∂x    expression (3), ΓSS − ρ ∂∂2 S φ (S ∗ ) e−ρS . The

first part, ΓSS , depends on the third derivative of log f (·), which is difficult to interpret. However, the
                   2              ∗
second term, ρ ∂∂2 S φ (S ∗ ) e−ρS , is positive due to the convexity of the cost function (assumption A2)

and therefore has a negative effect on the entire expression. Importantly, this identifies convex effort

costs as another potential reason for the remediation we find in our empirical analysis. Because high
  42
    To simplify the notation, we follow Card (2001) and assume that savings during school are close to zero i.e.,
(T − P − x) ≈ 0. In the appendix we discuss the more general case in which (T − P − x) is different from 0.


                                                                     44
ability individuals obtain more schooling, absent the PROGRESA incentive, it is more difficult for a

program like PROGRESA to increase the schooling of a high-endowment individual (compared to a

low-endowment individual) due to the effort cost curve being steeper at the higher level of schooling of

higher-endowment individuals. It is important to note, however, that we cannot make any statements

about how changes in the convexity will affect the overall sign and magnitude of the expression in

equation 3 because the weights αi also depend on the convexity of the cost function.

       These two dimensions of the cost of schooling are the main reasons for the remediation we are

finding in this empirical context. However, the shape of the earnings function is also involved in the

first term of (3). Specifically, ΓSω (ω, S) measures how the curvature of the log earnings function, with

respect to schooling, changes with the initial endowment. To better understand the sign of ΓSω (ω, S),

suppose that f (·) can be approximated by a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) function, i.e.,
                                       1
f (ω, S) = A · [λω κ + (1 − λ) S κ ] κ , where λ ∈ [0, 1].43 In the appendix (section B.1.2), we show that

ΓSω (ω, S) < 0 if κ < 0, given that the contribution of both inputs are similar. That is, the first term

of (3) is negative if schooling and endowments are complements.44 Similarly, ΓSω (ω, S) = 0 if κ = 0,

that is, ΓSω (ω, S) = 0 if f (·) is a Cobb-Douglas function.

       Although we can make these claims about the sign of the first term, ΓSω (ω, S), it is important to

note that the expression in (3) does not become more negative (or positive) as κ approaches to −∞,

as the other terms of (3) also depend on κ. That is, we cannot claim any monotonicity in the relation-
                  ∂S ∗
ship between     ∂ω∂x    and κ, the degree of complementarity or substitutability between the endowment

and schooling in the earnings function. Remediation – that is, larger PROGRESA effects for lower-

endowment individuals – is possible whether schooling and endowments are complements or substitutes

in the earnings function. As we have shown here, the level of schooling is the result of an optimization

problem, not a direct output of some “production” function – which means that complementarity (or

substitutability) in the earnings function does not imply reinforcement (or remediation). Similarly, re-

mediation itself does not necessarily imply complementarity or substitutability in the earnings function.
  43
     κ determines the elasticity of substitution between the level of schooling and the initial endowment in the earnings
                                  1
function, which is defined by 1−κ    , and A is a factor-neutral productivity parameter. Under this technology, κ ∈ [−∞, 1];
as κ approaches 1, the level of schooling and the initial endowment become perfect substitutes and as κ approaches −∞,
the factors become perfect complements.
  44
     This might seem counter-intuitive because complementarity in the production function is often assumed to imply
reinforcement – larger positive effects of an intervention on high-endowment individuals. However, as we discuss below,
the level of schooling is the result of an optimization problem, and not a direct output of the earnings or “production”
function. Here, complementarity between schooling and endowments in the production function mean that the marginal
benefit of schooling, relative to foregone earnings, will increase more for low endowment than high endowment individuals
due to the lower value of their foregone earnings.



                                                            45
On the other hand, convex effort costs and lower foregone wages for low-endowment individuals are

primary factors driving the remediation we find in our empirical context irrespective of the shape of the

earnings function.



6    Conclusion

In this paper, we leverage the combination of two sources of exogenous variation – in early life circum-

stance and investments during childhood – to study whether (and the extent to which) it is possible

to mitigate the impact of early life shocks, a question that is usually confounded by the endogeneity of

investment responses. Using the PROGRESA experiment and year-of-birth rainfall shocks, we study

the impacts of these investment and endowment shocks on educational attainment and employment

outcomes.

    We find that better early-life circumstance and more investments generate higher schooling attain-

ment and employment probabilities. Moreover, the coefficient on the interaction between PROGRESA

exposure and normal rainfall is negative and significant across most outcome measures, indicating that

remediation of early-life shocks is possible through investments.

    The magnitude of the interaction term is telling: in most cases, it is over half of the size of the main

effect of PROGRESA, suggesting that cash transfer programs like PROGRESA have the potential to

offset almost entirely the inequality generated by early life circumstances. We find similar patterns when

studying continued education and employment outcomes in a sub-sample of older individuals. That is,

longer-run post-schooling labor outcomes exhibit the potential for remediation as well.

    This study contributes to the large literature evaluating PROGRESA, and more specifically, to

our knowledge about the program’s ability to mitigate shocks. Two studies investigate the ability

of PROGRESA to mitigate for contemporaneous weather shocks and find mixed results: De Janvry

et al. (2006) find that PROGRESA protected child enrollment from declining due to contemporaneous

weather shocks, but Aguilar and Vicarelli (2011) find that the health component of the program did

not mitigate the negative impact of a 1999 El Niño shock on child development. Unlike both of these

studies, we look at shocks that took place over a decade prior to the beginning of the program and find

strong evidence for remediation with respect to educational outcomes.

    Our results also speak to the literature on cash transfer programs more generally (Behrman et al.,

2011; Blattman et al., 2013; Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013; Schultz, 2004). While most evaluations of


                                                    46
such programs tend to focus on average effects, we compare impacts across individuals with different

unobserved endowments, exploiting rainfall shocks as our source of exogenous variation in this unob-

servable. PROGRESA had a very targeted impact on those who experienced negative shocks early in

life. An important finding for policymakers, this suggests that programs like these may be most efficient

if targeted toward the disadvantaged – not just in terms of income (as PROGRESA already targets the

poor) but also in terms of endowments. While the challenges involved with this sort of targeting are

not trivial, our results offer reason for optimism about the ability of policies to mitigate the negative

impacts and inequality generated by early life shocks.




                                                   47
References

Acemoglu, D., Autor, D. H., and Lyle, D. (2004). Women, war, and wages: The effect of female labor

  supply on the wage structure at midcentury. Journal of Political Economy, 112(3):497–551.

Adhvaryu, A., Fenske, J., and Nyshadham, A. (2016). Early life circumstance and adult mental health.

  Technical report, Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.

Aguilar, A. and Vicarelli, M. (2011). El nino and mexican children: medium-term effects of early-life

  weather shocks on cognitive and health outcomes. Cambridge, United States: Harvard University,

  Department of Economics. Manuscript.

Aizer, A., Eli, S., Ferrie, J., and Lleras-Muney, A. (2016). The long-run impact of cash transfers to

  poor families. American Economic Review, 106(4):935–71.

Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 Influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero Influenza

  exposure in the post-1940 US population. Journal of Political Economy, 114(4):672–712.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011). Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis. The Journal of

  Economic Perspectives, 25(3):153–172.

Almond, D. and Mazumder, B. (2013). Fetal origins and parental responses. Annu. Rev. Econ., 5(1):37–

  56.

Andalón, M. (2011). Oportunidades to reduce overweight and obesity in mexico? Health economics,

  20(S1):1–18.

Angelucci, M. and De Giorgi, G. (2009). Indirect effects of an aid program: how do cash transfers affect

  ineligibles’ consumption? The American Economic Review, 99(1):486–508.

Barber, S. L. and Gertler, P. J. (2008). The impact of mexico’s conditional cash transfer programme,

  oportunidades, on birthweight. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 13(11):1405–1414.

Barham, T. (2011). A healthier start: the effect of conditional cash transfers on neonatal and infant

  mortality in rural mexico. Journal of Development Economics, 94(1):74–85.

Barham, T. and Rowberry, J. (2013). Living longer: The effect of the mexican conditional cash transfer

  program on elderly mortality. Journal of Development Economics, 105:226–236.

                                                  48
Behrman, J. R., Calderon, M. C., Preston, S. H., Hoddinott, J., Martorell, R., and Stein, A. D.

  (2009a). Nutritional supplementation in girls influences the growth of their children: prospective

  study in guatemala. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 90(5):1372–1379.

Behrman, J. R., Fernald, L., Gertler, P., Neufeld, L. M., and Parker, S. (2008). Long-term effects of

  Oportunidades on rural infant and toddler development, education and nutrition after almost a decade

  of exposure to the program, volume I, chapter 1, pages 15–58. Secretarı́a de Desarrollo Social.

Behrman, J. R. and Hoddinott, J. (2005). Programme evaluation with unobserved heterogeneity and se-

  lective implementation: The mexican progresa impact on child nutrition. Oxford bulletin of economics

  and statistics, 67(4):547–569.

Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., and Todd, P. E. (2009b). Medium-term impacts of the oportunidades

  conditional cash transfer program on rural youth in mexico. Poverty, Inequality and Policy in Latin

  America, pages 219–70.

Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., and Todd, P. E. (2011). Do conditional cash transfers for schooling gen-

  erate lasting benefits? a five-year followup of progresa/oportunidades. Journal of Human Resources,

  46(1):93–122.

Behrman, J. R., Sengupta, P., and Todd, P. (2005). Progressing through progresa: An impact assessment

  of a school subsidy experiment in rural mexico. Economic development and cultural change, 54(1):237–

  275.

Behrman, J. R. and Todd, P. E. (1999). Randomness in the experimental samples of progresa (education,

  health, and nutrition program). International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Bitler, M. P., Hoynes, H. W., and Domina, T. (2014). Experimental evidence on distributional effects

  of head start. Technical Report 20434, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blattman, C., Fiala, N., and Martinez, S. (2013). The economic and social returns to cash transfers:

  Evidence from a ugandan aid program. Technical report, CEGA Working Paper.

Bleakley, H. (2007). Disease and development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the American

  South. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):73–117.




                                                  49
Bleakley, H. (2010). Malaria eradication in the Americas: A retrospective analysis of childhood exposure.

  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2):1–45.

Bobonis, G. J. (2009). Is the allocation of resources within the household efficient? new evidence from

  a randomized experiment. Journal of Political Economy, 117(3):453–503.

Card, D. (2001). Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric problems.

  Econometrica, 69(5):1127–1160.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., and Katz, L. F. (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on

  children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. American Economic Review,

  106(4):855–902.

Conley, T. (1999). Gmm estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of Econometrics, 92(1):1–

  45.

Conti, G. and Heckman, J. J. (2014). Economics of child well-being. Springer.

Conti, G., Heckman, J. J., and Pinto, R. (2015). The effects of two influential early childhood interven-

  tions on health and healthy behaviors. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Crookston, B. T., Penny, M. E., Alder, S. C., Dickerson, T. T., Merrill, R. M., Stanford, J. B., Porucznik,

  C. A., and Dearden, K. A. (2010). Children who recover from early stunting and children who are

  not stunted demonstrate similar levels of cognition. The Journal of nutrition, 140(11):1996–2001.

Crookston, B. T., Schott, W., Cueto, S., Dearden, K. A., Engle, P., Georgiadis, A., Lundeen, E. A.,

  Penny, M. E., Stein, A. D., and Behrman, J. R. (2013). Postinfancy growth, schooling, and cognitive

  achievement: Young lives. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 98(6):1555–1563.

Cueto, S., León, J., Miranda, A., Dearden, K., Crookston, B. T., and Behrman, J. R. (2016). Does

  pre-school improve cognitive abilities among children with early-life stunting? a longitudinal study

  for peru. International journal of educational research, 75:102–114.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L., and Masterov, D. V. (2006). Interpreting the evidence on life

  cycle skill formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education, 1:697–812.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., and Schennach, S. M. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive and

  noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931.

                                                    50
Currie, J. and Vogl, T. (2012). Early-life health and adult circumstance in developing countries. Annual

  Review of Economics, 5:1–36.

De Janvry, A., Emerick, K., Gonzalez-Navarro, M., and Sadoulet, E. (2015). Delinking land rights from

  land use: Certification and migration in mexico. The American Economic Review, 105(10):3125–3149.

De Janvry, A., Finan, F., Sadoulet, E., and Vakis, R. (2006). Can conditional cash transfer programs

  serve as safety nets in keeping children at school and from working when exposed to shocks? Journal

  of Development Economics, 79(2):349–373.

Dinkelman, T. (2013). Mitigating long-run health effects of drought: Evidence from south africa.

  Technical Report 19756, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Djebbari, H. and Smith, J. (2008). Heterogeneous impacts in progresa. Journal of Econometrics,

  145(1):64–80.

Doyle, O., Harmon, C. P., Heckman, J. J., and Tremblay, R. E. (2009). Investing in early human

  development: timing and economic efficiency. Economics & Human Biology, 7(1):1–6.

Fernald, L. C., Gertler, P. J., and Hou, X. (2008a). Cash component of conditional cash transfer

  program is associated with higher body mass index and blood pressure in adults. The Journal of

  nutrition, 138(11):2250–2257.

Fernald, L. C., Gertler, P. J., and Neufeld, L. M. (2008b). Role of cash in conditional cash transfer

  programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of mexico’s oportunidades. The

  Lancet, 371(9615):828–837.

Fernald, L. C., Gertler, P. J., and Neufeld, L. M. (2009). 10-year effect of oportunidades, mexico’s condi-

  tional cash transfer programme, on child growth, cognition, language, and behaviour: a longitudinal

  follow-up study. The Lancet, 374(9706):1997–2005.

Fernald, L. C. and Gunnar, M. R. (2009). Poverty-alleviation program participation and salivary cortisol

  in very low-income children. Social science & medicine, 68(12):2180–2189.

Fernald, L. C., Hou, X., and Gertler, P. J. (2008c). Oportunidades program participation and body

  mass index, blood pressure, and self-reported health in mexican adults. Prev Chronic Dis, 5(3):A81.



                                                    51
Gertler, P. (2004). Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? evidence from progresa’s control

  randomized experiment. American Economic Review, 94(2):336–341.

Gertler, P., Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang, S. M., and

  Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation intervention

  in jamaica. Science, 344(6187):998–1001.

Gertler, P. J., Martinez, S. W., and Rubio-Codina, M. (2012). Investing cash transfers to raise long-term

  living standards. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pages 164–192.

Gould, E. D., Lavy, V., and Paserman, M. D. (2011). Sixty years after the magic carpet ride: The

  long-run effect of the early childhood environment on social and economic outcomes. The Review of

  Economic Studies, 78(3):938–973.

Goyal, D., Gay, C., and Lee, K. A. (2010). How much does low socioeconomic status increase the risk

  of prenatal and postpartum depressive symptoms in first-time mothers?         Women’s Health Issues,

  20(2):96–104.

Gunnsteinsson, S., Adhvaryu, A., Christian, P., Labrique, A., Sugimoto, J., Shamim, A. A., and

  West Jr., K. P. (2016). Resilience to early life shocks. Technical report.

Haushofer, J. and Shapiro, J. (2013). Household response to income changes: Evidence from an uncon-

  ditional cash transfer program in kenya. Technical report.

Heckman, J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P., and Yavitz, A. (2010). Analyzing social experiments

  as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the highscope perry preschool program.

  Quantitative economics, 1(1):1–46.

Heckman, J., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through which an

  influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic Review, 103(6):1–

  35.

Heckman, J. J. (2006). Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children. Science,

  312(5782):1900–1902.

Heckman, J. J. (2007). The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability formation.

  Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences, 104(33):13250–13255.

                                                   52
Heckman, J. J. and Mosso, S. (2014). The economics of human development and social mobility.

  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hoddinott, J., Alderman, H., Behrman, J. R., Haddad, L., and Horton, S. (2013a). The economic

  rationale for investing in stunting reduction. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 9(S2):69–82.

Hoddinott, J., Behrman, J. R., Maluccio, J. A., Melgar, P., Quisumbing, A. R., Ramirez-Zea, M.,

  Stein, A. D., Yount, K. M., and Martorell, R. (2013b). Adult consequences of growth failure in early

  childhood. The American journal of clinical nutrition, pages ajcn–064584.

Hoddinott, J., Maluccio, J. A., Behrman, J. R., Flores, R., and Martorell, R. (2008). Effect of a

  nutrition intervention during early childhood on economic productivity in Guatemalan adults. The

  lancet, 371(9610):411–416.

Hoddinott, J. and Skoufias, E. (2004). The impact of progresa on food consumption. Economic devel-

  opment and cultural change, 53(1):37–61.

Hoynes, H., Schanzenbach, D. W., and Almond, D. (2016). Long-run impacts of childhood access to

  the safety net. American Economic Review, 106(4):903–34.

Kaur, S. (2014). Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets. Technical report, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Kim, P., Capistrano, C. G., Erhart, A., Gray-Schiff, R., and Xu, N. (2017). Socioeconomic disadvan-

  tage, neural responses to infant emotions, and emotional availability among first-time new mothers.

  Behavioural brain research, 325:188–196.

Lavy, V. and Schlosser, A. (2005). Targeted remedial education for underperforming teenagers: Costs

  and benefits. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4).

Lavy, V., Schlosser, A., and Shany, A. (2016). Out of africa: Human capital consequences of in utero

  conditions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lundeen, E. A., Behrman, J. R., Crookston, B. T., Dearden, K. A., Engle, P., Georgiadis, A., Penny,

  M. E., and Stein, A. D. (2014). Growth faltering and recovery in children aged 1–8 years in four

  low-and middle-income countries: Young lives. Public health nutrition, 17(9):2131–2137.



                                                 53
Maccini, S. and Yang, D. (2009). Under the weather: Health, schooling, and economic consequences of

  early-life rainfall. American Economic Review, 99(3):1006–1026.

Majid, M. F. (2015). The persistent effects of in utero nutrition shocks over the life cycle: evidence

  from ramadan fasting. Journal of Development Economics, 117:48–57.

Malamud, O., Pop-Eleches, C., and Urquiola, M. (2016). Interactions between family and school envi-

  ronments: Evidence on dynamic complementarities? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic

  Research.

Maluccio, J. A., Hoddinott, J., Behrman, J. R., Martorell, R., Quisumbing, A. R., and Stein, A. D.

  (2009). The impact of improving nutrition during early childhood on education among Guatemalan

  adults. The Economic Journal, 119(537):734–763.

Martorell, R., Khan, L. K., and Schroeder, D. G. (1994). Reversibility of stunting: epidemiological

  findings in children from developing countries. European journal of clinical nutrition, 48:S45–57.

OECD (2006). Agricultural and Fisheries Policies in Mexico: Recent Achievements, Continuing the

  Reform Agenda. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Parker, S. W., Todd, P. E., et al. (2017). Conditional cash transfers: The case of progresa/oportunidades.

  Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3):866–915.

Paxson, C. H. (1992). Using weather variability to estimate the response of savings to transitory income

  in thailand. American Economic Review, 82(1):15–33.

Pouliot, G. A. (2015). Spatial econometrics for misaligned data. Technical report.

Prentice, A. M., Ward, K. A., Goldberg, G. R., Jarjou, L. M., Moore, S. E., Fulford, A. J., and Prentice,

  A. (2013). Critical windows for nutritional interventions against stunting. The American journal of

  clinical nutrition, 97(5):911–918.

Rivera, J. A., Sotres-Alvarez, D., Habicht, J.-P., Shamah, T., and Villalpando, S. (2004). Impact of the

  mexican program for education, health, and nutrition (progresa) on rates of growth and anemia in

  infants and young children: a randomized effectiveness study. Jama, 291(21):2563–2570.

Rossin-Slater, M. and Wüst, M. (2015). Are different early investments complements or substitutes?

  long-run and intergenerational evidence from denmark.

                                                   54
Sadoulet, E., De Janvry, A., and Davis, B. (2001). Cash transfer programs with income multipliers:

  Procampo in mexico. World development, 29(6):1043–1056.

Schultz, T. P. (2004). School subsidies for the poor: evaluating the mexican progresa poverty program.

  Journal of Development Economics, 74(1):199–250.

Shah, M. and Steinberg, B. M. (2013). Drought of opportunities: Contemporaneous and long term

  impacts of rainfall shocks on human capital. Technical Report 19140, National Bureau of Economic

  Research.

Shah, M. and Steinberg, B. M. (2017). Drought of opportunities: Contemporaneous and long-term

  impacts of rainfall shocks on human capital. Journal of Political Economy, 125(2):527–561.

Skoufias, E. (2005). Progresa and its impacts on the welfare of rural households in mexico. Technical

  Report 139, INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE.

Skoufias, E., Davis, B., and De La Vega, S. (2001). Targeting the poor in mexico: an evaluation of the

  selection of households into progresa. World development, 29(10):1769–1784.

Skoufias, E. and Parker, S. W. (2001). Conditional cash transfers and their impact on child work and

  schooling: Evidence from the progresa program in mexico. Economia, 2(1):45–96.

Victora, C. G., Adair, L., Fall, C., Hallal, P. C., Martorell, R., Richter, L., Sachdev, H. S., Maternal,

  Group, C. U. S., et al. (2008). Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult health and

  human capital. The lancet, 371(9609):340–357.

Victora, C. G., de Onis, M., Hallal, P. C., Blössner, M., and Shrimpton, R. (2010). Worldwide timing

  of growth faltering: revisiting implications for interventions. Pediatrics, pages peds–2009.

Wolpin, K. I. (1982). A new test of the permanent income hypothesis: the impact of weather on the

  income and consumption of farm households in india. International Economic Review, pages 583–594.




                                                   55
A   Additional Tables

          Figure A1: Proportion of Individuals Not Living in Household, by Age




                                          56
                      Table A1: Exposure to PROGRESA

                                                    Years Exposed to PROGRESA in 2003

                                                    Treatment Control    Difference in
Age in 1998   School Grade in 1998    Age in 2003
                                                     Villages Villages    Exposure

     5                   -                10            3        3            0
     6          1st year primary          11            3        3            0
     7          2nd year primary          12            5        4            1
     8          3rd year primary          13            6        4            2
     9          4th year primary          14            6        4            2
    10          5th year primary          15            6        4            2
    11          6th year primary          16            6        4            2
    12         1st year junior high       17            6        4            2
    13        2nd year junior high        18            4        2            2
    14        3rd year junior high        19            2        1            1
    15        1st year high school        20            0        0            0
    16        2nd year high school        21            0        0            0




                                           57
Figure A2: PROGRESA Localities by Proportion of Years with a Rainfall Shock, 1985-1991




              Notes:
              Percentages in the legend correspond to the proportion of years from 1985 to
              1991 (in which rainfall data was available for that locality) that a rainfall shock
              was experienced.




                                                     58
                                              Table A2: Summary Statistics for Control Variables

Panel A: Household-level                                                                             Panel B: Locality-level

                                   Full       Treatment        Control         Treatment -                                            Full       Treatment        Control         Treatment -
                                  Sample       Villages        Villages     Control Differences                                      Sample       Villages        Villages     Control Differences

Household size                      7.41          7.42           7.40               0.019            Community Well                    0.38          0.37           0.39             -0.027
                                   (2.19)        (2.22)         (2.15)             (0.041)                                            (0.49)        (0.48)         (0.49)            (0.049)
Household head age                  41.7          41.4           42.2             -0.79***           Well Spring                       0.48          0.51           0.44              0.074
                                   (11.3)        (11.1)         (11.6)             (0.21)                                             (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)            (0.050)
Female household head              0.057         0.056          0.057             -0.00047           Public Water Network              0.15          0.12           0.19             -0.070*
                                   (0.23)        (0.23)         (0.23)            (0.0043)                                            (0.36)        (0.33)         (0.39)            (0.035)
Number of children aged            0.073         0.073          0.072              0.0016            Bury Garbage                      0.18          0.21           0.14             0.065*
0-2                               (0.086)       (0.086)        (0.087)            (0.0016)                                            (0.39)        (0.41)         (0.35)            (0.039)
Number of children aged            0.10          0.10           0.099             0.0034*            Public Dumpster                  0.017        0.0078          0.031             -0.023*
3-5                               (0.096)       (0.096)        (0.096)            (0.0018)                                            (0.13)       (0.088)         (0.17)            (0.013)
Number of boys aged 6-7            0.052         0.051          0.054             -0.0027*           Public Drainage                  0.038         0.035          0.043             -0.0079
                                  (0.077)       (0.076)        (0.079)            (0.0014)                                            (0.19)        (0.18)         (0.20)            (0.019)
Number of boys aged 8-12            0.12          0.13           0.12             0.0049**           Public Phone                      0.52          0.52           0.52             -0.0040
                                   (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.11)            (0.0021)                                            (0.50)        (0.50)         (0.50)            (0.050)
Number of boys aged 13-            0.070         0.070          0.069             0.00067            Hospital or health                0.15          0.13           0.18             -0.046
18                                (0.095)       (0.096)        (0.093)            (0.0018)           center                           (0.36)        (0.34)         (0.38)            (0.036)
Number of girls aged 6-7           0.051         0.052          0.051             0.00082            Distance to health center         13.5          13.7           13.2               0.57
                                  (0.076)       (0.077)        (0.076)            (0.0014)                                            (24.4)        (24.3)         (24.7)             (2.45)
Number of girls aged 8-12           0.12          0.12           0.12              -0.0023           DICONSA store                     0.24          0.26           0.20              0.058
                                   (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.11)            (0.0021)                                            (0.43)        (0.44)         (0.40)            (0.043)
Number of girls aged 13-           0.066         0.065          0.067              -0.0014           Distance to Bank                  38.7          40.5           36.0               4.48
18                                (0.091)       (0.091)        (0.091)            (0.0017)                                            (51.8)        (59.3)         (37.6)             (5.50)
Number of women aged               0.16          0.16            0.16             -0.00096           Distance to Bank                  0.12          0.13          0.098              0.030
19-54                             (0.061)       (0.061)        (0.062)            (0.0011)           Missing                          (0.32)        (0.34)         (0.30)            (0.032)
Number of men aged 55              0.019         0.018          0.019            -0.00087            Distance to Secondary             11.8          12.2           11.3               0.84
and over                          (0.051)       (0.051)        (0.051)           (0.00094)           School                           (15.9)        (16.0)         (15.9)             (2.44)
Number of women aged               0.017         0.017          0.018             -0.0018*           Distance to Secondary             0.58          0.60           0.55              0.047
55 and over                       (0.050)       (0.050)        (0.051)           (0.00093)           School Missing                   (0.49)        (0.49)         (0.50)            (0.049)
Mother's educational                3.93          3.92           3.93             -0.0040
attainment (categorical)           (2.07)        (2.07)         (2.07)            (0.048)
Mother's educational                0.34          0.33           0.36             -0.024***
attainment missing                 (0.47)        (0.47)         (0.48)            (0.0088)
Father's educational                3.98          4.03           3.89              0.14***
attainment (categorical)           (2.25)        (2.31)         (2.14)             (0.050)
Father's educational                0.31          0.30           0.31              -0.0080
attainment missing                 (0.46)        (0.46)         (0.46)            (0.0086)
Mother speaks indigenous            0.38          0.37           0.39              -0.012
language                           (0.48)        (0.48)         (0.49)            (0.0092)
Mother's language                  0.041         0.039          0.044              -0.0046
missing                            (0.20)        (0.19)         (0.20)            (0.0037)
Father speaks indigenous            0.39          0.38           0.40             -0.021**
language                           (0.49)        (0.49)         (0.49)            (0.0095)
Father's language missing          0.096         0.097          0.094              0.0030
                                   (0.29)        (0.30)         (0.29)            (0.0055)

Number of households                6233          3795           2438                                Number of localities               420           257            163


Notes:
Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Missing indicators for parental education and language are binary variables equal to 1 for individuals missing the relevant
information. Community well, well spring, public water network, public dumpster, public drainage, public phone, hospital or health center, and DICONSA store are all indicators equal to 1
for localities that have the relevant public good or facility. Bury garbage is an indicator equal to 1 for localities that report burying garbage as their main form of garbage dispolsal. Distances
reported in kilometers. Missing distance variables are indicators for localities that did not report a distance to the nearest secondary school or bank.




                                                                                              59
                                   Table A3: Summary of Related PROGRESA Literature

   Age of sample
                         Outcome                                                                            Analysis
  during Progresa                                Outcome                            Result                                              Studies
                         Category                                                                          timeframe
     exposure
                                      Attendance                  Increased, particularly for older ages   ST          Skoufias and Parker (2001)
                                      Dropouts                    Decreased                                ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005)
                                                                                                                       Schultz (2004); Behrman, Sengupta,
                                      Educational attainment      Increased by ~0.66 years                 ST
                                                                                                                       Todd (2005)
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Parker, Todd (2011);
                                      Educational attainment      Increased by ~0.2 years                  MT
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009)
                                      Enrollment                  Increased for younger ages               MT          Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009)
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005);
                                      Enrollment                  Increased for older ages                 ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2000);
                        Education                                                                                      Schultz (2004)
                                      Grade progression           Increased                                ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005)
    School-aged                       Grade progression           Increased                                MT          Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009)
                                      Grade repetition            Decreased                                ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005)
                                      Re-entering school          Increased                                ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005)
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2005);
                                      Schooling gaps              Decreased                                ST
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2000)
                                                                                                                       Skoufias and Parker (2001); Schultz
                                      Work                        Decreased                                ST
                                                                                                                       (2004)
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Parker, Todd (2011);
                                      Work                        Decreased for younger boys               MT
                                                                                                                       Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009)
                          Health     Overweight                   Decreased for girls (in most spec.'s)    MT          Andalon (2011)
                       Cognitive and
                                     Cognitive tests              No significant effect                    ST          Behrman, Sengupta, Todd (2000)
                        Behavioral
                                     Age of school start          Decreased                                MT          Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009b)
 Younger than 3rd
                        Education    Educational attainment       Increased                                MT          Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009b)
       grade
                                      Grade progression           Increased                                MT          Behrman, Parker, Todd (2009b)
                                      Anemia                      Decreased                                ST          Gertler (2004)
                                      BMI                         No significant effect                    LT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2009)
                                      Height                      Increased                                ST          Gertler (2004)
                                                                  Increased only for children of mothers
                          Health      Height                                                               LT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2009)
                                                                  with no educatin
Younger than school-
                                                                  Decreased for children of mothers with
        age                           Salivary cortisol                                                    MT          Fernald and Gunnar (2009)
                                                                  high depressive symptoms
                                      Self-reported morbidity     Decreased                                ST          Gertler (2004)
                                     Behavioral problems          Decreased                                LT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2009)
                       Cognitive and
                                     Cognitive tests              No significant effect                    LT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2009)
                        Behavioral
                                     Language tests               Increased                                MT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2008b)
                                      Anemia                      Decreased in ST                          ST          Rivera et al (2004)
                                      Birthweight (self-rep.)     Increased                                ST/MT       Barber and Gertler (2008)
                                                                                                                       Behrman and Hoddinott (2005); Rivera
Younger than school-                  Height                      Increased                                ST
                                                                                                                       et al (2004)
 age (including not       Health
                                      Infant mortality            Reduced                                  MT          Barham (2011)
        born)
                                      Neonatal mortality          No significant effect                    MT          Barham (2011)
                                      Pre-natal care visits by
                                                                  No significant effect                    ST/MT       Barber and Gertler (2008)
                                      mother
                                      BMI                         Decreased                                MT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2008b)
                          Health      Height                      Increased                                MT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2008b)
     Not born                         Motor development           Increased                                MT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2008b)
                       Cognitive and
                                     Cognitive tests              Increased                                MT          Fernald, Gertler, Neufeld (2008b)
                        Behavioral
                                      Blood pressure              Increased (due to cash component)        MT          Fernald, Gertler, Hou (2008a)
                                      Blood pressure              Decreased                                MT          Fernald, Hou, Gertler (2008c)
                                      BMI                         Increased (due to cash component)        MT          Fernald, Gertler, Hou (2008a)
      Adults              Health      Elderly mortality           Reduced                                  MT          Barham and Rowberry (2013)
                                      Hypertension                Decreased                                MT          Fernald, Hou, Gertler (2008c)
                                      Overweight, obesity         Increased (due to cash component)        MT          Fernald, Gertler, Hou (2008a)
                                      Self-reported health         Increased                               MT          Fernald, Hou, Gertler (2008c)
                                      Agricultural income, assets,                                                     Gertler, Martinez, Rubio-Condina
                                                                   Increased                               ST
                                      production                                                                       (2012)
                        Income and                                                                                     Djebbari and Smith (2008); Angelucci
 N/A - Households                     Consumption                 Increased                                ST
                       Consumption                                                                                     and De Giorgi (2012)
                                                                                                                       Hoddinott and Skoufias (2004);
                                      Food consumption            Increased                                ST
                                                                                                                       Angelucci and De Giorgi (2012)
- ST (short-term) estimates used outcomes measured before control group received treatment in 2000
- MT (medium-term) estimates used outcomes measured between 2000 and 2003
- LT (long-term) estimates used outcomes measured in 2007
                                                                               60
                                                                     Table A4: Rainfall Shocks, PROGRESA, and Baseline Characteristics
                              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)       (12)       (13)        (14)        (15)        (16)       (17)       (18)       (19)       (20)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of
                                                     Mother                    Father                    Mother    Father's            Female Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of Number of
                           Mother's     Father's                  Mother                    Father                          Household                                                                                                       men aged
                                                     primary                  primary                   Education Education           household children children boys aged boys aged boys aged girls aged girls aged girls aged women aged
                          education    education                 secondary                secondary                          head age                                                                                                        55 and
                                                       only                     only                     Missing   Missing              head    aged 0-2 aged 3-5    6-7      8-12      13-18       6-7       8-12      13-18      19-54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              over


     Treatment Village     -0.0017        0.15       0.0029        -0.0042      0.026       0.013          -0.024     -0.0072      -0.81      -0.00061      0.0015     0.0034     -0.0026     0.0047    0.00049      0.00095     -0.0022    -0.0015   -0.00088   -0.00088
                            (0.13)       (0.15)      (0.028)      (0.0070)     (0.029)     (0.0085)       (0.028)     (0.024)     (0.42)*     (0.0068)     (0.0029)   (0.0030)   (0.0025)    (0.0035)   (0.0027)     (0.0023)   (0.0041)   (0.0025)   (0.0019)   (0.0015)

      Normal Rainfall        -0.051      -0.032      0.000057      -0.0018      -0.017      0.0044         0.016       -0.017      0.45        0.0033      0.00097     -0.0014    -0.0040     0.0032      0.0042      -0.0031    -0.0010   0.00033     -0.0019   0.00026
                            (0.057)     (0.066)       (0.013)     (0.0049)     (0.015)     (0.0051)       (0.016)     (0.013)     (0.24)*     (0.0055)     (0.0020)   (0.0021)   (0.0024)*   (0.0027)   (0.0020)**   (0.0019)   (0.0034)   (0.0021)   (0.0015)   (0.0010)

        Observations        7998         8424         7998         7998         8424         8424         12159       12159        12159       12159       12159      12159       12159       12159       12159       12159      12159      12159      12159      12159

     Mean of Dep. Var.
                             3.93         3.98         0.29        0.037        0.30         0.050         0.34        0.31         41.7        0.057       0.073      0.10       0.052       0.12        0.070       0.051      0.12       0.066       0.16      0.019

        Fixed Effects                                                                                                                          Birth year x state
                             (21)         (22)         (23)         (24)        (25)         (26)          (27)        (28)         (29)        (30)         (31)       (32)       (33)        (34)        (35)        (36)       (37)       (38)       (39)       (40)
                         Number of Mother        Father                                                                                                                                                                                           Distance to




61
                                                         Mother's             Father's                                Public                                                     Hospital Distance to                     Distance to Distance to
                           women      speaks     speaks                                  Community        Well                    Bury        Public       Public     Public                          DICONSA Distance to                         secondary
                                                         language            language                                 water                                                      or health  health                           bank     secondary                    Age
                           aged 55 indigenous indigenous                                    well         spring                  garbage     dumpster     drainage    phone                             store    bank                               school
                                                          missing             missing                                network                                                      center    center                         missing      school
                          and over  language   language                                                                                                                                                                                            missing


     Treatment Village      -0.0019      -0.016       -0.025       -0.0047     0.0032        -0.023        0.052       -0.083      0.059        -0.027      -0.017    -0.0025      -0.041      1.58       0.095        0.56     0.0012       0.79      0.026       -0.10
                           (0.0015)     (0.073)      (0.072)      (0.0056)    (0.0079)      (0.061)       (0.065)     (0.050)     (0.042)      (0.018)     (0.020)    (0.062)     (0.065)     (2.30)     (0.056)*     (5.32)    (0.042)     (1.63)    (0.071)    (0.046)**

      Normal Rainfall      0.0018        0.083        0.088        0.0029      -0.0036       -0.027       0.083        -0.025      0.026       -0.010       0.0077     0.028     0.00059       0.93      -0.0024       0.29      -0.013     0.078     -0.0031      0.50
                          (0.0011)*    (0.027)***   (0.027)***    (0.0043)    (0.0072)      (0.025)     (0.029)***    (0.017)     (0.022)     (0.0092)     (0.0081)   (0.031)    (0.023)      (1.01)     (0.024)      (1.84)    (0.018)     (0.58)    (0.026)    (0.17)***

        Observations        12159        11663        10995        12159       12159         12159        12159       12159        12159       12159       12159      12159       12159       12159       12159       12159      12159      12159      12159      12159

     Mean of Dep. Var.
                            0.017         0.38         0.39        0.041       0.096         0.36          0.51        0.14         0.16        0.015       0.037      0.57        0.20       12.6        0.30        33.6       0.11       5.55        0.57       15.0

         Fixed Effects                                                                                                                         Birth year x state
     Notes:
     - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
     -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
     -"Treatment village" = 1 for individuals in villages assigned to PROGRESA in the first wave (1998).
Table A5: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Woodcock-Johnson Test Scores

                                                          (1)                 (2)                     (3)                 (4)

                                                    Letter Word           Applied
                                                                                               Dictation          Average Score
                                                   Identification         Problems


      Years of PROGRESA Exposure                        -0.052               0.014                0.060                 0.0079
                                                       (0.051)              (0.050)              (0.060)                (0.045)

                Normal Rainfall                          -0.13                0.15                 0.18                 0.064
                                                        (0.23)               (0.25)               (0.28)                (0.21)

       Normal Rainfall x Exposure                       0.056              -0.00039               -0.033                0.0046
                                                       (0.048)              (0.052)              (0.057)                (0.044)

                  Observations                           1593                1586                 1581                    1571

                  Fixed Effects                                                  Birth year x state
   Notes:
   - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
   -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year
   historical locality-specific mean
   - All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition
   variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for parental
   language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values
   - Sample includes individuals aged 15 to 18
   - Scores are standardized by test type, and the average score in column 4 takes the average across all three z-
   scores.




               Table A6: Effects of Rainfall on Migration-Related Variables

                                                            (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

                                                      Father living     Father living
                                                                                       Household     Household
                                                      in household      in household
                                                                                      found in 2003 found in 2003
                                                         in 1997           in 1997


                      Normal Rainfall                     0.0025            0.0059
                       (in birth year)                   (0.0070)          (0.0074)


                      Normal Rainfall                                                         -0.0050            -0.021
                         (in 1997)                                                            (0.014)           (0.016)

                      Observations                        12156             12156              6684              6684
               Mean of Dependent Variable                  0.91              0.91              0.88              0.88

                                                                         Birth year x                        Birth year x
                        Fixed Effects
                                                          None               state            None               state
            Notes:
            - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
            -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 if relevant rainfall value fell within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical
            locality-specific mean.
            -Columns 3 and 4 are household-level regressions




                                                                  62
Table A7: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education and Employment Outcomes: Trimmed
Sample
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)                (9)

                                                                               Appropriate                                             Currently   Worked in   Enrolled or
                                           Educational         Grade                              Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9
                                                                                 Grade                                                Enrolled w/ Non-Laborer Worked in Non-
                                           Attainment        Progression                            grades      grades      grades
                                                                               Completion                                             HS Degree       Job      Laborer Job

     Years of PROGRESA Exposure                 0.23             0.031             0.035              0.061             0.060             0.071             0.010             0.10               0.11
                                             (0.058)***        (0.014)**         (0.011)***         (0.016)***        (0.016)***        (0.017)***         (0.014)         (0.040)**          (0.046)**

              Normal Rainfall                   0.71              0.12               0.14              0.21              0.25              0.27            0.096              0.32               0.35
                                              (0.29)**         (0.058)**          (0.053)**         (0.071)***        (0.072)***        (0.085)***        (0.056)*          (0.13)**           (0.15)**

         Normal Rainfall x Exposure            -0.12            -0.022             -0.021             -0.033            -0.043            -0.048           -0.016             -0.12              -0.12
                                             (0.056)**         (0.011)*           (0.011)**          (0.014)**        (0.013)***        (0.016)***         (0.018)         (0.041)***         (0.046)***

                Observations                   10236            9713               10236              8689               7160             5684             1320              966                 962
         Mean of Dependent Variable             6.78             0.59               0.47               0.56              0.51              0.45            0.065             0.35                0.41
                    Ages                      12 to 18         12 to 18           12 to 18           13 to 18          14 to 18          15 to 18           18                18                  18
                Fixed Effects                                                                                     Birth year x state
    Notes:
    - Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
    -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
    -All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
    parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




Table A8: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education and Employment Outcomes, Re-weighted
on Shock Probability
                                               (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)               (7)                  (8)                     (9)

                                                                             Appropriate                                                               Currently                        Enrolled or
                                          Educational         Grade                            Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9                                      Worked in Non-
                                                                               Grade                                                                  Enrolled w/                      Worked in Non-
                                          Attainment        Progression                          grades      grades      grades                                          Laborer Job
                                                                             Completion                                                               HS Degree                         Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                   0.22             0.030            0.031             0.055              0.055              0.066             0.013                0.084                0.086
                                            (0.054)***        (0.013)**        (0.011)***        (0.016)***         (0.016)***         (0.017)***         (0.014)             (0.039)**            (0.043)**

            Normal Rainfall                    0.65             0.11               0.12             0.20               0.23               0.25             0.10                 0.22                    0.26
                                             (0.28)**         (0.056)*          (0.051)**        (0.070)***         (0.071)***         (0.083)***        (0.053)*              (0.13)*                 (0.13)*

    Normal Rainfall x Exposure                -0.11            -0.020            -0.019            -0.032             -0.040             -0.047            -0.018              -0.099                -0.10
                                            (0.053)**         (0.011)*          (0.010)*          (0.014)**         (0.013)***         (0.016)***         (0.017)             (0.040)**            (0.042)**

          Observations                       11824             11216             11824             10068               8285            6618                1597                 1143                    1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.79              0.58              0.46              0.56               0.52             0.45               0.061                0.35                    0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18          12 to 18          12 to 18          13 to 18           14 to 18         15 to 18               18                  18                      18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                             Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values
-All specifications are weighted to produce a sample that is balanced on rainfall shocks across treatment and control groups.




                                                                                                       63
Table A9: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education and Employment Outcomes, Re-weighted
on Age
                                                                            (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)

                                                                                                                 Appropriate
                                                                       Educational             Grade                              Completed 7          Completed 8          Completed 9
                                                                                                                   Grade
                                                                       Attainment            Progression                            grades               grades               grades
                                                                                                                 Completion


                       Years of PROGRESA Exposure                          0.26                  0.041              0.034              0.057               0.056                0.068
                                                                        (0.060)***             (0.013)***        (0.0100)***         (0.016)***          (0.016)***           (0.018)***

                                Normal Rainfall                            0.93                   0.17               0.13               0.22                0.24                 0.28
                                                                         (0.31)***             (0.052)***         (0.044)***         (0.071)***          (0.073)***           (0.088)***

                         Normal Rainfall x Exposure                        -0.16                 -0.030             -0.019            -0.035               -0.042               -0.050
                                                                        (0.059)***             (0.010)***         (0.0090)**         (0.014)**           (0.014)***           (0.017)***

                               Observations                               11824                 11216              11824             10068                 8285                 6618
                        Mean of Dependent Variable                          6.76                 0.57                0.46             0.56                  0.51                 0.44
                                   Ages                                   12 to 18             12 to 18            12 to 18         13 to 18              14 to 18             15 to 18
                               Fixed Effects                                                                           Birth year x state
                    - Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).

                    -"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific
                    mean
                    -All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education,
                    parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing
                    values
                    -All specifications are weighted to produce the same age distributions across the four groups defined by treatment status and rainfall type.




Table A10: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education and Employment Outcomes, Controlling
for Rainfall Shock Interactions with Unbalanced Characteristics

                                               (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)           (6)                (7)                 (8)              (9)

                                                                              Appropriate                                                              Currently                        Enrolled or
                                          Educational         Grade                              Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9                                    Worked in Non-
                                                                                Grade                                                                 Enrolled w/                      Worked in Non-
                                          Attainment        Progression                            grades      grades      grades                                        Laborer Job
                                                                              Completion                                                              HS Degree                         Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                   0.22             0.030               0.031             0.055            0.053           0.061               0.022               0.081            0.090
                                            (0.055)***        (0.013)**           (0.011)***        (0.016)***       (0.016)***      (0.016)***           (0.014)             (0.051)          (0.050)*

          Normal Rainfall                      0.51             0.14                0.070              0.17             0.16            0.24                0.20                0.56            0.63
                                              (0.36)          (0.084)*             (0.077)           (0.096)*          (0.10)         (0.12)**           (0.086)**             (0.36)          (0.38)*

    Normal Rainfall x Exposure                -0.11            -0.019              -0.019            -0.032            -0.039          -0.041              -0.027              -0.096           -0.11
                                            (0.054)**         (0.011)*            (0.010)*          (0.014)**        (0.013)***      (0.015)***           (0.018)             (0.052)*        (0.051)**

          Observations                        11824            11216               11824             10068              8285            6618              1597                 1143             1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                  6.79             0.58                0.46              0.56              0.52             0.45             0.061                0.35             0.41
              Ages                           12 to 18         12 to 18            12 to 18          13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18             18                  18               18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                              Birth year x state
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values
-All specifications include interactions between the rainfall shock variable and each of the control variables that are unbalanced across treatment and control villages (see Table A2).




                                                                                                          64
Table A11: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall on Education and Employment Outcomes, Controlling
for Other Government Programs

                                               (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)                  (9)

                                                                             Appropriate                                                               Currently                    Enrolled or
                                          Educational        Grade                            Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9                                   Worked in Non-
                                                                               Grade                                                                  Enrolled w/                  Worked in Non-
                                          Attainment       Progression                            grades            grades           grades                          Laborer Job
                                                                             Completion                                                               HS Degree                     Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                  0.21             0.029            0.031              0.053             0.052            0.065             0.0091             0.094                0.089
                                           (0.054)***        (0.013)**        (0.011)***         (0.015)***        (0.016)***       (0.016)***          (0.012)          (0.038)**            (0.040)**

          Normal Rainfall                     0.64              0.10              0.12              0.20              0.22             0.26              0.082              0.25                 0.26
                                            (0.28)**          (0.054)*         (0.050)**         (0.071)***        (0.073)***       (0.084)***          (0.047)*          (0.12)**             (0.12)**

    Normal Rainfall x Exposure                -0.11            -0.019           -0.019            -0.031             -0.040           -0.048             -0.013             -0.11                -0.10
                                            (0.054)**         (0.011)*         (0.010)*          (0.014)**         (0.013)***       (0.016)***          (0.015)          (0.037)***           (0.039)***

          Observations                       11734             11135            11734             9992               8225            6575                1587              1134                 1131
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.79              0.58             0.46              0.56              0.52             0.45               0.060             0.35                 0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18          12 to 18         12 to 18          13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18               18               18                   18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                           Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values
-All specifications control for household receipt of PROCAMPO cash transfers, indicators for corn, sugar, and kidney bean growing localities interacted with birth year dummies, and the individual's age in
the year PROCEDE reached its locality (along with a dummy for individuals missing PROCEDE information, for whom the PROCEDE age variable is set to zero).




                  Table A12: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall, Using Treatment Village Dummy
                                               (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)                  (9)

                                                                             Appropriate                                                               Currently                    Enrolled or
                                          Educational        Grade                            Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9                                   Worked in Non-
                                                                               Grade                                                                  Enrolled w/                  Worked in Non-
                                          Attainment       Progression                            grades            grades           grades                          Laborer Job
                                                                             Completion                                                               HS Degree                     Laborer Job


         Treatment Village                    0.29             0.046             0.062             0.099              0.10             0.11              0.025              0.17                 0.17
                                            (0.11)***         (0.027)*         (0.022)***        (0.035)***        (0.036)***       (0.040)***          (0.027)          (0.079)**            (0.086)**

          Normal Rainfall                     0.15             0.026             0.050             0.072             0.068            0.063              0.068             0.023                0.059
                                             (0.094)          (0.022)          (0.019)***        (0.026)***        (0.029)**         (0.033)*          (0.024)***         (0.061)              (0.062)

   Normal Rainfall x Treatment               -0.080           -0.025             -0.040            -0.050           -0.069            -0.062             -0.035            -0.20                -0.20
                                             (0.11)           (0.025)           (0.023)*          (0.033)          (0.034)**          (0.040)           (0.033)          (0.079)**            (0.083)**

          Observations                       11824             11216             11824             10068             8285            6618                1597              1143                 1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.79              0.58              0.46              0.56             0.52             0.45               0.061             0.35                 0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18          12 to 18          12 to 18          13 to 18         14 to 18         15 to 18               18               18                   18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                           Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-"Treatment village" = 1 for individuals in villages assigned to PROGRESA in the first wave (1998).
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                                                                                                     65
                     Table A13: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall, Using Exact Years of Exposure

                                               (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)                 (8)                  (9)

                                                                            Appropriate                                                             Currently                       Enrolled or
                                         Educational         Grade                           Completed 7        Completed        Completed                          Worked in Non-
                                                                              Grade                                                                Enrolled w/                     Worked in Non-
                                         Attainment        Progression                         grades            8 grades         9 grades                           Laborer Job
                                                                            Completion                                                             HS Degree                        Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                  0.26             0.036            0.037            0.067             0.066             0.079             0.015                0.10                 0.10
 (not rounded to the nearest year)         (0.068)***        (0.017)**        (0.014)***       (0.019)***        (0.019)***        (0.021)***         (0.016)            (0.047)**            (0.051)**

          Normal Rainfall                     0.71             0.12              0.13             0.23              0.26              0.29              0.12               0.32                  0.36
                                            (0.32)**         (0.066)*         (0.061)**        (0.084)***        (0.085)***        (0.100)***         (0.069)*            (0.17)*              (0.17)**

     Normal Rainfall x Months                 -0.13           -0.023            -0.021           -0.039            -0.049            -0.056           -0.021               -0.12                -0.12
                                            (0.065)*         (0.014)*          (0.013)*         (0.017)**        (0.017)***        (0.020)***         (0.020)            (0.047)**            (0.050)**

          Observations                       11824            11216             11824            10068              8285            6618               1597                1143                 1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.79             0.58              0.46             0.56              0.52             0.45              0.061               0.35                 0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18         12 to 18          12 to 18         13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18              18                 18                   18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                          Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-The PROGRESA exposure variable in this regression is calculated by dividing months of exposure by 12 (not rounding to the nearest year, as we do in our main results).
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




    Table A14: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall, Using Alternate Historical Rainfall Calculations
                                              (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)                 (8)                  (9)

                                                                           Appropriate                                                             Currently                        Enrolled or
                                         Educational        Grade                           Completed 7 Completed 8 Completed 9                                     Worked in Non-
                                                                             Grade                                                                Enrolled w/                      Worked in Non-
                                         Attainment       Progression                         grades      grades      grades                                         Laborer Job
                                                                           Completion                                                             HS Degree                         Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                  0.18            0.026            0.035             0.050             0.046            0.056             0.0028               0.071                0.066
                                           (0.054)***        (0.014)*        (0.012)***        (0.015)***        (0.016)***       (0.018)***          (0.017)             (0.041)*             (0.046)

          Normal Rainfall                     0.26            0.056              0.12              0.12             0.13             0.15              0.055                0.19                 0.20
                                             (0.26)          (0.064)          (0.049)**         (0.061)**         (0.067)*         (0.083)*           (0.061)              (0.12)               (0.14)

    Normal Rainfall x Exposure              -0.060           -0.014            -0.023            -0.025           -0.028            -0.033            -0.0070              -0.082               -0.077
                                            (0.051)          (0.013)         (0.0099)**         (0.012)**        (0.013)**         (0.016)**          (0.018)             (0.042)*             (0.046)*

          Observations                       11824            11216            11824             10068              8285            6618               1597                1143                 1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.79             0.58             0.46              0.56              0.52             0.45              0.061               0.35                 0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18         12 to 18         12 to 18          13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18              18                 18                   18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                          Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose birth-year rainfall was within one standard deviation of the 20-year locality-specific mean from 1978-1998 (centered around the median birth year)
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                                                                                                    66
          Table A15: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall, Using Flexible Definition of Rainfall Shock
                                                   (1)          (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)                 (8)                  (9)

                                                                           Appropriate                                                             Currently                        Enrolled or
                                           Educational  Grade                          Completed 7              Completed        Completed                          Worked in Non-
                                                                             Grade                                                                Enrolled w/                      Worked in Non-
                                           Attainment Progression                        grades                  8 grades         9 grades                           Laborer Job
                                                                           Completion                                                             HS Degree                         Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                     0.068       0.0038            0.013              0.019            0.011             0.015            0.0016               -0.055               -0.042
                                                (0.048)      (0.011)          (0.0090)           (0.014)          (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.012)             (0.029)*             (0.029)

               Drought                           -1.03         -0.22            -0.18             -0.24             -0.27            -0.28             -0.060               -0.16                -0.16
                                                (0.40)**    (0.072)***       (0.064)***         (0.094)**        (0.091)***        (0.11)***          (0.063)              (0.19)               (0.19)

         Below normal rainfall                    -0.16       0.031             0.020             0.028            0.021             0.032             0.065                -0.21                -0.12
                                                 (0.30)      (0.073)           (0.059)           (0.067)          (0.071)           (0.073)           (0.076)              (0.14)               (0.14)

         Above normal rainfall                    -0.30      0.0029             -0.014            -0.065           -0.096            -0.089            -0.025               -0.18                -0.14
                                                 (0.27)      (0.059)           (0.050)           (0.070)          (0.075)           (0.077)           (0.052)              (0.14)               (0.14)

                 Flood                           -0.65        -0.19             -0.11             -0.19             -0.18           -0.28              -0.054               -0.20                -0.18
                                                (0.28)**    (0.075)**         (0.064)*           (0.10)*           (0.11)*         (0.11)**           (0.079)              (0.19)               (0.22)

               Drought                             0.17       0.037             0.027             0.040            0.047             0.050           -0.00068              0.080                0.067
              x Exposure                        (0.075)**   (0.014)***        (0.013)**         (0.018)**        (0.017)***        (0.021)**          (0.022)             (0.054)              (0.055)

         Below normal rainfall                   0.027       -0.0024           -0.0051          -0.0051           -0.0057           -0.0097            -0.028              0.073                0.036
              x Exposure                        (0.058)      (0.015)           (0.012)          (0.013)           (0.014)           (0.014)           (0.020)             (0.044)*             (0.044)

         Above normal rainfall                   0.049       -0.00084          -0.0030           0.0099            0.014             0.015            0.0028               0.067                0.055
             x Exposure                         (0.052)       (0.012)          (0.011)           (0.014)          (0.015)           (0.016)           (0.015)             (0.040)              (0.041)

                 Flood                             0.12       0.041             0.014            0.032             0.032             0.053            -0.0033              0.085                0.063
              x Exposure                        (0.056)**   (0.015)***         (0.013)          (0.019)*          (0.021)          (0.023)**          (0.022)             (0.061)              (0.069)

          Observations                           11824        11216            11824             10068             8285             6618               1597                1143                 1138
   Mean of Dependent Variable                     6.79         0.58             0.46              0.56              0.52             0.45              0.061               0.35                 0.41
             Ages                               12 to 18     12 to 18         12 to 18          13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18              18                 18                   18

Tests for equality of coefficients (p-values)
              drought = flood                     0.66         0.68             0.57              0.19              0.16             0.17               0.22                0.82                 0.86
    below normal = above normal                   0.36         0.73             0.31              0.66              0.49             0.99               0.95                0.88                 0.95
          drought x exposure =
             flood x exposure                     0.72         0.91             0.86              0.29              0.20             0.15               0.09                0.88                 0.62
  below normal x exposure = above
            normal x exposure                     0.51         0.84             0.34              0.73              0.53            0.90                0.93                0.95                 0.96
             Fixed Effects                                                                                       Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Drought", "Below normal rainfall," Above normal rainfall," and "Flood" are dummy variables indicating individuals whose birth-year rainfall (normalized using the locality-specific historical 10-year
mean and standard deviation) fell below the 20th percentile, between the 20th and 40th percentile, between the 60th and 80th percentile, and above the 80th percentile, respectively.
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                                                                                                    67
  Table A16: Effects of PROGRESA and Rainfall in Year of Birth and Subsequent Childhood Years
                                              (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)                 (8)                  (9)

                                                                           Appropriate                                                             Currently                        Enrolled or
                                         Educational        Grade                           Completed 7        Completed         Completed                          Worked in Non-
                                                                             Grade                                                                Enrolled w/                      Worked in Non-
                                         Attainment       Progression                         grades            8 grades          9 grades                           Laborer Job
                                                                           Completion                                                             HS Degree                         Laborer Job


  Years of PROGRESA Exposure                  0.22            0.039            0.042             0.056             0.062            0.071             -0.0025              0.088                0.075
                                           (0.074)***       (0.018)**        (0.015)***        (0.019)***        (0.020)***       (0.023)***          (0.025)             (0.067)              (0.074)

          Normal Rainfall                     0.65             0.10              0.12             0.22              0.26             0.30              0.091                0.15                 0.15
          in year of birth                  (0.31)**         (0.060)*         (0.055)**        (0.075)***        (0.077)***       (0.088)***          (0.061)              (0.18)               (0.19)

 Normal Rainfall in year of birth            -0.12            -0.019           -0.020            -0.037            -0.048           -0.056             -0.014              -0.070               -0.061
         x Exposure                        (0.059)**         (0.012)          (0.011)*          (0.014)**        (0.014)***       (0.017)***          (0.019)             (0.051)              (0.056)

          Normal Rainfall                     0.18            0.066             0.050             0.030            0.012           -0.0067             -0.021               0.14                 0.11
           in first year                     (0.16)          (0.043)           (0.033)           (0.042)          (0.043)          (0.049)            (0.048)              (0.11)               (0.12)

   Normal Rainfall in first year             -0.042           -0.014            -0.011           -0.0065          -0.00043          0.0024            0.0057               -0.052               -0.039
          x Exposure                        (0.030)          (0.0085)         (0.0065)*         (0.0079)          (0.0085)         (0.0099)           (0.014)             (0.033)              (0.035)

          Normal Rainfall                     -0.24           -0.036          -0.0091             -0.10            -0.039            -0.086            -0.024             -0.0067               0.029
          in second year                     (0.20)          (0.048)          (0.040)           (0.046)**         (0.056)           (0.054)           (0.049)              (0.11)               (0.12)

  Normal Rainfall in second year             0.053            0.0066           0.0033             0.019           0.0093            0.019              0.014             -0.00057              -0.0052
          x Exposure                        (0.040)          (0.0096)         (0.0085)         (0.0095)**         (0.012)          (0.011)*           (0.014)             (0.033)              (0.036)

          Normal Rainfall                    0.069            0.046             0.016             0.072            0.064             0.083            -0.0088              0.027               0.0043
           in third year                     (0.20)          (0.044)           (0.037)           (0.047)          (0.051)           (0.055)           (0.051)              (0.12)              (0.12)

   Normal Rainfall in third year            -0.0058           -0.0073          -0.0038           -0.0100          -0.0094            -0.017           0.0020               -0.015              -0.0077
          x Exposure                        (0.038)          (0.0086)         (0.0075)          (0.0095)          (0.010)           (0.011)           (0.015)             (0.034)              (0.035)

          Observations                       10679            10127            10679             9033               7418            5846               1398                 992                  989
   Mean of Dependent Variable                 6.76             0.58             0.47              0.56              0.51             0.45              0.058                0.36                 0.41
              Ages                          12 to 18         12 to 18         12 to 18          13 to 18          14 to 18         15 to 18              18                  18                   18
          Fixed Effects                                                                                          Birth year x state
Notes:
- Standard errors clustered at the municipality level are in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
-"Normal Rainfall" = 1 for individuals whose rainfall value (in the relevant year) was within one standard deviation of the 10-year historical locality-specific mean
-All specifications include gender, household head gender and age, household size, household composition variables, parental education, parental language, and locality characteristics. Controls for
parental language/education and locality distance include dummies for missing values




                                                                                                   68
B     Model Appendix
                          ∂S ∗
B.1     Investigating    ∂ω∂x


B.1.1    Costs

We explore why the second term of expression (3), Θ (x, ω, S ∗ ), is positive. To see why this is the
                                              
                                      fω (ω,S)
case, note that the first term, α4 f (ω,S)H(R)   , measures how PROGRESA changes the marginal effect
                                                  T −P −x
of the endowment on the following term:        f (ω,S ∗ )H(R)   (from equation 2), which represents the cost

of education (expressed as a fraction of foregone earnings), ignoring effort costs. Figure 3A plots

this cost of education as a function of the endowment, separately for high PROGRESA exposure and

low PROGRESA exposure, and shows that it is decreasing in the initial endowment (because higher-

endowment individuals have higher lifetime earnings and therefore a larger denominator). This figure

also demonstrates that PROGRESA shifts this cost curve down for all levels of the initial endowment

but with a bigger shift for lower levels of the endowment. This fact is made more apparent in Figure 3B,

where we see that PROGRESA decreases the magnitude of the negative slope (and therefore increases

the value of the slope) for all levels of the initial endowment. Intuitively, PROGRESA has a larger effect

on low-endowment individuals because the cost reductions are a larger share of their lifetime income

compared to high-endowment individuals, who have higher foregone earnings. A similar interpretation
                                          
                                  fS (ω,S)
applies to the second term, α2 f (ω,S)H(R)   .


B.1.2    Parametric Example of Earnings Function

Suppose that


                                                                          1
                                   f (ω, S) = A · [λω κ + (1 − λ) S κ ] κ ,                              (4)

where κ ∈ [−∞, 1] and λ ∈ [0, 1]. Note that, f (·) is increasing with respect to ω and S, and log-concave

with respect to S. Moreover, f (·) is log-supermodular (log-submodular) with respect to (S, w) if κ < 0

(κ > 0). Note that


                                                                      κ       κ
                                 ΓSω = κ·Ξ (ω, S) ∆(ω,S)+2(1−λ)S    f (ω,S)
                                                      [λω κ +(1−λ)S κ ]4
                                                                            ,                            (5)
                                                             h                       i
where Ξ (ω, S) ≡ λ (1 − λ) S κ−2 ω κ−1 and ∆ (ω, S) ≡ (κ − 1) (γS S κ )2 − (γω ω κ )2 . If the contribution



                                                      69
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                      ∂       T −P −x
                   Figure 3A:     T −P −x                                               Figure 3B:   ∂ω       f (ω,S ∗ )
                                  f (ω,S ∗ )




                                                                      −P −x
      Figure (3A) shows how the standardized cost of schooling, T   f (ω,S ∗ )
                                                                               , change when PROGRESA increases. Figure (3B)
      shows how the slope (with respect to the initial level of endowment) of the standardized cost of schooling change when
      PROGRESA increases.




of the endowment and schooling are similar in the earning function, i.e., ∆ (ω, S) ≈ 0, ΓSω is negative

if κ < 0.


B.2     Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1. First order condition with respect to S is



                        −φ (S) e−St + λ [P (S) − T (S) + x (S)] e−RS − y (ω, S, S) e−RS +                                      (6)
                                                        ∞
                                                             ∂y (ω, S, t) −Rt
                                                                         e    dt = 0,
                                                         S       ∂S

using (A1)


                                                                                            φ (S) e−(ρ−R)S
                     fS (ω, S) H (R) = f (ω, S) + [T (s) − P (s) − x (S)] +                                .                   (7)
                                                                                                   λ

   From the first order conditions with respect to the consumption, together with the budget constraint

                                         S
                            1
                              =               [P (t) − T (t) + x(t)] e−Rt dt + f (ω, S) H (R) e−RS .                           (8)
                           λρ         0



                                                                     70
   Using (8) and (7) and assuming that the tuition cost, part-time earnings and PROGRESA subsidy

are constant over time, i.e., T (t) − P (t) − x (t) = T − P − x for all t, in equilibrium, S is implicitly

defined by



                                                                                       RS ∗ − 1
                                                                 "                             #
        fS (ω, S ∗ )     1      T −P −x                        ∗      (T − P  − x)    e
                     =      +                  + ρφ (S ∗ ) e−ρS 1 − ρ                             .             (9)
        f (ω, S ∗ )    H (R) f (ω, S ∗ ) H (R)                            f (ω, S ∗ ) H (R)

   Next, we assume that tuition costs minus PROGRESA are small relative to lifetime earnings, thus,

S ∗ is uniquely defined by

                                                                                  
                          ∗               ∗   1      T −P −x               ∗ −ρS ∗
               Λ (x, ω, S ) ≡ Γ (ω, S ) −        +                  + ρφ (S ) e      = 0,                      (10)
                                            H (R) f (ω, S ∗ ) H (R)
                                          |                   {z                   }
                                                                           d(x,ω,S ∗ )

                   fS (ω,S)
where Γ (ω, S) ≡    f (ω,S) ,   which is the marginal return to schooling. Note that Λ (x, ω, S) is decreasing

with respect to S. Moreover, note that Λ (x, ω, 0) > 0 and as S → ∞, Λ (x, ω, S) → −∞. Thus, given

(x, ω) ∈ X × Ω, there exists a unique S ∗ that satisfies (10).

   Note that

             ∂Λ            ∂Λ                                             ∂Λ
                = −dx > 0;    = Γω (ω, S) − dω > 0,                          = ΓS (ω, S) − dS (x, ω, S) < 0,
             ∂x            ∂ω                                             ∂S

                     −1
and that dx =   f (ω,S)H(R)     < 0 and


                                       (T − P − x) fS (ω, S)     ∂
                                                                   φ (S) e−ρS > 0.
                                                                             
                              dS = −                         +ρ
                                          f (ω, S) H (R)        ∂S

   Thus, we conclude from the Implicit Function Theorem that


                                       ∂S ∗              −dx
                                            =                              > 0.
                                       ∂x     − [ΓS (ω, S) − dS (x, ω, S)]
                                 −P −x)fω (ω,S)
   Similarly, note that dω = − (TH(R)f (ω,S)2
                                                < 0 and that

                                                              
                                           ∂       fs (ω, S)           fsω (·) f (·) − fs (·) fω (·)
                           Γω (ω, S) =                             =                                 ,
                                          ∂ω       f (ω, S)                       f (·)2

is positive if f (·) is log-supermodular with respect to (S, w). Thus, we conclude that



                                                               71
                                ∂S ∗         Γω (ω, S) − dω
                                     =                              > 0.
                                ∂ω     − [ΓS (ω, S) − dS (x, ω, S)]


   Proof of Proposition 1. Using the implicit function theorem for a surface


                               Λx ΛS ΛSω + Λω ΛS ΛxS − Λx Λω ΛSS − Λ2S Λxω
                                                                          
                      ∂2S∗
                           =                                                 ,
                      ∂ω∂x                         Λ3S

where



             Λx = −dx > 0, Λω = Γω (ω, S) − dω > 0,       ΛS = ΓS (ω, S) − dS (x, S) < 0,



                                ΛSω = ΓSω (ω, S) − dSω , Λxω = −dxω ,



                       ΛxS = −dxS , and, ΛSS = ΓSS (ω, S) − dSS (x, S) .

   Note also that


                                           (T − P − x)
                                 dSω = −               Γω (ω, S) < 0,
                                              H (R)


                                                 fω (ω, S)
                                      dxω =                  > 0,
                                              f (ω, S) H (R)


                                                 fS (ω, S)
                                      dxS =                  > 0,
                                              f (ω, S) H (R)

and


                                (T − P − x)                ∂2
                                            ΓS (ω, S) + ρ 2 φ (S) e−ρS > 0.
                                                                      
                      dSS = −
                                   H (R)                | ∂ S {z      }
                                                                 ≥0

   Thus




                                                  72
      ∂2S∗
                                                                                                       
                    Λx                              Λω              fS (ω, S)                1       fω (ω, S)
           =                  ΓSω (ω, S) −                                              + −                                   (11)
      ∂ω∂x          Λ2S                             Λ2S          f (ω, S) H (R)             ΛS    f (ω, S) H (R)



                                                                           ∂2
                                                                                       
                                   Λx Λω         (T − P − x)                         −ρS
                                                                                         
                      −           − 3          −             ΓS (ω, S) + ρ 2 φ (S) e
                                    ΛS              H (R)                 ∂ S

                                                                       
                                  Λx         (T − P − x)              Λx Λω
                          +                              Γω (ω, S) + − 3      (ΓSS (ω, S)) .
                                  Λ2S           H (R)                  ΛS

   If savings during school are close to zero i.e., (T − P − x) ≈ 0

                                                                      
                                                                 Λx
                                                      =                    ΓSω (ω, S) −                                       (12)
                                                                 Λ2S

                                                                                                   
                                   Λω            fS (ω, S)                    1              fω (ω, S)
                                                                         + −
                                   Λ2S        f (ω, S) H (R)                 ΛS           f (ω, S) H (R)


                                                              ∂2
                                                                           
                                       Λx Λω                            −ρS
                                                                            
                                    + − 3      ΓSS (ω, S) − ρ 2 φ (S) e
                                        ΛS                   ∂ S
              Λx                    Λω
   Let α1 ≡   Λ2S
                    > 0, α2 ≡       Λ2S
                                          > 0, α3 ≡ − ΛΛx Λ3 ω > 0, and α4 ≡ − Λ1S > 0. Then we can write (12) as
                                                                 S



              ∂2S∗                                                       ∂2 
                                                                                           
                                    ∗              ∗                              ∗ −ρS ∗
                    = α1 ΓSω (ω, S ) − Θ (x, ω, S ) + α3 ΓSS − ρ 2            φ (S ) e         ,                              (13)
              ∂ω∂x                                                      ∂ S
                                                                                           
                    ∂2                                         fω (ω,S)              fS (ω,S)
where ΓSω (ω, S) ≡ ∂ω∂S Γ (S, x, ω) and Θ (x, ω, S ∗ ) ≡ α4 f (ω,S)H(R)     + α2 f (ω,S)H(R)    .



B.3    Equilibrium Income

We explore the effects of PROGRESA, endowments, and their interaction, on equilibrium income, y ∗ .

   Lemma 2. Suppose (A1) and (A2) hold in equilibrium.
                                                                                                                ∂y ∗
   (i) The equilibrium income is increasing with respect to PROGRESA x, i.e.,                                   ∂x     > 0.

   (ii) If f (·) is log-supermodular with respect to (S, w), the equilibrium income is increasing with
                                                          ∂y ∗
respect to the initial endowment, ω, i.e.,                ∂ω     > 0.




                                                                           73
      Proof of Lemma 2. From the Implicit Function Theorem there are neighborhoods U ⊂ S of S ∗

and W ⊂ X × Ω of (x, ω) on which equation (2) uniquely defines S ∗ as a function of (x, ω). That is,

there is a function ξ : W → U such that Λ (x, ω, ξ (x, ω)) = 0 for all (x, ω) ∈ W . Note that



                                         y ∗ ≡ y (ω, S ∗ , S ∗ ) = f (ω, ξ (x, ω))

      Then


                              ∂y ∗                     ∂ξ (x, ω)
                                   = fS (ξ (x, ω) , ω)           + fω (ξ (x, ω) , ω) > 0
                              ∂ω                          ∂ω

and


                                          ∂y ∗                     ∂ξ (x, ω)
                                               = fS (ξ (x, ω) , ω)
                                          ∂x                          ∂x

thus the proof follows from Lemma 1.



      Next, we study under what conditions there is remediation or reinforcement in the optimal of level

of income. From Implicit Function Theorem there are neighborhoods U ⊂ S and W ⊂ X × Ω of S ∗ and

(x, ω), respectively, on which there is a function ξ : W → U such that (x, ω, ξ (x, ω)) satisfy (2) for all

(x, ω) ∈ W . We show in the next proposition that remediation on the optimal level of income depends

on,

                                                                

             fSS (ξ (x, ω) , ω) ∂ξ (x, ω) +fSω (ξ (x, ω) , ω) ∂ξ (x, ω) + fS (ξ (x, ω) , x, ω) ∂ξ (x, ω)
                                                             
                                                                                                             (14)
             |       {z       } | ∂ω
                                    {z }
                                                              
                                                                | ∂x
                                                                   {z } |           {z         } | ∂ω∂x
                                                                                                    {z }
                      <0                                                             >0
                                    >0                                >0                           <0

      Proposition 2. Suppose (A1)-(A2) hold in equilibrium. If (14) is negative (positive) there is

remediation (reinforcement) between PROGRESA and the initial level of endowment, in producing the

optimal level of income, y ∗ .



      To understand intuitively when there is remediation in the optimal of level of income we analyze each

of the terms of equation 14. For the last term, we know from Proposition 1 that if there is remediation
                                         ∂ξ(x,ω)
in the optimal level of schooling,        ∂ω∂x     < 0. The first term of the bracket is negative, due to the

concavity of the earnings function, while the last term may be positive if the initial endowment and the


                                                            74
level of schooling are direct complements in the earnings function. Thus, remediation on the optimal

level of income depends on the size of the remediation effect on the optimal level of schooling, and on

the total derivative of the marginal return of education on earnings, with respect the initial endowment

weighted by the marginal effect of PROGRESA on the earnings function.




                                                  75
