                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 EXPANDING FINANCIAL ACCESS VIA CREDIT CARDS:
                            EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO

                                       Sara G. Castellanos
                                    Diego Jiménez Hernández
                                        Aprajit Mahajan
                                          Enrique Seira

                                       Working Paper 24849
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24849


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2018


We like to thank Bernardo Garcia Bulle, Eduardo Rivera, and Isaac Meza for their outstanding
research assistance. We thank Stephanie Bonds, Arun Chandrashekhar, Pascaline Dupas, Liran
Einav, Marcel Fafchamps, Dean Karlan, Asim Khwaja, Melanie Morten, Mauricio Romero,
Carlos Serrano, Sirenia Vazquez, and Jon Zinman for their helpful comments. We thank Ana
Aguilar and Alan Elizondo for their support. We also thank seminar participants at Banco de
Mexico, the Central Bank of Armenia, Columbia, ITAM, The Naval Postgraduate School,
Stanford, UC Berkeley, Yale, USC, UC Merced, BREAD (May 2018), UC Davis, Barcelona
GSE Conference (June 2018), HKUST and UConn. All errors are our own. Previous versions of
this paper was circulated under the titles “Financial Inclusion with Credit Cards in Mexico” and
“The Perils of Bank Lending and Financial Inclusion: Experimental Evidence from Mexico.” The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Banco
de México. AEA RCT Registry Identifying Number: AEARCTR–0003941. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or Banco de México.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sara G. Castellanos, Diego Jiménez Hernández, Aprajit Mahajan, and Enrique Seira. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Expanding Financial Access Via Credit Cards: Evidence from Mexico
Sara G. Castellanos, Diego Jiménez Hernández, Aprajit Mahajan, and Enrique Seira
NBER Working Paper No. 24849
July 2018, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D14,D18,D82,G20,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

Credit card debt is increasingly common among poor and inexperienced borrowers – thus de
facto a financial inclusion product. However, it remains relatively under-studied. We use detailed
card level data and a product that accounted for 15% of all first-time formal loans in Mexico and
show that default rates are high and ex-ante unpredictable for new borrowers – suggesting an
important role for ex-post contract terms in limiting risk. However, using a large nation-wide
experiment we find that default is unresponsive to minimum payment increases, a commonly
proposed policy remedy. We provide evidence that the zero result is driven by the offsetting
effects of tightened liquidity constraints and lower debt burdens. Surprisingly, we also find muted
default responses to large experimental changes in interest rates – suggesting a limited role for
ex-post moral hazard in our context. Finally, we use job displacements to document large effects
of unemployment on default, highlighting the centrality of idiosyncratic shocks as a barrier to the
expansion of formal credit among poorer populations.

Sara G. Castellanos                              Aprajit Mahajan
Banco de México                                  Dept. of Agricultural & Resource Economics
saragcastellanos@gmail.com                       University of California, Berkeley
                                                 219 Giannini Hall
Diego Jiménez Hernández                          Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
Stanford University                              and NBER
579 Serra Mall                                   aprajit@gmail.com
Stanford, CA 94305
diego.j.jimenez.h@gmail.com                      Enrique Seira
                                                 Centro de Investigación Económica
                                                 ITAM
                                                 Ave. Santa Teresa # 930
                                                 Mexico
                                                 enrique.seira@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Credit card borrowing is increasingly common in many developing countries (see Figure 1) and
is often the first formal sector loan product for borrowers. For instance, in Mexico (our country
of focus) it was the first loan type for 74% of all formal sector borrowers (and comprises over half
of all formal sector loans). In Peru and Colombia, credit cards were the first formal loan for 83%
and 51% of all formal borrowers respectively. Even in the United States, credit cards are the most
common way to enter the formal credit sector, comprising about half of all first time formal loans.1
Credit card use has been expanding to low income populations (see Figure 2(a) for Mexico), and
this expansion of borrowing among often poor and inexperienced borrowers has in turn led to
increased policy attention and regulation on key contract terms aimed at limiting (what is seen as)
excessive debt and default risk.2
        Despite its increasing role in deepening financial inclusion and increased policy attention and
regulation, credit card borrowing in developing countries remains relatively understudied — par-
ticularly relative to other recent approaches to expanding credit access, e.g. micro-finance. As
context, there were approximately 2.3 million micro-finance clients in Mexico in 2009, while the
single credit card we study, targeted at borrowers with non-existent or limited credit histories,
taken alone had 1.3 million customers at the time (Pedroza, 2010, and authors’ calculations.) Thus,
relative to their importance as an engine of credit expansion, credit cards have received relatively
little attention from development economists.
        In this paper, we study credit card lending to borrowers with limited credit histories in Mexico.
To do so, we use detailed individual-level loan data, and a large-scale country-level randomized
experiment on new borrowers (we will often use the abbreviation NTB borrowers to denote such
new to banking borrowers). The experiment focuses on a specific card (henceforth the study card)
targeted at NTB borrowers issued by one of the country’s largest commercial banks (Bank A from
now on). In 2010, the study card was a flagship financial inclusion product in Mexico and ac-
counted for approximately 15% of all first-time formal sector loan products nationwide (Figure
2b). We use this experiment as a window into the challenges of financial inclusion through credit
cards.
        We begin by establishing two central facts about NTB credit card borrowers. First, NTB bor-
rowers have high default rates — about 19% of our sample of Bank A borrowers defaulted on
the study card over the 26 month study period. Newer borrowers are much riskier: default is
    1
     The figures for Mexico are from authors’ calculations. The figures for Colombia are from Banca de las Oportu-
nidades (2016). The figure for Peru was obtained through Universidad del Pacifico and kindly provided by Mirko
Daga. The numbers for the U.S. are from Haughwout et al. (2020). There does not, however, appear to be an inter-
nationally comparable database that can be used to examine this at a global level. We provide numbers from all the
countries for which we were able to obtain data.
   2
     For instance, in Mexico and Taiwan, the state mandates a floor on minimum payments. Singapore mandates both
minimum income requirements as well as automatic credit suspension for any borrower not making their minimum
payment for 60 days. Several countries mandate transparency in terms and conditions as well as limit the scope of
interest rate increases and penalty fees (e.g. the United States and South Korea). See e.g. Nelson (2020); Financial
Conduct Authority (2015).



                                                         1
twice as high for borrowers who had been with Bank A for less than a year relative to borrowers
who had been with the bank for more than two years. We document similarly high default rates
for NTB borrowers in a representative credit bureau sample of 1 millon borrowers, evidence that
these default rates are a general feature of lending to NTB borrowers. Second, we use a large set of
observables and a range of machine learning methods and find that default is difficult to predict
at the time of card issuance. Given this lack of predictability, the role of ex-post contract terms in
mitigating risk assumes even greater importance.
    We then ask whether default can be reduced by altering two key elements of the credit card
contract: minimum payments and interest rates. To our knowledge, this is the first experimental
evaluation of changes in minimum payments as well as the first experimental evaluation of joint
changes in interest rates and minimum payments. The experiment, carried out by Bank A, cov-
ered all 32 Mexican states, (and 1,360 out of 2348 municipalities) and randomly allocated 162,000
pre-existing study card borrowers to 8 treatment arms that varied monthly minimum payments
(between 5% and 10%) and annual interest rates (between 15%, 25%, 35% and 45%) and a control
group. The magnitude of experimental variation as well as the sample sizes are substantial.
    We study the 26 months of the experimental period from March 2007 to May 2009. In addition,
we also follow borrowers and examine outcomes three years after the experiment ended (June
2012). The sampling scheme ensures that the experimental results are representative of the bank’s
national population of study card customers (about 1.3 million at the start of the study) — all bor-
rowers had signed up for the study card under the status quo contract terms (minimum payment
of 4% and an annual interest rate of 55%), so our results are conditional on this initial selection.
    We first examine the effects of the experimentally induced changes in minimum payments.
Policy-makers, worried that low minimum payments could lead to excessive borrowing and in-
creased default with negative consequences for both borrowers and the financial system, have
advocated raising minimum payments.3 As a consequence of this global policy debate, the Mexi-
can Central Bank mandated a floor for minimum payments in 2010. Higher minimum payments,
however, could have two opposing effects and it is not apriori clear which one will dominate.
On the one hand, ceteris paribus, higher minimum payments reduce debt, easing the repayment
burden, thereby reducing default. On the other hand, higher minimum payments reduce effec-
tive borrowing possibilities, tighten short run liquidity constraints, which increases default. This
trade-off has been explicitly recognized in policy discussions,4 but there is, hitherto, no evidence
   3
     See e.g. Warren (2007); Bar-Gill (2003). In the United States policy makers have evaluated this possibility given that
many minimum payments do not cover the finance charges (https://goo.gl/X8ujTi). For a detailed description of the
global attention to such concerns and the various policy prescriptions around it, see Financial Conduct Authority (2015).
Such prescriptions find some support in models of time-inconsistent or unaware agents (Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2010;
Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2016; DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004; Gabaix and Laibson, 2006). There is some evidence
that time inconsistent preferences play a role in credit card debt accumulation (Meier and Sprenger, 2010; Laibson et al.,
2003; Shui and Ausubel, 2005) and that minimum payments serve as an anchoring device (Stewart, 2009; Keys and
Wang, 2019).
   4
     For instance, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority notes that “The [increase in] minimum payment
requirement [attempts to] ensure consumers pay off credit card debts faster, incurring less cumulative debt in the long
run. It is plausible that such a measure could increase default rates in the short run, as consumers are forced to pay off
bigger proportions of their balance up front.” Financial Conduct Authority (2015).


                                                            2
on the matter. The liquidity effect may be particularly relevant for poorer borrowers – at the start
of the experiment for instance, 73% of borrowers’ monthly payments were less than 10 percent of
the total debt.
       Our first finding is that doubling the minimum payment (from 5 to 10 percent of total debt)
had no effect on default over the 26 month study period. The intervention also increased card
cancellations and reduced (a proxy for) bank revenues suggesting, if anything, that both borrowers
and the bank were hurt by the change. This provides sobering evidence on the effectiveness of
lowering default through increased minimum payments even over a relatively long period. We
next attempt to unpack the null effect of the increased minimum payments by examining behavior
in June 2012, three years after the experiment ended. After the experiment ended in May 2009, the
second effect (tightened contemporaneous liquidity constraints) was no longer operational as all
subjects were returned to a common minimum payment (4%). However, because debt was lower
at the end of the experiment in the higher minimum payment arms, the repayment burden effect
should be smaller in these arms. Our second finding verifies this. In stark contrast to the null
effect in the short run where the opposing effects likely operated, the effect of the higher minimum
payments on default was substantively (and statistically) significantly stronger in June 2012 than in
May 2009. It seems reasonable to assume that during the experiment the two countervailing effects
cancelled each other out, highlighting the double-edged nature of increasing minimum payments
as a policy tool to limit default.
       Turning to interest rates, our third finding is that reducing the interest rate from 45% to 15% re-
duced default by 2.6 percentage points (on a base rate of 19 percent) over the 26 month experiment.
The implied elasticity is a relatively small: +0.20.5 This is somewhat surprising since a positive
correlation between default and interest rates (conditional on selection) is often interpreted as a
measure of moral hazard6 and our apriori expectation was that moral hazard would be a signif-
icant contributor to borrower default for NTB borrowers. This finding is potentially important
since it suggests that (conditional on selection) asymmetric information in the form of moral haz-
ard may not be a prime determinant of default in our NTB population. In the same vein, our final
experimental finding, taking advantage of the stratified experimental design, is that default elas-
ticities are increasing in tenure with the bank so that interest rate changes are least effective for
those borrowers for whom the asymmetric information problem is likely the most acute (i.e. the
newest NTB borrowers).
   5
      This contrasts with other work (e.g. Adams et al., 2009) who find that interest rates are an important determinant
of default for U.S. auto loans. Our default responsiveness is considerably smaller than the effects on delinquency rates
documented in Karlan and Zinman (2017) although the authors do not report effects on default. It is also smaller than
the elasticity implied by the Karlan and Zinman (2009) interest rate interventions in South Africa. See Table OA-15 for
a comparison table.
    6
      “[T]he theory of moral hazard suggests that high interest rates give greater reason to default, for those who have a
choice” (Banerjee and Duflo, 2010). A significant literature infers moral hazard from the causal effect of interest rates on
default (conditional on the selection) (see e.g. Karlan and Zinman, 2009; Adams et al., 2009). The causal effect on default
arises from both a debt or repayment burden effect (higher interest rates mechanically increase the debt burden) as well
as a “pure” moral hazard or incentive effect (higher interest rates increase incentives for default independently of debt
burden). That the combined effect is small implies that both effects are small. Note that default is always feasible and
that there is “space” for responses in both directions as baseline default is 19%.


                                                             3
       In the last section we show that default, while unresponsive to large changes in contract terms,
is very responsive to changes in employment status. Matching the universe of Mexican Social
Security data with credit bureau data, we find first that 37% of our sample experienced at least
one separation episode during the study period (of 31 months). Using downsizing (mass layoffs)
as a proxy for involuntary separation (see e.g. Jacobson et al., 1993; Couch and Placzek, 2010;
Flaaen et al., 2019) we estimate that displacement (defined as separation that occurs as part of
a downsizing) leads to a 7 percentage point increase in the probability of default on a formal
sector loan in the next year, corresponding to 36% of the mean default rate. These magnitudes
are substantial and are consistent with the hypothesis that NTB borrowers are vulnerable to large
shocks that precipitate default.7
       We draw three lessons from these results. First, despite the regulatory emphasis on increasing
minimum payments to protect inexperienced borrowers, we find them to be of limited effective-
ness in limiting default. Second, ex-post contract terms do little to mitigate risk among our sample
of pre-existing NTB borrowers. This is unfortunate since ex-ante screening through credit scoring
methods is difficult for new borrowers given limited or non-existent credit histories. Third, the
small casual effect of interest rates suggests that moral hazard – interpreted as the causal effect
of interest rates on default (conditional on selection) – may be less important than other factors
in contributing to default. In particular, large idiosyncratic shocks (here unemployment, though
illness could also have similar effects) may be important drivers of default, suggesting a more
prominent role for insurance in expanding financial access. These lessons point to difficulties in
expanding credit to NTB borrowers using credit cards – in fact, after nearly a decade of expend-
ing considerable effort and resources, Bank A stopped issuing the study card entirely by 2010 and
moved away from lending to NTB borrowers.
       This paper connects with several strands in the literature on credit markets. First, a recent
literature identifies lack of access to formal financial services as a general problem in developing
countries and advocates supply-side interventions aimed at increasing financial inclusion – that is
the creation of broad-based access to financial services, particularly for poor and disadvantaged
populations.8 We provide a detailed empirical analysis of the difficulties involved in expanding
formal credit access through an increasingly commonly used – though under-studied – product
as well as causal evidence on the effectiveness of standard policy tools at mitigating default risk.
Our work also adds to an earlier literature that critiques institutional, typically state-led and agri-
cultural, lending to the poor (see e.g Adams et al., 1984). In this literature, limited formal private
sector engagement with poor borrowers is taken as prima facie evidence of the inability to do so
profitably. Our study provides detailed evidence on a large-scale commercial bank’s experience of
   7
      Since the social security data only capture formal employment, our results are only about separations in the formal
sector. In that sense, the effects are potentially a lower bound since absence from the social security data may not mean
unemployment – workers may have found informal employment.
    8
      This literature has largely been descriptive, documenting, for instance, the large numbers of people world-wide
who do not use formal banking services. See e.g. Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper (2012), though Dabla-Norris et al. (2015)
is a notable exception. See also Dupas et al. (2018) who provide experimental evidence (from a multi-country trial) that
a focus on expanding access to bank accounts by itself may only have limited welfare impacts.



                                                           4
lending to poor inexperienced borrowers using an increasingly common credit instrument.
        We also contribute to the empirical literature documenting the existence and gravity of infor-
mational problems in credit markets.9 We complement this literature by focusing on a different
population (borrowers who are new to formal credit), a different product (credit cards) and dif-
ferent contract terms (minimum payments). In addition, we examine the relative importance of
liquidity constraints, repayment burden and “pure” moral hazard over a longer (five year) hori-
zon; our research design also allows us to isolate some effects (e.g the effect of the debt repayment
burden). Finally, we believe we are the first to document the effects of formal sector job displace-
ment on default risk for a developing country.
        The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines the various data sets we use and provides ba-
sic summary statistics. Section 3 provides relevant institutional context and establishes some facts
about financial inclusion and credit in Mexico using a large representative sample of borrowers
from the formal credit market and our sample from Bank A. Section 4 describes the experiment
while Section 5 reports the effects of the experiment on default, cancellations and bank revenues,
the primary outcomes of interest. Section 6 discusses some of the mechanisms driving the treat-
ment effects documented in Section 5, Section 7 estimates the effect of job displacement on default,
and Section 8 concludes. Due to space constraints some robustness analyses and secondary figures
and tables are reported in the Online Appendices (OA).


2        Data, Main Outcomes and Summary Statistics
In this section we outline the data sets used, the primary outcomes considered and summary statis-
tics for our experimental sample.

2.1       Data sets
We use six different data sets. The first data set is a monthly individual level administrative panel
for a sample of 162,000 cardholders from Bank A. The second data set comes from the Credit
Bureau and is an annual panel matched to the sample of 162,000 study card holders. The third
group comprises a set of six large representative samples of one million consumers each from the
Mexican Credit Bureau that allows us to make population level statements and comparisons. The
fourth dataset is the Mexican Social Security data matched to the bank and credit bureau data. The
last two data sets are nationally representative surveys (ENIGH, MxFLS). We next describe each in
turn. Figure 4 provides a comprehensive view of our main data sets and their measurement dates.

Bank Data (Experimental Sample) and Study Card:
Study Card: We use detailed data from a large commercial Mexican bank and a product (the study
card) that accounted for 15% of first-time loans nation-wide in 2010. The study card is a credit
card that can be used at a large set of supermarkets as well as other stores. In 2011, these stores
    9
        See e.g. Edelberg (2004), Karlan and Zinman (2009), Adams et al. (2009), Einav et al. (2012).



                                                               5
that accounted for 43% of all household expenditures at supermarkets and 16% of all household
expenditures in Mexico.10 The card was specifically targeted at low-income borrowers with no or
limited credit histories (internally the bank referred to them as the C, C- and D customer segments).
It had an initial credit limit of approximately 7,000 pesos, an annual interest rate of 55 basis points
over the base rate and a monthly minimum payment of 4% of the total amount outstanding. The
card was initially offered in 2003, and by 2009 Bank A had approximately 1.3 million clients ,
a substantial financial inclusion effort in a country where there were approximately 11 millions
cards at the time.

Sample: The sample consisted of a stratified random sample of study card holders. Card holders
were chosen subject to the additional constraint that they had paid at least the minimum amount
due in each of the six months prior to (and including) January 2007. This left the bank with a sam-
pling frame of about one million clients from which the study sample was drawn. The sampling
frame was partitioned into nine strata based on tenure with the bank and payment behavior (each
taking on three values), which the bank uses internally as predictors of default (see Section 4.1 for
more details). The bank then randomly selected a sample of 18,000 clients per stratum. We use
stratum weights (see Table OA-9) in all of our analysis to ensure our results are representative of
the sampling frame. Within each stratum, clients were randomly assigned to one of nine study
arms so there are 2,000 clients per treatment arm within a stratum. In what follows we will often
restrict attention to the 8 primary study arms which gives us a total sample of 144,000 clients across
the 9 strata. As noted earlier, the resulting sample is geographically widespread – covering all 31
states and the Federal District, 1,360 municipalities and 12,233 zip codes. We examine the external
validity of the sample for the national population of NTB borrowers below in Table 1.

Variables: For this sample of 144,000 clients, we have monthly level data on purchases, payments,
debt, credit limits, default and cancellations from March 2007 to May 2009. In addition to this
detailed transaction information we also observe some basic demographic variables – age, gender,
marital status and residential zip code. Finally, we also observe default status for the study sample
in June 2012, three years after the end of the experiment.

Credit Bureau Data (Matched to Experimental Sample): We were able to match the experimen-
tal sample to the credit bureau data once each year (from June 2007 to June 2010) and once more in
June 2012. This enables us to observe other formal sector transactions by the experimental sample
thereby allowing us to measure effects on non-Bank A related outcomes (e.g. overall debt or over-
all default). We will refer to this data as the matched CB data. We also observe credit score in each
of these snapshots, but no information on other interest rates.

Credit Bureau Data (Representative Cross-Section): We use six random samples of one million
borrowers from the Mexican Credit Bureau (Buró de Crédito) to describe the population of NTB
borrowers in the country. We observe six credit bureau representative cross-sections from June
  10
       We thank Marco Gonzalez-Navarro for kindly carrying out the calculations using data from Atkin et al. (2018).


                                                            6
2010, June 2011, June 2012, June 2013, December 2013, and March 2014. A borrower appears in the
credit bureau if she has or has had a loan with a formal financial intermediary.11 For each borrower
we observe the date of loan initiation, the source and type of loan and her monthly delinquency
and default history. We have limited information on total loan amounts and no information on the
interest rate, or other contract terms. Unlike the matched CB data, we do not observe credit scores
for the borrowers in these random sample snapshots. We also observe some demographics – age,
gender, marital status and zip code. We use this information to provide a snapshot of financial
inclusion – in particular we describe the characteristics of first-time and recent borrowers, their
sources of credit and their repayment history. We will refer to this as the CB data.

Matched Social Security Data Panel: We were also able to merge the universe of Mexican formal
workers (close to 14 million) from social security agency’s records from November 2011 to March
2014 to obtain information on formal employment. We observe the formal sector wage for those
employed in the formal sector in this dataset.

Survey Data (ENIGH, MxFLS): We also draw upon two national surveys to supplement the data
above. We use Mexico’s income-expenditure survey (ENIGH 2004, 2012) to measure credit card
penetration in the country and the Mexican Family Life Survey (2005 and 2008) to measure loan
terms for both formal and informal loans.

2.2    Main outcomes

Default. Default is defined as three consecutive monthly payments that are each less than the
minimum payment due. In such instance, the bank revokes the card automatically. Therefore we
will refer to default and revocation interchangeably. Default is enormously relevant for policy
makers since it can be an important source of financial instability and is particularly worrisome in
poor populations. In fact, the experiment described in this paper was driven in part by the Mexican
Central Bank’s concern over default rates among NTB borrowers. Default is clearly important for
banks as well since it directly affects profits. Finally, the literature on credit market imperfections
has focused on default in testing for moral hazard.

Client cancellation. Cancellation refers to the event when a borrower voluntarily cancels their
card. Cancelling a card is an active decision which the client can take after repaying the debt
outstanding on the card. Cancellations are of direct interest because they provide some revealed
preference evidence on the change in the study card’s attractiveness as a result of contract term
changes and because they typically reduce bank revenues.

  11
    The Credit Bureau is required to maintain all records provided by reporting agencies for a fixed period of time. As
of September 2004 the Credit Bureau received information from 1,021 data suppliers including banks, credit unions,
non-bank leasing companies, telecommunications companies, some MFIs, retailers (e.g. department stores), SOFOLES
– limited purpose financial entities specializing in consumer credit, e.g. for auto loans and mortgages – and other
commercial firms (World Bank, 2005).



                                                          7
Revenue. Measures of bank revenues (and profits) from the study card – difficult to observe –
are critical for understanding the long term viability of expanding financial access through credit
cards. They are also informative about the commercial feasibility of the experimental contract
terms. We quantify bank revenue from the study card using the detailed data on purchases, pay-
ments and debt over the 26 month experiment.12 We define revenue for card i as


                          Revi = PV(Pay - Buy)i − Debt03/07,i + αi PV(Debt05/09,i )                                   (1)

where PV(·) stands for the present value of the stream of payments inside parentheses that are
discounted at the TIIE (the Mexican inter-bank rate).13 If we observed a card from inception until
closure, the exercise above would reduce to subtracting the net present value of payments from the
net present value of purchases. Unfortunately, we only observe cards for a 26 month window so
have to account for card usage before and after the experiment. We account for pre-study behavior
by subtracting the amount due from card i at the start of the experiment (March 2007). We assume
that post-study, borrowers make no further purchases and default on their outstanding debt with
probability φi in which case the bank recovers 10% of the amount due.14
       Several features are worth noting. First, this measure of revenue accounts, albeit mechanically,
for both default and cancellations. By the same reasoning it incorporates interest and fees. Second,
it is not a comprehensive measure of profit since it does not include promotion costs, the cost of
the physical card and maintenance or administrative expenses or any income earned by merchant
discount fees or interchange fees. Nevertheless, in our estimation, it provides a useful proxy for
card-level bank revenue.
       Figure OA-10 plot histograms of our revenue measure. The measure shows considerable dis-
persion — the standard deviation is 7,347 pesos, considerably larger than the mean of 4,197 pe-
sos. Newer borrowers exhibit even greater dispersion. In private conversations, Bank A officials
confirmed that average revenue, its dispersion, and its relation to credit scores are reasonable.
To assess its reasonableness, we examine correlations with credit scores. Revenue displays an
inverted-U pattern with respect to initial credit scores. This inverted-U shaped relationship be-
tween bank revenues has been documented in other markets which gives us further confidence in
our construct (e.g. Fig. II.E in Agarwal et al. (2015) plots a similar inverted-U relationship using
credit card data for the United States).
  12
     The exercise is analogous to the quantification performed in Adams et al. (2009) though the on-going borrowing
on the card and data censoring (outside of the study period of 26 months) are important differences. Measuring bank
profits or revenues is relatively uncommon (Agarwal et al., 2015; Adams et al., 2009, are notable exceptions.) for lack of
data.
  13
      P V (X)i = Tt=t    (1 + r)−t Xit where time is measured in months, t0 is March 2007 (03/07) and Ti is either May
                 P i
                       0
2009 (05/09) or the month in which the card exited the study (if this happened before 05/09.
  14
     For each card i, φi is modeled as a function of its credit score using a non-parametric regression of default (during
the 26 month window 03/07-05/09) against the credit score in June 2007 for the control group. We then assigned φi
based on the estimated regression evaluated at the credit score for i in June 2009 (see figure OA-9). The 10% figure for
debt collections is based on conversations with bank officials. The expected fraction (of the amount due) that would be
recovered then is given by αi ≡ φi × 0.1 + (1 − φi ) × 1. Figure OA-11 in the OA shows that our measure of revenue is
not particularly sensitive to the choice of αi .



                                                            8
2.3    Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics of the experimental sample in columns 1-2 and comparisons
with samples representative of Mexican borrowers in columns 3–5. The experimental sample is of
broad interest in itself since the study card accounted for 15% of all first-time formal sector loan
products nation-wide. In Column 3 we use the CB sub-sample that had at least one active credit
card in June 2010, making it a nationally representative sample of the population of borrowers
with at least one credit card (in 2010). Since our experimental sample is relatively new to formal
credit, we attempt to find a comparable group in the CB data by constructing a sample whose
credit history duration matches that of the experimental sample. We do this by matching the
distribution of the oldest credit entry across the experimental and CB samples. This is the sub-
sample for which summary statistics are reported in column 4 and we refer to it as the new (or
recent) borrower sample (see Online Appendix Subsection B.2 for details). Finally, in column 5 we
consider a sub-sample of experienced borrowers – those with a credit history of at least 8 years
(the median) in the CB data.
      The experimental sample is just over half male, with an average age of approximately forty,
about three-fifths of whom were married at the start of the study (Panel C). Other than marriage
rates (which are lower in the CB) the figures are roughly comparable to those of the three CB
data sub-samples. Borrowers in the experimental sample are somewhat less well-off relative to
the average CB member. For the borrowers that we could match to the social security, average
monthly income (in 2011) in the experimental sample is 13,855 pesos compared to an average
of 14,759 for recent borrowers and 22,641 for experienced borrowers.15 Figure OA-7 shows that
the distribution of income for the experimental sample is first-order stochastically dominated by
corresponding distribution for the CB sub-sample from column 3. Since we were unable to match
82% of the experimental sample with the social security, we concluded that these individuals were
in the informal sector with likely lower, less stable incomes.
      Credit information also points towards our experimental sample being “marginal”. First, the
mean credit score of 645 is low in absolute terms – borrowers with scores below 670 are typically
ineligible for standard credit card products.16 Second, the card issued by Bank A was the first
formal loan ever product for 47 percent of the sample, and for 57% it was their first card. Third,
our study sample was, unsurprisingly, at the low-end of borrowing ability in the CB data. The
credit limit for the study card was relatively low at 7,879 pesos and the overall card limit for the
experimental sample (across all cards) was 15,776 pesos in 2007, rising to 18,475 pesos by June
2010. For comparison, in 2010 the mean card limit was 49,604 pesos for the CB sub-sample with at
  15
     For comparison, average monthly per capita income in Mexico in 2007 was 4,984 pesos. The 25th and 75th per-
centiles of income for our experimental sample are 2,860 and 19,535 pesos respectively, while they are 2,580 and 6,000
pesos for the country as a whole. Our income numbers are not adjusted for family size or for other earners in the
card-owner’s family. These numbers are conditional on working in the formal sector. We could match 18% of our ex-
perimental sample and about 13% of the CB data to the IMSS. Well over half of Mexico’s labor force is in the informal
sector so is not captured in the social security data, and many formal workers do not have loans.
  16
     See Drenik et al. (2018). Unfortunately we cannot compare scores to the other CB sub-samples (Cols 3-5) since credit
scores were not provided in these CB cross-sections.



                                                           9
least one active card, 22,082 pesos for the CB recent borrowers sub-sample and 56,187 pesos for the
experienced sub-sample. Fourth, borrowers have high rates of default; 17% of the experimental
sample as a whole defaulted on the study card over the course of the experiment (the figure is 19%
for the sample we will use as our base comparison group in the experiment). Based on the figures
presented above, we conclude that the experimental sample was indeed drawn from a financially
fragile population.



3        Financial Inclusion with Credit Cards

3.1        Commercial Banks Increase Lending to Poorer Individuals
         Formal credit penetration is low in Mexico,17 but has been growing, primarily via large banks
using credit cards to serve under-served populations. Figure 2(b) shows that more than 70 percent
of first time loans are through a credit card. The corresponding figures for Peru, Colombia and
the US are 83%, 51% and about 50% respectively – credit cards are increasingly the most common
way for individuals to obtain formal credit. In Mexico, the number of credit cards nationwide
grew from 10 million in the first quarter of 2004 to 24.6 million in the last quarter of 2011 with
a substantial part of the growth being concentrated among lower income individuals (see Figure
2(a) and Banco de México, 2016) – the study card playing an important role in this expansion
accounting for 15% of all first-time formal sector loans in 2010.
         This desire to pursue low-income clients appears to have been in part inspired by the success
of Banco Compartamos and Banco Azteca.18 However, both Compartamos and Azteca pursue
markedly different strategies than those pursued by Bank A. Compartamos uses joint liability (via
group lending) while Azteca requires collateral (typically household durables) – in stark contrast,
Bank A uses individual uncollateralized lending. In addition, both lenders expend considerable
resources on face-to-face interactions and home visits while Bank A relies on credit scoring and
distance monitoring. Finally, Bank A relies on standard debt collection mechanisms (declining to
pursue loans defaults that are less than 50,000 pesos) while Azteca and Compartamos pursue debt
collection much more vigorously.19 This approach is costly – both Compartamos and Azteca have
higher operating expenses (relative to assets, see Fig OA-8) than Bank A – and potentially limits
the scale of financial inclusion.


    17
      The ratio of private credit to GDP was 23 percent in 2010, while in the same year the figure was 52, 98, 43 and
40 percent for Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Latin America and the Caribbean respectively. The percentage of adults
with at least one credit card was 17 percent (in 2014) compared to about 70% – 80% for the United States. See US:
https://goo.gl/bVWnaS and https://goo.gl/UG6pgn. For Mexico, see the “Reporte de Inclusion Financiera” (2016)
(https://goo.gl/kYy4ae), Graph 1.12.
   18
      See e.g. https://goo.gl/7HufqG; https://goo.gl/vi2EYK; https://goo.gl/sjgoAn.
   19
      Azteca uses “crude collection and repossession mechanisms” (Ruiz, 2013). Ruiz attributes Banco Azteca success to
its ability “to leverage its relationship with a large retail chain (Elektra) to reduce transaction costs, acquire effective
information and enforce loan repayment.”



                                                            10
3.2    Regulatory Concerns with Minimum Payments
Regulators in many countries have expressed concerns with credit card terms, particularly for
financially inexperienced borrowers. In particular, minimum payments are often held to be too low
– i.e. failing to cover even financing charges. Typical minimum payments have decreased from 5%
of outstanding debt in the 1970s to 2% in the 2000s (Kim, 2005) – according to Keys and Wang (2019)
this was partly a result of issuers lowering minimum payments in order to extend repayment
periods. Lower minimum payments are thought to increase indebtedness and eventually default
with potentially dire consequences for the financial sector (see e.g. this circular https://goo.gl/
MkYbVO from the Mexican Central Bank). In addition, there is also evidence of behavioral biases
such as borrowers anchoring payments at the minimum payment (Stewart, 2009; Keys and Wang,
2019) which is an additional concern.
      Regulators worldwide have noticed and often criticized low minimum payments. In the U.S.,
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency issued a guidance on minimum payment that “ex-
pect[ed] lenders to require minimum payments to amortize the current balance over a reasonable
period of time” OCC (2003). Mexico and Taiwan have been the most forceful, instituting a regu-
latory floor for minimum payments. Other countries have mandated statement disclosures – that
e.g. display the time required to pay off a debt while only making minimum payments (e.g. in the
United States and South Korea). The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority discusses
the various measures undertaken by regulators in a set of nine countries.20 Despite these persis-
tent concerns, there is scarce evidence on the causal effects of minimum payments on debt and
default.21 This paper provides the first experimental evidence on this question.


3.3    Stylized Facts
We document that (a) NTB borrowers default at high rates and default decreases with formal credit
sector tenure and (b) provide suggestive evidence that default and revenue are difficult to predict.

                                             A. High Default Rates

During our 26 month study approximately 19 percent of the control group defaulted on their card,
compared to an average cumulative 26-month default rate of 12 percent for a random sample of
cards in the credit bureau during the same period. NTB borrowers for the study card are thus quite
risky, even though the sample is presumably positively selected since (a) it comprises successful
applicants approved by Bank A and (b) all borrowers had made at least the minimum payment in
the six months prior to January 2007 for inclusion in the experiment.
   20
      Financial Conduct Authority (2015). Economists have also shown concern. Keys and Wang (2019) write that “In-
creasing minimum payments could also help issuers mitigate default risk”. They also recognize that mandating min-
imum payment increases has stark trade-offs: “it may be difficult to help anchoring [their minimum payments] con-
sumers increase their payments without placing some restriction on the choices of liquidity constrained consumers.”.
   21
      d’Astous and Shore (2017) focus on examining delinquency and default employing using a quasi-experimental
design on observational data from the United States.



                                                        11
       Default risk, however, is not homogeneous. Figure 3(a) shows that newer borrowers are riskier
(blue bars): default rates are 36% (during the experiment for the control group) for borrowers who
had been with the bank for less than a year (the “6-11m” stratum) when the study began. The
corresponding figure for the borrowers who had been with the bank for more than 2 years when
the experiment began are half that rate at 18 percent.22
       The finding that newer borrowers are riskier also holds for a representative sample of NTB bor-
rowers in the credit bureau. Mimicking the experimental sample, Figure 3(b) examines behavior
on the first card obtained by Mexican borrowers during the same period as the experiment. To
be comparable with the experiment, we condition on cards that had not been delinquent in the
6 months previous to January 2007. Figure 3(b) plots default in this card in the next 26 months
as a function of how long borrowers have had the card. We plot default rates for three different
groups: the study card (all cards, not just those in the experiment), all credit cards of Bank A (not
just those targeted at NTB borrowers), and all cards of all banks. We see that the study card has
default rates twice as high as those of Bank A’s other cards – consistent with the study card be-
ing a “financial inclusion” product. Second, overall default rates for Bank A are similar to those
at other banks, suggesting our partner bank is comparable to other banks in this respect. Finally,
the negative slope shows that, across all banks, newer borrowers are more likely to default – for
instance, borrowers with a card tenure of less than 3 months are twice as risky as borrowers with
a card tenure of 3 years. Serving new borrowers – financial inclusion – is evidently risky.


                       B. Default and Revenue are Difficult to Predict for NTB Borrowers

Large banks rely heavily on credit scoring and predictive modeling to screen consumers. In other
contexts such methods have led to significant credit expansions.23 It is unclear whether such an
approach is suitable for financial inclusion as NTB borrowers by definition have little or no credit
information with which to estimate such models. For instance, at the moment of application, 57
percent of the study card borrowers did not have any credit cards and 47 percent did not have any
other formal sector loan.
       We find that default is difficult to predict in our data even using state-of-the-art predictive
methods.24 We use the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC–ROC) as our
measure of predictive power for default. This measure summarizes the predictive ability of the
model to separate defaulters (true positives) and non-defaulters (true negatives) and goes from
0.5 (worst) to 1 (best). We report an AUC of 0.79 for our best-performing model (see Appendix
G.). For comparison, this is lower than those found for credit cards in the US (Khandani et al.,
2010, report AUCs in the 0.89-0.95 range) and for other loans (Ala’Raj and Abbod, 2016, reports
  22
     These differing rates may be driven by at least three forces: positive selection, as riskier borrowers leave the market;
experience, as borrowers learn how to manage their cards; and lower moral hazard, as non-defaulting borrowers exert
more effort to avoid default to protect their reputation. We do not attempt to separate these.
  23
     See e.g. Einav et al. (2013).
  24
     Note that our sample consists of successful applications that are, presumably, positively selected for the outcomes
examined. The high prevalence of adverse outcomes (e.g default) even for such a population is indicative of the magni-
tude of the bank’s selection problem.


                                                             12
AUCs of 0.80, 0.94, 0.93, 0.77 and 0.84 for loan data from Germany, Australia, Japan, Iran, and
Poland, respectively), and lower than what Fuster et al. (2017) reports for US mortgage data. This
comparison highlights the difficulty of predicting default among our NTB borrowers.
         We, likewise, find that predicting revenue is extremely difficult in our NTB sample using credit
bureau information available at the time of application. Table OA-6 show a wide array of predic-
tive performance measures for a selected subset of prediction models with increasingly finer in-
formation sets. In terms of revenue, using the information available to the bank at the moment of
application, the correlation (ρ) between the predicted (using random forests — our best model) and
realized revenue is 0.28, with a substantial root mean square error of 7,204 pesos (mean revenue is
4,197 pesos). Using post-approval information, and even including the credit score does not yield
much better results. Part of the difficulty in predicting revenue stems from the difficulty of pre-
dicting default (ρ=0.45), voluntary cancellations by clients (ρ=0.15), and interest accrual (ρ=0.44),
all of which affect revenue.



4        Using Ex-Post Contract Terms to Limit Default
The previous section documented high rates of card exit and the difficulty of predicting default
and revenue using borrower observables (even among a positively selected pool). This limited
ability to screen borrowers ex-ante increases the importance of ex-post measures such as contract
term adjustments – the most important being the minimum payment, the interest rate and the
credit limit – in limiting default and maximizing profits.
         Whether and to what extent such variation in contract terms can mitigate default for NTB
borrowers, and its implications for bank profits are open empirical questions. Bank A’s large ex-
perimental variation in interest rates and minimum payments for NTB borrowers (designed inde-
pendently of the researchers) allows us to answer these questions.25


4.1        Experiment Description

                                               A. Sample Selection

As outlined in Section 2.1, the sample frame consisted of all study card borrowers who had paid at
least the minimum amount due in each of the six months prior to January 2007. The bank divided
this sample frame of more than one million study card clients into nine different strata based on
two pre-intervention characteristics which were used internally as default predictors: the length of
tenure with the bank, and repayment history over the past 12 months (both measured in January
2007).26 Each borrower was classified into one of three categories of tenure with the bank: (a) a long
term customer who had been with the bank for more than 2 years, (b) a medium term customer
    25
     Bank A did not experimentally vary credit limits. Aydin (2018) finds that (experimental) changes in credit limits
have no effect on card default.
  26
     For borrowers with less than 12 months the full available history was used for stratification.


                                                         13
who had been with the bank for more than one but less than two years, and (c) a new customer
who had been with the bank for more than six months but less than a year. Each borrower was also
classified into one of three categories based on her repayment behavior over the past 12 months:
(a) a “full payer” who had paid her bill in full in each of the previous 12 months and hence accrued
no debt, (b) a “partial payer” whose average payment over the past 12 months was greater than 1.5
times the average of the minimum payments required from her during this time, and (c) a “poor
payer” whose average payment over the past 12 months was less than 1.5 times the average of the
minimum payments required from her during this time. The product of both categories defined 9
strata, and 18,000 borrowers were randomly selected from each of these strata. We use sampling
weights in our analysis to account for unequal stratum sizes and can thus make valid statements
about the entire sampling frame.


                                       B. Experimental Design

Within each stratum, the bank randomly allocated 2,000 members to each of 8 intervention arms
and one control arm. Each treatment arm is a combination of two contract characteristics: (a)
a required minimum monthly payment which is expressed as a fraction of amount outstanding
(debt) on the card, and (b) the interest rate on the amount outstanding. The minimum payment
was set at either 5% or 10%. The interest rate could take on one of four values: 15%, 25%, 35% or
45%. The interest rate for the study card prior to the study was approximately about 55% so all
the experimental interest rates are reductions relative to the status quo (as in Karlan and Zinman,
2009). The new interest rate applied to all new debt incurred going forward (borrowers were not
informed about any duration for the contract changes, see below) as well as to debt outstanding.
The variation thus includes a forward-looking component since it applied to all future debt as well
as a current component since it applied to currently existing debt. Thus we are unable to isolate
the dynamic repayment incentive aspect of moral hazard (unlike Karlan and Zinman, 2009, who
can vary interest rate on future debt while holding constant the current debt burden).
   The two different minimum payments and four different interest rates yield 8 unique contract
terms. The experimental design thus identifies for each outcome and for each month 8 treatment
effects within each of 9 different strata. In addition 2,000 customers within each stratum also served
as a control group whose contract terms did not change during the period of the experiment. The
minimum payment for the control arm was 4% but the interest rate varied across clients and,
unfortunately, we do not observe this rate in our data. Consequently, we do not use the control
group as a contrast in most of the analysis below and are explicit in the sequel about which arm
serves as the reference or comparison group. In most cases we use the 5% minimum payment
and the 45% interest rate group (abbreviated to (45, 5)) as the comparison group and we often
refer to it as the base arm or base group. Panel A of Table OA-10 in the Online Appendix tests
the randomization procedure and shows that treatment assignment is uncorrelated with baseline
observables for the initial sample and for the sample of non-attriters.
   Figure 4 shows the time-line of the experiment as well as measurement dates. Each study client

                                                 14
was sent a letter in March 2007 stating the new set of contract terms that would be in force starting
in April 2007. Clients were not informed about the study or of any time-line for when the new
contract terms would change. The measurement of experimental outcomes began in March 2007
and lasted until May 2009. During this period the interest rate and the minimum payment were
kept fixed at their experimentally assigned levels. The experimental terms were not revealed to
the risk department in charge of deciding credit limits. We cannot reject the null of no differences
in credit limits across treatment arms at baseline and end-line (Table OA-11 and Figure OA-17).
The experiment ended in May 2009 at which point all treatment arm participants received a letter
setting out their new contract terms. These terms were the standard conditions with an interest
rate of approximately 55% and a minimum payment of 4%.
         We take advantage of the stratified randomization scheme to estimate simple regressions of the
form:
                                                        7
                                                        X
                                           Yi = β 0 +         βj Tji + δs + i .                                       (2)
                                                        j=1

where Yi the outcome of interest (default, cancellation or bank revenues) for borrower i and
{Tji }7j=1 are a set of treatment indicators – the excluded group is the (45,5) treatment arm. The
strata fixed effects, δs , are included in a way that allows us to interpret β0 as the base group mean.27
We use stratum weights (see Table OA-9) in all regressions.



5        Experimental Effects on Default, Cancellations and Revenues

5.1        Default
                            A. Minimum Payment Increases Do Not Reduce Default

         Default is defined as a binary variable equal to one if a borrower defaults at some point during
the 26 month experiment and zero otherwise. In contrast to the literature on interest rates and
default, there is relatively limited empirical work on the relationship between minimum payments
and default. However, minimum payments have received substantial attention in policy circles
as a regulatory tool to protect consumers from default driven by over-indebtedness. We view
minimum payments as having two primary effects: (a) a tightening of liquidity constraints and (b)
a reduction in debt over the longer term. These will be a useful lens through which to interpret
our experimental findings.
         The experiment doubled the minimum payment from 5% to 10%. This was a large and signif-
icant change since 73% of borrowers paid less than 10% of the amount due before the experiment
began (see figure OA-16). Table 2 shows that, perhaps surprisingly in the light of this figure, the
    27                                                                                                           P
    This is equivalent to estimating Eq. (2) with a full set of strata dummies and the additional constraint that s δs = 0.
Also, note that treatment assignment was done within each stratum and that the treatment assignment probabilities do
not vary across strata.


                                                            15
minimum payment increase had no effect on default measured at the end of the 26 month ex-
periment – the point estimate is a statistically insignificant increase of 0.5 percentage points on a
base default rate of 19% for an elasticity of +0.02.28 Figure OA-18 examines the evolution of treat-
ment effects by month finds muted dynamics. To our knowledge this is the first experimentally
estimated effect of minimum payments on default. See Table OA-15 for a comparison table.
       The effects in the other arms are all broadly comparable, with the estimated elasticities rang-
ing from −0.01 to +0.08. Interestingly, the elasticities are smaller for newer borrowers (a statis-
tically insignificant +0.03) relative to older borrowers for whom the corresponding elasticity is
substantially larger (+0.10) and also statistically significant. Thus, it is precisely those borrowers
for whom the asymmetric information problem is most dire that are most unresponsive to contract
term changes.
       The overall effects are small, particularly relative to the policy attention paid to increasing
minimum payments as a means of limiting default. A key, albeit implicit, component of the policy
argument is that increasing minimum payments should decrease debt which in turn should reduce
default. As we show in Appendix J.3, the first part of the argument is true – debt does decline,
though it is imprecisely estimated. However, any such reductions did not translate into lower
default. In Section 6.1 we present some evidence that the null effect is due to two countervailing
forces (lower debt repayment burden versus tighter liquidity constraints) off-setting each other.


                             B. Interest Rate Changes Have Small Effects on Default

       Table 2 shows that reducing the interest rate to a third of the base group rate (i.e. from 45% to
15%) reduced default by approximately two and a half percentage points over 26 months (com-
pared to the 19% default rate for the base arm). The implied elasticity of default with respect to the
interest rate is +0.20. This is considerably lower than the delinquency elasticity of 1.8 in Karlan
and Zinman (2017) and also somewhat lower than, though broadly in line with, the default elas-
ticity of 0.27 in Karlan and Zinman (2009) (see Table OA-15 for a comparison to other effects in the
literature). The treatment effects for the other intermediate treatment arms are also similarly small.
The results for the comparisons between the (45, 10) and the (r, 10) arms are even more stark with
none of the estimated treatment effects being statistically different from zero. Figure OA-18 also
shows zero effects in most periods.
       Interestingly, again these effects are smaller for newer borrowers. For borrowers who had
been with Bank A for less than one year (as of January 2007) the elasticity is +0.08 while the
corresponding elasticity for borrowers who had been with the bank for more than two years (as of
January 2007) is +0.30, nearly four times as large.

Our results on the unresponsiveness of new borrower default are important for at least two rea-
sons. First, they show that the standard tools used by large banks have smaller effects on NTB
  28
    The results are lower than those for delinquency in Keys and Wang (2019) but of the same order of magnitude as
those for default documented by d’Astous and Shore (2017). The latter document that an increase in minimum payments
of 2% on average over a base-rate of 3% increased default rates by 4% over two years (which implies an elasticity of .06).


                                                           16
borrower behavior than typically assumed in policy discussions. Second, the inability to control
default reduces the profitability of new borrowers, making financial inclusion harder.


                             C. A Moral Hazard Interpretation of Default Responses
       A substantial literature in credit markets infers moral hazard from the causal effect of inter-
est rates on default, conditional on the selection of borrowers (see e.g. Karlan and Zinman, 2009;
Adams et al., 2008). Standard models in this literature have borrowers deciding how much costly,
but unobservable (to the lender), effort to exert (see e.g. Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981; Bizer and Di-
Marzo, 1992). Lower effort hurts the lender (through higher default). Holding debt constant,
increases in interest rates decrease incentives to exert effort since the lender captures part of the
returns. Moral hazard is important if effort is responsive to this incentive. A broad class of models
predict that (randomized) increases in interest rates will causally increase default; therefore that
absence of default changes (in response to exogenous interest rate changes) implies lack of moral
hazard.29 It could, however, be the case that moral hazard is not manifested in default but rather
in other outcomes. However, default has been the main focus of this literature (partly because it is
easily observable) and we follow the literature in this respect.
       The literature distinguishes between at least three channels in understanding the effect of ex-
ogenously varying interest rates on default: (a) the “debt burden” channel describes the fact that
higher interest rates increase debt mechanically, and this makes repayment harder; (b) the “pure
current incentive effect”, which we call concurrent moral hazard, viz. the incentive effect of higher
current interest rates on default (holding debt constant); (c) the “pure future incentive effect”, or
dynamic moral hazard, arises if future interest rates from the lender are higher (while holding cur-
rent debt and interest rates constant).30 In our case, the interest rate changes apply on all current
debt as well as on future debt for the foreseeable future (i.e. for all future debt). Therefore, a muted
default response implies that the contributions from all three channels are correspondingly small.
       The large experimental variation in interest rates, together with the fact that they applied to a
sample of pre-existing clients (i.e. those that had already selected into the product) permits a clean
test for the presence of moral hazard. Moreover the large sample sizes and stratified randomiza-
tion ensure that the tests are well-powered to study borrowers new to formal credit. The setting
complements that in Karlan and Zinman (2009) who focus on repeat borrowers, while we can also
examine first-time borrowers for whom asymmetric information problems may be the most acute.
We find that even for NTB borrowers, and even though baseline default rates are high, it appears
that moral hazard is not an important determinant of default for the range of interest rate variation
  29
      This is usually the key empirical test for the presence of moral hazard. For example Karlan and Zinman (2007a)
write that they “identify any effect of repayment burden (which includes moral hazard) by ... comparing the repayment
behavior of those who received the high contract interest rate with those who received the low contract interest rate.
These borrowers selected in identically, but ultimately received randomly different interest rates on their contract. Any
difference in default comes from the resulting repayment burden.”
   30
      Karlan and Zinman (2009) find evidence for channel (c) but not for (b): “Moral hazard appears to work in dif-
ferent directions on contemporaneous loan prices (where we find that lower interest rates do not generally improve
repayment) and future loan prices (where we find the lower interest rates substantially improve repayment on current
loans)”.


                                                           17
considered here. Section 7 shows that, by contrast, job displacement is a stronger determinant of
loan default.

5.2      Card Cancellations
Cancellation is a binary variable that equals one if a borrower voluntarily cancels her card at some
point during the 26 month experiment and Table 2 shows that cancellations in the base arm (45, 5)
were 13.4% over the 26 month period of the experiment. Cancelling a card is an active decision
which the client can take after repaying the debt outstanding on the card. Cancellations are of
direct interest because they provide direct evidence on the (change in) the study card’s attractive-
ness as a result of contract term changes and because they typically reduce bank revenues, thereby
making financial inclusion harder.

                              A. Higher Minimum Payments Increase Cancellations
       Doubling the minimum payment increased cancellations (over the experiment duration) by
a statistically significant 1.7 percentage points, for an implied elasticity of +0.12 (Table 2). The
estimated treatment effects for the other arms are all roughly comparable with elasticities ranging
from +0.12 to +0.24. As noted previously, the increase in minimum payments tightens short run
liquidity constraints – decreasing the card’s attractiveness and likely then leading to increased
cancellations.

                                   B. Lower Interest Rates Reduce Cancellations
       Reducing the interest rate to 15% decreases cancellations by a statistically significant 3.5 per-
centage points, for an implied elasticity of +0.39. The reduction in interest rates made the study
card unambiguously more attractive and it is not surprising then that fewer borrowers chose to
cancel. This behavior is consistent with consumers engaging in some search or at least being open
to outside options.31 Treatment effects from the other arms provide broadly comparable results as
do the month-by-month treatment effects presented in Figure OA-18.
       To summarize – the results from all the experimental contrasts show that interest rate changes
have a robust moderate effect on card cancellations.32 This larger response allows us to rule out
inattention as a cause for the limited effects on default. Finally, from the bank’s perspective, the
benefits from these decreased cancellations need to be compared against the revenue losses from
lowering interest rates, which we discuss below.

  31
      We have some suggestive evidence that cancellations are followed by account openings elsewhere. Figure OA-
15(a) plots a non-parametric regression of voluntary client cancellation between June 2008 and May 2009 against the
change in credit scores in the preceding twelve months. Increases in credit scores are associated with higher borrower
initiated cancellations. Virtually none of the borrowers that experience a decrease of 100 points in the credit score cancel,
whereas more than 8 percent of those that experience a 50 point increase cancel the study card. Figure OA-15(b) plots
non-parametric regressions of new card acquisitions between June 2008 and May 2009 against the same regressor as in
Figure OA-15(a). We see that increases in credit scores are associated with increased card acquisition by NTB borrowers:
22% of borrowers with a 50 point increase in credit scores acquire at least one more card in the following year.
   32
      It is, though, a bit unclear how to benchmark this finding. If we map cancellations to repeat borrowing for micro-
finance borrowers, Karlan and Zinman (2017) find no effect of a interest rate reduction on the probability of repeat
borrowing (p.18) by Compartamos borrowers over a 29 month period.


                                                             18
5.3      Effects on Bank Revenues
Changes in interest rates and minimum payments have implications for profits and it is impor-
tance to consider these consequences when evaluating the impact of regulations such as minimum
payment floors or interest rate caps. We evaluate the effects of the interventions on the revenue
proxy described above. We find that all departures from the (45, 5) arm reduced bank revenues.
Unsurprisingly, this suggests that changes in contract terms away from the standard terms – e.g.
as a result of regulations – might reduce profits (although one would need to consider broader
costs measures and market-level considerations in a fuller analysis).

                                     A. Lower Interest Rates Reduce Revenues
       Table 2 shows that revenues are monotonically increasing in the interest rate. Taken literally,
the point estimates imply that reducing interest rates from 45% to 15% over the 26 month period of
the experiment reduced bank revenues (per borrower) by a substantial 2, 859 pesos (approximately
half of the mean revenue measure) for an estimated elasticity of 1.54, with similar elasticities for
the other interest rate arms.
       In the Appendix (sections J.2,J.4, and J.6) we document the effects of the intervention on three
proximate determinants of revenues – purchases, payments and debt. Surprisingly, debt declined
in response to the interest rate decrease (the Lee bounds for the elasticity are [+0.34, +0, 74]).33
Together with the small effects on borrower behavior (i.e. limited changes in purchases and pay-
ments) the result that debt is larger in higher interest arms suggest that NTB borrowers had limited
substitution possibilities and that interest rate compounding is the dominant component of debt
changes.

                                B. Higher Minimum Payments Reduce Revenues
       Higher minimum payments also reduced bank revenues which are 469 pesos lower in the
(45, 10) arm compared to the (45, 5) arm, with an implied elasticity is −0.16 – the proximate mech-
anism appears to be lower debt and greater cancellations.34 These results are consistent with the
policy assumption that lower minimum payments increase bank revenues.
       The revenue findings emphasizes another problem with using higher minimum payments as a
policy lever – higher minimum payments reduce bank revenues. Thus, collating the results from
the previous sections, we find that higher minimum payments increased cancellations (perhaps
lowering consumer welfare), had no effects on default and lowered bank revenues.

5.4      Spillover Effects

       The large variation in contract terms could also have affected behavior with other lenders.
For instance, higher minimum payments could have led borrowers to substitute away towards
  33
    We use Lee bounds Lee (2009), to account for the attrition caused by default and cancellation.
  34
     The point estimate of effect on debt shows a decrease of about one-third though the the Lee bounds for the elasticity
are quite wide – [−0.46, +0.15]. In the appendix (J.5, J.7 and J.3) we show that the minimum payment increase led to
modest increases in purchases and payments (the Lee bounds are [+0.18, +0.85] and [+.01, +.48] respectively).


                                                           19
other lenders. In the Appendix (Table OA-16) we use the credit bureau data to examine whether
the experimental changes in the study card’s contract terms affected borrowing with other formal
lenders. We find that neither default, cancellations, nor new borrowing, (all measured in June
2009) with all other formal lenders respond to the changes in minimum payments and interest
rates in the study card. In addition, we find no evidence of crowd-out (or crowd-in) of borrowing,
either along the extensive or intensive margin, from other lenders. This is true both during the
experiment and three years after it ended. Studying group lending micro finance products, Karlan
and Zinman (2017) and Angelucci et al. (2015) find similar results.

5.5    Bank A Discontinues the Study Card
      In addition to the the limitations of ex-ante screening NTB borrowers documented in Section
3.3, the previous results document that even substantial changes in contract terms were relatively
ineffective at reducing default among pre-existing borrowers. Viewed in this light, it is perhaps
unsurprising that Bank A subsequently reduced its interactions with NTB borrowers. Figure 2(c)
shows the trend in both the current stock of and new issues of the study card. After issuing the
study card in substantial quantities for several years, the bank stopped issuing new cards in 2009
and by 2013 there were no borrowers with the study card in the credit bureau. The closing of
the card appears to have had large effects on NTB borrowing: for instance Figure OA-23 shows
that the closing of the study card coincided with a decrease of close to 25 percentage points in the
fraction of new loans going to NTB borrowers.


6     What Explains The Limited Default Response?
In this section we consider some of the possible reasons for the limited response of default to the
experimental changes in contract terms. For the case of minimum payments, we argue that the
null default effect is consistent with the “cancelling out” of two opposing forces and we identify
the debt repayment burden as a potentially important channel for explaining default.

6.1    Countervailing Debt Burden and Liquidity Constraint Effects
As mentioned earlier, increasing minimum payments sets in motion two counteracting forces.
First, liquidity constraints tighten which could increase default. Second, ceterus paribus increased
minimum payments decrease the debt repayment burden, which should reduce default. The esti-
mated null effect is consistent with these two opposing effects negating each other.
      We can assess the reasonableness of this argument by studying default when one of the two
effects is no longer operational. To do so we obtain data on default for the experimental sample
for June 2012, three years after the experiment ended. After May 2009, all study borrowers were
returned to the same set of contract terms. The minimum payment was set at the pre-experiment
level of 4% and the interest rates were likewise returned to their pre-experiment levels (we con-
firm this in Table 3, column (3) and in Figure OA-20). This means that for those previously in



                                                20
the 10% minimum payment arms, the tightening of short-run liquidity constraints effect was no
longer operational. On the other hand, since the higher minimum payments reduced debt (see
Appendix J.3), clients in the 10% minimum payment arm faced a lower debt repayment burden so
the second effect was still present after the experiment ended.35 Thus, of the two countervailing
forces described above, only the debt burden effect was operational after the experiment ended.
We hypothesize that after the experiment, default should should be lower for those previously in
the 10% minimum payment arms (relative to the 5% arm).
       Table 3 shows that this is the case. Higher minimum payments (between April 2007 and May
2009) decreased default through June 2012 by a statistically significant 4.6 percentage points. The
implied elasticity of −0.11 is much larger and opposite in sign from the statistically insignificant
elasticity of +0.02 at the end of the experiment in May 2009.36 The results are thus consistent with
the hypothesis that during the experiment tightened short-run liquidity constraints counteracted
the effect of a lower debt repayment burden yielding a zero net effect on default and that after the
experiment, the reduced debt burden effect decreased default.
       We can also directly examine the effect of the debt burden on default by using an instrumental
variables strategy. The LATE of debt – measured in thousands of pesos in May 2009 – on default
between June 2009 and June 2012, using the 10% minimum payment arm as an instrument, is
0.06, i.e. every 1000 peso reduction in debt due to increased minimum payments leads to a six
percentage point reduction in default rates.37 Finally, the (Spearman) rank correlation between
the 7 ITT estimates of default and debt reduction in May 2009 (i.e. ITT for each of the 7 possible
contrasts) is 0.96 so that that the largest debt contrasts were those with the largest reductions in
debt at the end of the experiment.

6.2      The Importance Debt Burden for Default
The previous section highlighted the importance of the debt repayment burden effect in determin-
ing default using the minimum payment intervention. In this section we provide further evidence
on its importance using the interest rate variation generated by the experiment. We do by disen-
tangling the debt burden effect from the “pure” moral hazard effect.
       We again use outcomes three years after the experiment to learn about the relative magnitudes
  35
      For instance, the debt in the in the (45, 10) arm was lower than in the (45, 5) arm in May 2009 – although the Lee
bounds are wide and reductions in the range of 760 pesos to no change in debt are both consistent with the data. For
the selected sample that survived through the experiment, debt reduced substantially, by about 30%.
   36
      In the interest of clarity we focus on ITT estimates using cumulative default over the entire five year period from
March 2007 through June 2012. This has the advantage of avoiding the selection problems that would need to be dealt
with if we restricted attention to the non-attriters as of May 2009. On the other hand default now includes default
both during the experiment as well as after the experiment. We note, however, that at the end of the experiment (May
2009) of the seven treatment arms, only two (the (15, 5) and the (25, 5)) arm had default rates that were substantively or
statistically different from zero. Four of the remaining arms had default rates that were (typically much) less than 1%
away from the (45, 5) arm and none were statistically significant (see Table 2 for details).
   37
      The exclusion restriction is violated if the 10% payment arm affected post-experiment borrower behavior through
channels other than debt. For instance if two years of exposure to higher minimum payments changed borrower pur-
chase and payment behavior, perhaps through habit formation. In Appendix M. we explore this hypothesis and do not
find much support for it. In addition, we only use those treatment arms with non-differential attrition in May 2009.



                                                           21
of the two effects. During the experiment both effects should be operational. Since they both
increase default and we found small default responses, we concluded that both effects were likely
small. After the experiment, however, no differential “pure” moral hazard incentive effect was
operational since borrowers across arms faced the same interest rates (see col. (3) of Table 3).
However, Table OA-12 shows that the debt burden did vary systematically across the interest rate
arms – the Lee bounds for the debt elasticity were [+0.34, +0.74], a robust effect.38 Consistent
with the debt burden hypothesis, we find that default rates were lower in the lower interest rate
arms three years after the experiment ended. Table 3 finds that five-year default rates in the (15, 5)
arm were 4 percentage points lower relative to the base arm – the implied elasticity is +0.15.39
This finding further emphasizes the importance of the debt-burden effect in our sample of NTB
borrowers.
         This discussion needs to be qualified since the post-treatment effects may also be driven by
other non-debt effects across treatment arms (e.g. borrowers in the lower interest rate arms may
default less after the experiment if they expect favorable terms from the bank in the future). In the
absence of relevant data, we cannot rule out such non-debt channels. However, to the extent that
lower interest rates reduced default among more marginal borrowers (i.e. those who would have
defaulted absent the interest rate reduction), the post-experiment sample is likely not positively
selected, which would mean higher (not lower) default in the lower interest rate arms after the
interest rate returns to 55%.
         To conclude, the evidence on default, from both the minimum payment and the interest rate
variation suggests that the reduction in the debt repayment burden was an important channel for
reducing default three years after the end of the experiment.



7        What explains the high baseline default rates?
In Appendix N.1 we argue that card default is costly for NTB borrowers.40 If default is indeed
costly, why are default rates so high? We conjecture that the answer is partly that NTB borrow-
ers are vulnerable to frequent, large shocks that precipitate default. The importance of the debt
repayment burden documented above is consistent with this hypothesis.
         We focus on one particular shock — job separation in the formal sector — that we observe
using social security data. Job separation is common, approximately 37% of our sample (defined
below) suffered a separation at least once during the three year study period. We attempt to isolate
    38
      The Lee bounds are for the (15, 5) arm relative to the base arm.
    39
      This is approximately the same as the +0.20 elasticity at the end of the experiment which is estimated off a reduction
in default of 2.6 percentage points over the two year experiment. Note also that the 4% figure includes individuals who
defaulted during the experiment. We do not limit attention to post-experiment defaults only to avoid sample selection
issues, but note that such concerns might in fact lead us to under-estimate the debt-burden hypothesis if it is the case
that the lowered interest rates led to more financially vulnerable borrowers surviving in the lower interest rate group
post-experiment the (15, 5) arm.
   40
      In particular, we provide evidence that NTB borrowers are credit constrained in the formal sector, that default leads
to virtual exclusion from formal credit and informal credit terms are much worse than formal credit terms.



                                                            22
the effect of job loss on default. We use a common approach in labor economics (see e.g. Jacobson
et al., 1993; Couch and Placzek, 2010; Flaaen et al., 2019) to estimate the “treatment” effect of worker
separations on default in an event study framework which compares workers who lost their job
to a set of workers that did not. This literature focuses on effects for displaced workers – those
that lost their job as part of a downsizing – and the effects are usually interpreted as the effect of
involuntary separations.        41

       We assemble a dataset linking four repeated cross-sections (June 2012, June 2013, December
2013, March 2014) of one million borrowers each in the Credit Bureau to monthly data on the
universe of formal workers in Mexico. The matched data yields a panel of 338,167 individuals
(from 41,177 firms) with their full formal credit and employment history over a 31 month period.42
The matched data is representative of all formal-sector borrowers in Mexico that have a credit card
between October 2011 and March 2014 and held a formal sector position for at least one month
in this time period. For each individual, we observe age, gender, and municipality of residence.
For each individual-month observation, we observe formal sector employment status, firm and
monthly wage (if formally employed) and default status for each formal sector loan product.
       We focus on firms with more than 50 workers and define downsizing having occurred in firm
j as the first time t0 such that the fall in employment between t0 − 1 and t0 was more than 10%
(20%) of the firm’s peak employment in the twelve month period 10/11–9/12. This definition
captures a considerable reduction in a firm’s workforce and there are only 31,581 (23,135) firms
that experienced such a downsizing in our sample. Next, as in this literature, we define a worker
as being displaced if at some point in the panel they suffered a separation, say in month t and
their employer also downsized in the same month t; we refer to the non-displaced workers as
continuing workers (though they could subsequently be separated from the firm).43 Our strategy
is to compare default between displaced (“treated”) workers and continuing (“control”) workers
within the same firm.44
  41
      The argument is that “many view these large-scale (downsizing) events as natural experiments that allow re-
searchers . . . to accurately gauge the wage losses that result from breaking ties to a specific firm” (Couch and Placzek,
2010). See Flaaen et al. (2019) as well.
   42
      The matching procedure is as follows. Of the four million borrowers across our credit bureau cross-sections, 2.03
million had both a tax identifier and a credit card at some point between October 2011 and March 2014. We then attempt
to link each borrower to the monthly IMSS data (running from 10/11 to 5/14). We define a match as linking a borrower
to one entry in the IMSS data using unique tax identifiers. We find 455,588 matches between our credit bureau snapshots
and the IMSS formal sector labor datasets. Of those borrowers, we focus on 338,167 of them that work in firms of more
than 50 workers. Since the IMSS is a census of all formal sector workers, a match indicates employment in the formal
sector for that month and we assume that a lack of a match indicates no employment in the formal sector for that month.
Since we do not observe employment in the informal sector, we cannot construct a more comprehensive indicator of
employment, but this should if anything attenuate our results below.
   43
      There are 6,070 displaced workers and 168,211 continuing workers using the 10% cut-off and 5,179/106,403 workers
using the 20% cut-off. Other papers all using U.S. administrative data have longer panels and look at longer periods
of downsizing (e.g. Couch and Placzek (2010) allow for 5 years), which in turn allows the use of larger downsizing
thresholds (e.g. 30%) without losing too many firms. We have a shorter panel and measure downsizing relative to
short window (that defines peak employment). This has the advantage of using sudden unemployment shocks for
identification, but it forces us to use lower thresholds for defining downsizing.
   44
       Appendix O. assesses robustness by looking at the universe of all firms (not just downsizing), using as controls
employees who eventually lost their job (not just those in the same firm), as well as a different specification that exploits
the size of unemployment spells. We obtain comparable results.



                                                             23
       We estimate Equation (3) for borrower i working in firm j, municipality s, in month t:
                                    12                                    12
                                           βk 1(months to t0 = k)i(j) +          θk 1( months to t0 = k)i(j) Ti + ijt (3)
                                    X                                     X
                           0
 defaultijt = αi + γs,t + Xijt δ+
                                    k≥−6                                  k≥−6


where the dependent variable defaultijt is equal to 1 if any of borrower i’s credit cards are more
than 90 days past due at time t; αi is a borrower fixed effect, γs,t are a full set of municipality
by month indicators, Xijt include firm indicators45 and worker age; 1( months to tj0 = k)i(j) is an
indicator equal to one if the observation is k months away from firm j(i)’s downsizing event tj0
(k = 0 corresponds to the month in which downsizing occurs). Ti is an indicator equal to one
if i is a displaced worker and zero otherwise. The βk coefficients measure the trends in default
for non-displaced workers before and after the downsizing event. The θk coefficients measure the
default path of displaced workers relative to non-displaced workers at the same firm, that is the
difference-in-difference coefficients.
       The main identification challenge in this literature is that continuing and displaced workers
may not be similar along unobservables, and that macroeconomic shocks may affect both down-
sizing and default. We are able to control for these flexibly with time indicators at the municipality
level thus absorbing local macro shocks, and we compare workers within firms, which mitigates
to some degree the unobservables problem. A potential concern is that continuing workers may
also be affected when their firm downsizes – but we believe that such effects are likely negative, in
which case we may in fact be underestimating the true displacement effect.46
       The red line in Figure 5(a) plots the estimated θk coefficients in red, and the βk coefficients in
gray from equation (3), using 10% as the downsizing threshold, while Figure 5(b) uses 20% as
the threshold. Several things are noteworthy. First, continuing workers (gray line) do not show
signs of distress when their firm downsizes. This suggests that we are adequately controlling for
macroeconomic trends that may drive both default and unemployment. Second, all θk coefficients
for k < 0 are statistically indistinguishable from zero, suggestive evidence in favor of the parallel
trends assumption. Third, the effect of losing a formal job begins to affect default after about six
months and then increases over time. This is consistent with gradual increased debt accumulation
as earnings go down and because by definition default is defined as 90 days of balances past due.
The estimates show that one year after displacement default increases by about 5-7 percentage
points, or 28% – 36% of mean default rates among non-displaced workers.
       The effect is quite large, particularly since we cannot rule out displaced workers finding jobs in
the informal sector post-separation (and thereby dampening the separation shock). To our knowl-
edge this is the first quantification of the effect of job displacement on loan default and the mag-
nitudes suggest that displacement is an important contributor to default. Keys (2018) studies the
effects of displacement on financial outcomes in the United States – using the NLSY to study the
effect of unemployment on bankruptcy filings (rather than loan default) and finds considerably
  45
    Including firm characteristics instead of fixed effects gives similar results.
  46
    We find that earnings decrease immediately by 30% of mean non-displaced worker earnings and recover relatively
slowly.


                                                          24
smaller (and more imprecisely estimated) estimates. We use larger administrative data (matching
credit data with the universe of formal workers) which improves precision and mitigates mea-
surement error (and recall issues associated with survey data), include better controls (worker and
municipality-month fixed effects) and have plausibly greater exogeneity (using separations as part
of a downsizing).


8   Conclusion
Borrowing via credit card is an increasingly common way for borrowers to enter the formal finan-
cial sector in many developing countries and has received increased attention from policy makers
and regulators. However, it remains relatively under-studied. In this paper we examine one of the
largest efforts to-date in expanding credit via credit cards to poor and financially inexperienced
borrowers, carried out by one of Mexico’s largest commercial banks. We use detailed individual-
level data and a large-scale country-wide randomized experiment with a flagship financial in-
clusion product directed towards new-to-banking borrowers and establish some basic facts and
answer several key questions.
    We find that new to banking (NTB) borrowers default at high rates (over 19% of our sample
defaulted over the study period) and that default appears to be difficult to predict. We then use an
RCT to assess default sensitivity to substantial variation in key contract terms. We find that dou-
bling the minimum payment did not affect default over the 26 month experiment. This is sharp
evidence on the ineffectiveness of the commonly mooted policy of instituting minimum payment
floors to limit default (and currently adopted by e.g Mexico and Taiwan). We provide evidence
that the null effect on default during the experiment was likely the effect of two opposing effects
canceling each other out – tightened liquidity constraints versus reduced debt burden; policy dis-
cussions have tended to focus primarily on the latter while ignoring the former. We also found
that even large reductions in interest rates had small effects on default so that ex-post moral haz-
ard appears to play a limited role in our context. Finally, given that contract terms do not explain
default, we attempt to explain the high level of default in our population. We use a firm downsiz-
ing in difference-in-difference design and find that job separation has a significant effect on loan
defaults.
    Several avenues remain open for future research. A direct question is the role of the “outside”
option in credit markets with NTB borrowers to better understand why moral hazard appears to
be very important in some contexts (e.g Adams et al., 2008) and less so in others (e.g. Dobbie and
Skiba, 2013). A broader one is the extent to which the distance lending model such as the one
adopted by Bank A and other commercial banks (individual lending, credit-score based screening,
remote monitoring and collection) can be used to expand credit to under-served populations with
little or no credit history. Finally, it would be interesting to examine whether, given the large
effects of idiosyncratic shocks on credit histories, some form of insurance is useful in improving
credit expansion.



                                                25
Tables

                                      Table 1: Summary statistics and baseline characteristics


                                                                                                              Credit bureau sample
                                                              Experimental      Experimental
                                                                sample            sample       ≥ 1 Card Holders    New borrowers     Experienced
                                                                                                                     (matched)        borrowers
                                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)

  Panel A. Information from the experimental sample dataset
  Month of measurement                                        March 2007         May 2009
  Payments                                                         711               908              -                   -               -
                                                                 (1,473)           (1,811)
  Purchases                                                        338               786              -                   -               -
                                                                 (1,023)           (2,064)
  Debt                                                            1,198             5,940             -                   -               -
                                                                 (3,521)           (6,160)
  Credit limit                                                    7,879            12,376             -                   -               -
                                                                 (6,117)           (9,934)
  Card revenue†                                                   4,197               -               -                   -               -
                                                                 (7,347)
  Credit score                                                     645                -               -                   -               -
                                                                   (52)
  (%) Consumers for whom experiment is their first card             57                -               -                   -               -
  (%) Consumers who default between Mar/07 - May/09                 17                -               -                   -               -
  (%) Consumers who cancel between Mar/07 - May/09                  10                -               -                   -               -

  Panel B. Information from the credit bureau dataset
  Month of measurement                                         June 2007         June 2010        June 2010           June 2010       June 2010
  Mean card limit (all cards)                                    15,776            18,475           49,604             22,082           56,187
                                                                (15,776)          (17,557)         (32,596)           (28,710)         (43,032)
  Total credit line (all loans)                                  53,652            64,804           53,718             49,348          139,804
                                                                (70,292)          (79,994)        (103,503)           (87,855)        (162,568)
  Tenure in months of oldest credit                                68               100               79                 68              206
                                                                  (54)              (51)             (87)               (57)             (85)
  Panel C. Demographic information
  Month of measurement                                         June 2007         June 2010        June 2010           June 2010       June 2010
  (%) Male                                                         52                 -               47                 47               53
  (%) Married                                                      62                 -               50                 48               47
  Age (in years)                                                   39                42               45                 44               58
                                                                   (6)               (6)             (19)               (18)             (22)
  Monthly income (10/11)‡                                        13,855               -             14,391             14,759           22,641
                                                                (11,244)                           (12,949)           (12,885)         (15,928)
  Observations                                                  164,000               -            221,151             57,450           55,120


Notes: This table presents means and standard deviations for selected variables from the experimental sample and three different credit
bureau sub-samples. Column 1 shows statistics for the experimental sample at the beginning of the experiment – March 2007 (Panel
A) and June 2007 (Panels B and C). Column 2 (Panel A) shows statistics for the experimental sample at the end of the experiment
(May 2009) and June 2010 (Panels B and C). Column 3 presents summary statistics for the credit bureau sub-sample restricted to
borrowers with at least one credit card in June 2010. Column 4 selects a sub-sample from the Column 3 sample that mimics the
distribution of card tenure for the experimental sample (see the Appendix B.2 for details). Column 5 restricts the sample from Column
3 to individuals with at least eight years of credit history with the bureau. (†) The card revenue measure is constructed using monthly
data on purchases, payments and debt and the procedure is described on p.7. (‡) Income is obtained by matching our data with social
security data (IMSS) from October 2011. The IMSS contains firm reports of employee earnings. Approximately 18% and 13% of the
experimental sample and the CB sub-samples were matched with the IMSS.




                                                                           26
                          Table 2: Treatment Effects on Default, Cancellations, and Revenue
                                         (Outcomes measured in May 2009)


                                                     Default                 Cancellations             Revenue
                                   Strata:     All        6-11M             All        6-11M        All        6-11M
                                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
                r = 15, MP = 5               -0.026***     -0.019         -0.035***   -0.033***   -2,859***   -3,139***
                                               (0.008)     (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.007)      (105)       (184)
                r = 15, MP = 10                -0.015       0.012           -0.011    -0.027***   -2,642***   -2,893***
                                               (0.008)     (0.013)          (0.007)     (0.007)      (105)       (184)
                r = 25, MP = 5                -0.023**     -0.014         -0.024***   -0.026***   -1,889***   -1,956***
                                               (0.008)     (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.007)      (109)       (190)
                r = 25, MP = 10                -0.008      -0.004           -0.003    -0.024***   -1,893***   -2,108***
                                               (0.008)     (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.007)      (106)       (184)
                r = 35, MP = 5                 -0.000       0.004          -0.018**    -0.022**    -964***    -1,008***
                                               (0.008)     (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.007)      (118)       (198)
                r = 35, MP = 10                -0.002      -0.010           -0.004      -0.003    -1,167***   -1,062***
                                               (0.008)     (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.008)      (107)       (193)
                r = 45, MP = 10                 0.005       0.015           0.017*       0.004     -469***       -394
                                               (0.008)     (0.013)          (0.007)     (0.008)      (113)       (202)
                Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)     0.193***    0.315***         0.134***    0.099***    2,768***    1,615***
                                               (0.006)     (0.009)          (0.005)     (0.005)       (86)       (143)
                Observations                 143,916      47,959          143,916      47,959     143,916      47,959
                R-squared                     0.032       0.024            0.006       0.007       0.050       0.026

Notes: All regressions include strata dummies and use sample weights. The dependent variable for Columns (1) and (2) is default
(bank-initiated revocations). The dependent variable for Columns (3) and (4) are (client-initiated) cancellations. The dependent vari-
able for Column (5) and (6) is our measure of bank revenue from the study card. All outcomes measure the dependent variables at
the end of the experiment (26 months). Columns (1), (3) and (5) include all cardholders in the experiment. Columns (2), and (4) and
(6) restrict only the cardholders in the 6-11 months strata. Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis. One, two and three stars
denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                     27
                                            Table 3: Long-term Treatment Effects
                                             (Outcomes measured in June 2012)


                                              New Loan        # Banks       Int Rate    Cumulative      Cumulative
                                              (any bank)       active    (Study Card)    Default       Cancellations
                                            Jun 09 - Jun 12    Jun 12        Jun 12       Jun 12          Jun 12
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)
                r = 15, MP = 5                   0.003          0.012        0.002        -0.039***         0.008
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 15, MP = 10                  0.011          0.017        0.003        -0.066***       0.027**
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 25, MP = 5                  -0.001          0.008       -0.001        -0.040***         0.017
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 25, MP = 10                 -0.006          0.008        0.001        -0.048***         0.012
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 35, MP = 5                   0.006          0.016       -0.003           -0.004        -0.005
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 35, MP = 10                  0.015          0.002       0.005*        -0.038***         0.009
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.002)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                r = 45, MP = 10                  0.012          0.016        0.002        -0.043***        0.021*
                                                (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.003)         (0.010)        (0.010)
                Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)      0.342***       1.620***     0.530***        0.405***       0.428***
                                                (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.002)         (0.007)        (0.007)
                Observations                   139,197        139,197       42,463        139,197         139,197
                R-squared                       0.012          0.006        0.002          0.042           0.022

Notes: All regressions include strata dummies and use sample weights. Each column is a separate regression. The dependent variable
in column (1) is a binary variable equal to 1 if client i took out at least one loan between June 2009 and June 2012. The dependent
variable in column (2) is the number of banks with whom client i had an “active relationship” as of June 2012. An active relationship
means having at least one active loan with a lender. Column (3) uses as dependent variable the interest rate (between 0 and 1) on the
study card in June 2012 for those cards that remained open. Columns (4) and (5) use as dependent variables binary variables that are
equal to 1 if the client defaulted, or cancelled, respectively, at any point between March 2007 and June 2012. Robust standard errors
are shown in parenthesis. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                 28
Figures

                 Figure 1: Credit card and other borrowing across Latin American countries (2017)




                              Proportion of households with formal credit
                                          .1         0 .2             .3




                                                                            Argentina   Brazil      Chile      Colombia       Mexico          Peru

                                                                                         Only credit cards
                                                                                         Credit cards and other financial institution loans
                                                                                         Other financial institution loans only



Notes: Source is the 2017 World Bank Global Findex database. The figure shows the proportion of adults who have had credit in the
past 12 months for selected countries in Latin America. Formal credit is defined as credit issued by a bank or another type of financial
institution. Creditholders are then separated into groups based on type of credit. The first group is those with credit from financial
institutions but not using credit cards (light navy); the second is adults with credit from financial institutions and using credit cards
(mid navy); the third is adults using only credit cards (dark navy). Note that the Global Findex database used for this figure presents
data on the extent of formal credit held by respondents at a point in time, but does not record their first formal financial sector credit
product.




                                                                                                         29
                                                       Figure 2: Overall credit card growth, and study card’s share and evolution.
                                        200




                                                                                                                                                                                         .75
                                                                                                                                        .6
   Growth in CC holdings (%, 2004-2010)




                                                                                                                                        Fraction of households (2004)
                              150




                                                                                                                                                                             Fraction of individuals
                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                   100




                                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                             .25
         50             0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                              1   2   3     4      5    6                                        7   8    9   10




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                Income decile                                                                                                                            Credit cardPersonal loan Credit line Real estate     Auto   Other

                                                       Growth            Fraction of households                                                                                                                                      Experimental type of cards


                                              (a) CC Growth and share of HH with CC’s                                                                                                                                (b) First Time Loan, by type
                                                                                             2
                                                                         ratio of cards with respect to Jan/06
                                                                               .5           10         1.5




                                                                                                         Jan/06                Jul/07                                                                  Jan/09               Jul/10

                                                                                                                              total number of cards                                                             issued cards


                                                                                                                         (c) Study Card Stocks and Flows

Notes: Panel (a) is constructed using data from the 2004 National Income Expenditure Survey (ENIGH). The X-axis represents (house-
hold) income deciles. The left Y-axis – corresponding to the hollow bars– shows the percentage growth in the number of households
that have at least one credit card from 2004 to 2010. The right Y-axis – associated with the red line – plots the fraction of households
in each income decile that have at least one card in 2004. Panel (b) is constructed using a representative sample of 1 million borrowers
in the Credit Bureau (i.e those with formal sector loans) in 2010. For each individual, we identify the oldest loan and record its type
(e.g. auto loans, credit card, real estate loans). We then plot the fraction of first loans by type. The gray area represents the study
card described in Section 2. Panel (c) is constructed using credit bureau data from 2012 on Card A. For confidentiality purposes we
normalize the January 2006 values for both the total number of study cards and the number of issued study cards to 1. The solid blue
line represents the total number of study cards in a given month (stock). The red dashed line represents the flow of study cards: the
total number of new study cards were issued in a given month.




                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                     Figure 3: Default and revenue by months with the credit card




                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                4000
                                 .3




                                                                                                                            Proportion who default by May/09
  Proportion of cards who default




                                                                                      NPV of revenue (MXN pesos)



                                                                                                                                                       .3
                                                                                                       3000
                    .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                               2000
      .1




                                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                     1000




                                                                                                                                            0
                   0




                                                                                     0
                                      6 - 11          12 - 23                  24+                                                                             1      6       11         16        21       26      31           36
                                               Months with credit card                                                                                                      Months since card was opened (Jan/07)

                                                 default             revenue                                                                                         study card          bank A w/o study card           all banks


  (a) Default and revenue by months with the credit card                                                                                                       (b) Tenure at CB and future default, CB sample
Notes: Panel (a) plots default (in dark blue) and revenue (in light red) during the experiment on the study card for three different
strata defined by the length of time the borrower had had the study card prior to the start of the experiment (tenure). We restrict to
cardholders from the control group of the experimental sample. The blue bars represent the proportion of cardholders who defaulted
at any point in time between the beginning and end of the experimental period (March 2007 to May 2009). The red bars represent the
mean NPV of revenue by card from March 2007 to May 2009. We use stratum weights and the error bars show the confidence interval
for the estimate of the mean. Panel (b) uses the control group of the experimental sample and the 1 million representative sample from
the Credit Bureau. The red diamonds show, for the control group, the proportion of cardholders that default by the months since the
card was opened (binned into quarters because of the sample size). The blue squares and green circles repeat the sampling exercise
in the credit bureau data. The green circles use all cards, whereas the blue squares restrict attention to Bank A cards that are not the
same type as the study card (identified by the first 6 digits of the card). To mimic the sampling frame from the experimental sample,
we restrict attention to credit cards that were opened on or before Jan 2007 that had been non-delinquent in the last 6 months prior to
Jan 2007. For each of these cards, we plot the probability that the card is on default on before May 2009 (y-axis) against card tenure as
of January 2007 (x-axis). The resulting graph shows that newer borrowers in the formal credit market are more likely to default.




                                                                                                                       31
                                                                              Figure 4: Timeline for the datasets

      0. Strata information:
                         Strata variables recorded.
      1. Bank data:
                         Monthly card level data from 03/07 to 05/09.
      2. Credit Bureau data:
                         Loan level data matched to experimental sample for 06/07 to 06/10, annually.

                         Loan-level data representative of the entire credit bureau population (cross-sections).
      3. Social security data:
                         Individual-level, monthly information from 10/10 to 03/14.


                                                        2007               2008                 2009                       2010                   2011                2012                 2013                  2014

                                       strata
                                  bank data
               credit bureau - experimental
            credit bureau - random samples
                              social security


Notes: This figure presents a timeline for the experiment. The data for the 9 experimental strata was recorded in January 2007. Data
from the experiment is provided monthly for each card from March 2007 to May 2009. We use CB information for the experimental
sample, which is provided to us in 4 snapshots: June 2007-2010. The remaining datasets are the random sample credit bureau data,
and the social security data. The full description of the experiment is in Section 4.1.



                                                                Figure 5: Job displacement and Loan Default
        .1




                                                                                                                       .1
        .05




                                                                                                                       .05
  Default




                                                                                                                 Default
        0




                                                                                                                       0
        -.05




                                                                                                                       -.05




               -6   -5    -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1   2   3   4   5     6    7   8   9   10    11    12                     -6   -5   -4   -3    -2    -1   0   1    2     3   4   5     6   7   8    9   10    11    12
                                               Months since mass layoff                                                                                       Months since mass layoff

                                    first difference (βk)               second difference (θk)                                                    first difference (βk)                  second difference (θk)


Notes: These figures plot the default trend for continuing workers (βk coefficients from equation (3) in gray color, and differences-in-
differences effect for displaced workers (θk coefficients) in red. Panel (a) uses 10% as the downsizing threshold, while panel (b) uses
20% as the threshold. The x-axis measures time relative to the (firm specific) downsizing event.




                                                                                                            32
References
A BELLÁN , J. AND C. J. M ANTAS (2014): “Improving experimental studies about ensembles of classifiers for bankruptcy
  prediction and credit scoring,” Expert Systems with Applications, 41, 3825–3830. [OA - 15]
A DAMS , D. W., D. H. G RAHAM , AND J. D. V. P ISCHKE, eds. (1984): Undermining Rural Development With Cheap Credit,
  Bolder, CO: Westview Press. [4]
A DAMS , W., L. E INAV,   AND   J. L EVIN (2008): “Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending,” .
  [17, 25]
——— (2009): “Liquidity Constraints And Imperfect Information In Subprime Lending,” American Economic Review, 99,
 49–84. [3, 5, 8, OA - 34]
A GARWAL , S., S. C HOMSISENGPHET, N. M AHONEY, AND J. S TROEBEL (2015): “Regulating Consumer Financial Prod-
  ucts: Evidence from Credit Cards,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 111–164. [8]
A LA’R AJ , M. AND M. F. A BBOD (2016): “Classifiers consensus system approach for credit scoring,” Knowledge-Based
  Systems, 104, 89–105. [12, OA - 15]
A NGELUCCI , M., D. K ARLAN , AND J. Z INMAN (2015): “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit
  Program Placement Experiment,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151–182. [20]
ATKIN , D., B. FABER , AND M. G ONZALEZ -N AVARRO (2018): “Retail Globalization and Household Welfare: Evidence
  from Mexico,” The Journal of Political Economy. [6]
ATTANASIO , O. P., P. K. G OLDBERG , AND E. K YRIAZIDOU (2008): “Credit Constraints in the Market for Consumer
  Durables: Evidence from Micro-Data on Car Loans,” International Economic Review, 49, 401–436. [OA - 25, OA - 28]
AYDIN , D. (2018): “Consumption Response to Credit Expansions:Evidence from Experimental Assignment of 45,307
  Credit Lines,” Washington University in St. Louis. [13, OA - 10]
B ANCA DE LAS O PORTUNIDADES (2016): “Financial Inclusion Report 2016,” Tech. rep., Banca de las Oportunidades,
   Bogota, Colombia. [1]
B ANCO DE M ÉXICO (2016): “Sistema de Información Económica - Serie SF61870,” Tech. rep., Banco de México, accessed
   August 28, 2016. [10]
B ANERJEE , A. V.   AND   E. D UFLO (2010): “Giving Credit Where It Is Due,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 61–80. [3,
   OA - 42]
B AR -G ILL , O. (2003): “Seduction by Plastic,” Northwestern University Law Review, 98, 1373. [2]
B IZER , D. AND P. M. D I M ARZO (1992): “Sequential Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 41–61. [17]
B JÖRKEGREN , D. AND D. G RISSEN (2017): “Behavior Revealed in Mobile Phone Usage Predicts Loan Repayment,” ArXiv.
   [OA - 14, OA - 15]
B OS , M., E. B REZA , AND A. L IBERMAN (2018): “The Labor Market Effects of Credit Market Information,” The Review of
   Financial Studies, 31, 2005–2037. [OA - 42]
C ARROLL , C. D. (1992): “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity. [OA - 9]
C OUCH , K. A. AND D. W. P LACZEK (2010): “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited,” American Economic
  Review, 100, 572–89. [4, 23]
D ABLA -N ORRIS , E., Y. J I , R. M. T OWNSEND , AND D. F. U NSAL (2015): “Distinguishing Constraints on Financial Inclu-
  sion and Their Impact on GDP and Inequality,” NBER Working Paper. [4]
D EATON , A. (1991): “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 59, 1221–1248. [OA - 9]
D EHEJIA , R., H. M ONTGOMERY, AND J. M ORDUCH (2012): “Do interest rates matter? Credit demand in the Dhaka
  slums,” Journal of Development Economics, 97, 437–449. [OA - 25, OA - 28]
D ELLAV IGNA , S. AND U. M ALMENDIER (2004): “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and Evidence,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 119, 353–402. [2]
D EMIRGÜÇ -K UNT, A. AND L. K LAPPER (2012): “Measuring Financial Inclusion: The Global Findex Database,” Policy
  Research Working Paper. [4]
D OBBIE , W., N. M AHONEY, P. G OLDSMITH -P INKHAM , AND J. S ONG (2018): “Bad Credit, No Problem? Credit and Labor
  Market Consequences of Bad Credit Reports,” Working paper. [OA - 42]
D OBBIE , W. AND P. M. S KIBA (2013): “Information Asymmetries in Consumer Credit Markets: Evidence from Payday
  Lending,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 256–82. [25]
D RENIK , A., G. DE G IORGI ,   AND   E. S EIRA (2018): “Sequential Banking Externalities,” ITAM Working Paper. [9]


                                                              33
D UPAS , P., D. K ARLAN , J. R OBINSON , AND D. U BFAL (2018): “Banking the Unbanked? Evidence from three countries,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 257–97. [4]
D ’A STOUS ,
         P. AND S. H. S HORE (2017): “Liquidity Constraints and Credit Card Delinquency: Evidence from Raising
  Minimum Payments,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 52, 1705–1730. [11, 16, OA - 34]
E DELBERG , W. (2004): “Testing for Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in Consumer Loan Markets,” Federal Reserve
   Working Paper. [5]
E INAV, L., M. J ENKINS ,    AND   J. L EVIN (2012): “Contract Pricing in Consumer Credit Markets,” Econometrica, 80, 1387–
   1432. [5]
——— (2013): “The Impact Of Credit Scoring On Consumer Lending,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 44, 249–274. [12]
F INANCIAL C ONDUCT A UTHORITY (2015): “Credit Card Market Study (Interim Report) Annex 11 – International Com-
   parisons ,” Tech. rep. [1, 2, 11]
F LAAEN , A., M. D. S HAPIRO , AND I. S ORKIN (2019): “Reconsidering the Consequences of Worker Displacements: Firm
   versus Worker Perspective,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11, 193–227. [4, 23]
F USTER , A., P. G OLDSMITH -P INKHAM , AND T. R AMADORAI (2017): “Predictably Unequal? The Effects of Machine
   Learning on Credit Markets,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York. [13, OA - 15]
G ABAIX , X. AND D. L AIBSON (2006): “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Com-
  petitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 505–540. [2]
G ROSS , D. B. AND N. S. S OULELES (2002): “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior?
  Evidence from Credit Card Data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 149–185. [OA - 9, OA - 10, OA - 28, OA - 40]
H AUGHWOUT, A., D. L EE , J. S CALLY, AND W. VAN DER K LAAUW (2020): “Charging into Adulthood: Credit Cards and
  Young Consumers,” Tech. rep., New York Federal Reserve Board, https://tinyurl.com/sxjf349. [1]
H EIDHUES , P. AND B. K ŐSZEGI (2016): “Exploitative Innovation,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8, 1–23. [2]
H EIDHUES , P. AND B. K ŐSZEGI (2010): “Exploiting Naïvete about Self-Control in the Credit Market,” American Economic
  Review, 100, 2279–2303. [2]
J ACOBSON , L. S., R. J. L A L ONDE , AND D. G. S ULLIVAN (1993): “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,” The American
   Economic Review, 83, 685–709. [4, 23]
K ARLAN , D. AND J. Z INMAN (2007a): “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries with a Con-
  sumer Credit Field Experiment,” Yale University. [17]
——— (2017): “Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand for Credit: Evidence from a Countrywide Field Experiment in
 Mexico,” Forthcoming Review of Economic Studies. [3, 16, 18, 20, OA - 25, OA - 28, OA - 34, OA - 35]
K ARLAN , D. S. AND J. Z INMAN (2007b): “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries With a Con-
  sumer Credit Field Experiment,” Working Paper. []
——— (2008): “Credit elasticities in Less-Developed Economies: Implications for Microfinance,” American Economic Re-
 view, 98, 1040–1068. [OA - 28]
——— (2009): “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries With a Consumer Credit Field Experi-
 ment,” Econometrica, 77, 1993–2008. [3, 5, 14, 16, 17, OA - 34]
K EYS , B. J. (2018): “The Credit Market Consequences of Job Displacement,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100,
   405–415. [24]
K EYS , B. J.   AND   J. WANG (2019): “Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards,” . [2, 11, 16, OA
   - 34]
K HANDANI , A. E., A. J. K IM , AND A. W. L O (2010): “Consumer credit-risk models via machine-learning algorithms,”
  Journal of Banking and Finance, 34, 2767–2787. [12, OA - 15]
K IM , J. (2005): “Minimums Due On Credit Cards Are on the Increase,” Wall Street Journal. [11]
L AIBSON , D., A. R EPETTO , AND J. T OBACMAN (2003): “A Debt Puzzle,” in Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in
   Modern Economics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, ed. by P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, Princeton
   University Press. [2]
L EE , D. S. (2009): “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment Effects,” The Review
   of Economic Studies, 76, 1071–1102. [19, OA - 22, OA - 24]
L UO , C., D. W U , AND D. W U (2017): “A deep learning approach for credit scoring using credit default swaps,” Engi-
   neering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 65, 465–470. [OA - 15]
M EIER , S. AND C. S PRENGER (2010): “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing,” American Economic Jour-
  nal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 193–210. [2]


                                                              34
N ELSON , S. T. (2020): “Private Information and Price Regulation in the US Credit Card Market,” 1–36. [1]
OCC (2003): “Account management and loss allowance guidance on credit card lending,” Wall Street Journal. [11]
P EDROZA , P. (2010): “Microfinanzas en América Latina y el Caribe: El sector en Cifras,” Tech. rep., Interamerican Devel-
   opment Bank Report. [1]
R UBALCAVA , L. AND G. T ERUEL (2006): “Encuesta Nacional sobre Niveles de Vida de los Hogares: Primera Ronda.”
   MxFLS. [OA - 43]
R UIZ , C. (2013): “From Pawn Shops To Banks : The Impact Of Formal Credit On Informal Households,” Policy Research
   Working Paper Series 6634, The World Bank. [10]
S HUI , H. AND L. A USUBEL (2005): “Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market,” 14th Annual Utah Winter Finance
   Conference, 1–49. [2]
S TEWART, N. (2009): “The Cost of Anchoring on Credit Card Minimum Payments,” Psychological Science, 20, 39–41. [2,
   11]
S TIGLITZ , J. E. AND A. W EISS (1981): “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,” American Economic
   Review, 71, 393–410. [17]
VAN G OOL , J., W. V ERBEKE , P. S ERCU , AND B. B AESENS (2012): “Credit Scoring for MicroFinance: Is It Worth It?”
  International Journal of Finance & Economics, 17, 103–123. [OA - 16]
WARREN , E. (2007): “Examining the Billing, Marketing, and Disclosure Practices of the Credit Card Industry, and their
 Impact on Consumers,” Testimony Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, January
 5, 2007. [2]
W ORLD B ANK (2005): “Credit and Loan Reporting Systems in Mexico,” Tech. rep., World Bank Report. [7]




                                                           35
                    Expanding Financial Access Via Credit Cards:
                              Evidence from Mexico
                                   Appendix − For Online Publication
            Sara G. Castellanos, Diego Jiménez-Hernández, Aprajit Mahajan, Enrique Seira


Contents
Appendix A. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       OA - 2
  A.1 Types of kiosks used for find NTB                                                                            OA - 2

Appendix B. Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   OA - 2
  B.1 Data Check                                                                                                   OA - 2
  B.2 Details of “Matched” Sample for Table 1                                                                      OA - 3
  B.3 Distribution of wages using social security data                                                             OA - 4

Appendix C. Operating costs: Compartamos, Azteca, and Bank A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 OA - 5

Appendix D. Exploring our proxy of Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           OA - 6

Appendix E. Are NTB Borrowers Credit Constrained? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              OA - 9

Appendix F. Exit, study card closings and new cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 12

Appendix G. Predicting Default, Cancellations, Revenues and Interest Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 14

Appendix H. Experiment Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 17
  H.1 Experiment Details and Randomization Check                                                            OA - 17
  H.2 Minimum Payments Bind for a Substantial Fraction of Borrowers                                         OA - 19
  H.3 Credit Limits Are Orthogonal to Randomization                                                         OA - 20

Appendix I. Experiment Results: Dynamics in Treatment Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 21

Appendix J. Experiment Results: Debt, Payment, Purchases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 22
  J.1 Methodology                                                                                    OA - 22
  J.2 Debt: Effect of Interest Rate Decrease                                                         OA - 25
  J.3 Debt: Effect of Minimum Payments                                                               OA - 25
  J.4 Purchases: Effect of Interest Rates                                                            OA - 28
  J.5 Purchases: Effects of Minimum Payments                                                         OA - 30
  J.6 Payments: Effect of Interest Rates                                                             OA - 31
  J.7 Payments: Effect of Minimum Payment                                                            OA - 31

Appendix K. Experiment Results: Comparison with other studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 34

Appendix L. Experiment Results: Spillovers (Treatment Effects on Other Loans) . . . . . . . . . . OA - 35

Appendix M.Habit formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 38
  M.1 Comparison of min. payment across treatment arms 3 years after the experiment ended                    OA - 38
  M.2 Habit formation regressions                                                                            OA - 39

Appendix N. Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 40
  N.1 Severe Consequences of Default May Limit Moral Hazard                                                  OA - 40

Appendix O. Effects of unemployment: alternative method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 44

Appendix P. Closing of Study Card Not Taken up by Other Lenders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . OA - 46

                                                         OA - 1
Appendix A.              Background

A.1    Types of kiosks used for find NTB
                                       Figure OA-6: Example of Promotional Kiosks




                                                                                •            •




                          -3-332-3--36
                               away                   .




Notes: This kiosks do not necessarily correspond to those for our study card (for confidentiality reasons). But they are similar to the
ones Bank A used.




Appendix B.             Data


B.1    Data Check
    We argue the following relation holds in our data:



        amount duei,t = amount duei,t−1 + purchasesi,t − paymentsi,t + feesi,t + debti,t × interest ratei                          (4)

    To test such an equation in our data we use observations with positive debt (as the coefficient on the
interaction between debt and interest rate is not identified in the case when debt is zero). The following Table
OA-4 summarizes our results. We find that that inferred interest rates match closely with experimental interest
rates. This suggests that the debt transition equation (4) above is a good approximation to reality and that the
data on purchases, debt, payments, and fees is consistent. The R2 =1 means that the formula is virtually an
identity in the data.




                                                               OA - 2
                                                      Table OA-4: Data check


                                                                              (1)

                                                     Amount Duei,t−1         0.996***
                                                                           (0.000248)
                                                     Paymentsi,t            -1.000***
                                                                           (0.000363)
                                                     Purchasesi,t            1.008***
                                                                            (0.00102)
                                                     15% x Debti,t           0.179***
                                                                            (0.00343)
                                                     25% x Debti,t           0.279***
                                                                            (0.00356)
                                                     35% x Debti,t           0.380***
                                                                            (0.00370)
                                                     45% x Debti,t           0.476***
                                                                            (0.00474)
                                                     Feesi,t                 0.495***
                                                                            (0.00178)

                                                     R-squared               1.000
                                                     Observations          4,830,536


Notes: This table estimates equation (4) by OLS on months with positive debt. That     P is we estimate the β’s in the following equation:
Amount dueit = β0 + β1 Amount dueit−1 + β2 P aymentsit + β3 P urchasesit + k γk Debtit × I(r = k) + β5 F eesit + it , where
k ∈ {15, 25, 35, 45} The coefficients are unconstrained, so a coefficient of payments =-1 for instance is a result and not an imposed
constraint. The same is true of interest rates: the coefficient on I(r = 25%), i.e. γ25 =0.27 being close to 0.25 is a result as well. One,
two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.

B.2    Details of “Matched” Sample for Table 1
    This subsection describes how we constructed the sample from Column 4 in Table 1. First, note that, for
the experimental sample in March 2007 (Column 1), Panel B shows that the mean tenure is 68 months with a
standard deviation of 54 months. Using the individuals from the experimental sample in (described in Section
2.1) and focusing in March 2007, we construct 50-quintiles for the tenure in months of the oldest credit. Doing
so gives us values r1 , . . . , r49 where those cardholders whose loan tenure falls between [ri , ri+1 ) are in the
(i + 1)−th quintile, and we can define r0 and r50 as the min and max values for the tenure to have the first and
last 50-quintile groups defined. By construction, we have the same amount of cardholders in each [ri , ri+1 )
region.
    Next, we restrict to individuals in the credit bureau who had at least one credit card open in June 2010
(i.e. those shown in Column 3). We then drop any individual whose tenure in months of the oldest credit falls
outside of r0 and r50 . Then, for each i = 1, . . . , 50 we define qi as the number of individuals whose loan tenure
in June 2010 falls in [ri−1 , ri ), and define by q ∗ = mini qi as the region where we observe the smallest amount of
individuals. In our data q ∗ = 1, 149. Finally, for each i = 1, . . . , 50 we randomly select (without replacement)
q ∗ individuals whose loan tenure falls between [ri−1 , ri ). This leaves us with a sample of 57,450 individuals
shown in Column 4.




                                                                 OA - 3
B.3    Distribution of wages using social security data
                                 Figure OA-7: Creditholders by income in October 2011




                                                .15
                                   Fraction of creditholders
                                     .05        0    .1




                                                               0   10000      20000          30000        40000   50000
                                                                           Monthly wage in October 2011

                                                                            Market data            Experiment




Notes: The histogram in dark bars is the income distribution of a random sample of consumers in the credit bureau with at least
one credit card. The light bars shows the corresponding distribution for the experimental sample (using sampling weights). Both
histograms are censored at 45,000 pesos. Income data is from the IMSS and we were able to match 18 and 13 percent of the experimental
and credit bureau random sample datasets to the IMSS.




                                                                                 OA - 4
Appendix C.             Operating costs: Compartamos, Azteca, and Bank A


                                   Figure OA-8: Operational Costs (relative to Assets)


                                                           Operational Cost


                                      40%
                                      30%
                                   Average
                                    20%
                                      10%
                                      0%




                                             MFIs       Compartamos       Banco Azteca   Bank A

                                                                   Bank



Notes: The cost ratio is defined as the ratio of administrative and promotion spending to total assets. Data is taken from the Mexican
Banking Comission (CNBV) at https://portafoliodeinformacion.cnbv.gob.mx/bm1/Paginas/infosituacion.aspx (under 040-
5Z-R6, indicadores financieros). We average annual figures from 2007-2009 to be consistent with the study period.




                                                              OA - 5
Appendix D.              Exploring our proxy of Revenue



                                                                                   Figure OA-9: Default and Credit Scores




                                                                           .6
                                   Probability card being revoked by May 09
                                                .2       0    .4




                                                                                     550                  600               650                      700   750
                                                                                                                Credit Score in June 07

                                                                                                                95% CI                   lpoly smooth
                                                                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 3.75, pwidth = 5.62




Notes:   This figure plots a kernel regression of default (in May 2009) against credit scores (in June 2007). This forms basis of our
estimate of the likelihood of default used in constructing our bank revenue measure.




                                                                                                                    OA - 6
                                              Figure OA-10: Distribution of Measured Revenue per Card and Relationship with Credit Scores
                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .08
                                        .08
                Fraction of cardholders




                                                                                                                                                                           Fraction of cardholders
                                                                                                                                                                                               .06
                               .06




                                                                                                                                                                                   .04
                    .04




                                                                                                                                                                                              .02
                                    .02
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                -20                  -10              0               10                                                             20                                            -20                  -10              0               10                                              20
                                                                     NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)                                                                                                                                NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)

                                                (a) Net Present Value of Revenue (’000 Pesos)                                                                                                                      (b) Net Present Value of Revenue (’000 Pesos)
                                                          (control group borrowers)                                                                                                                                    (control group borrowers with 6-11M)
                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
   NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)




                                                                                                                                                                           NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                     25th percentile




                                                                                                                50th percentile




                                                                                                                                    75th percentile
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25th percentile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50th percentile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            75th percentile
        -2




                                                                                                                                                                                -2




                                                                                                       95% CI                                         lpoly smooth                                                                                                    95% CI                                  lpoly smooth
                       -4




                                                                                                                                                                                               -4




                                           525                     575                  625                                       675                                725                                           525                  575                  625                               675                           725
                                                                              Credit Score in June 07                                                                                                                                              Credit Score in June 07
                                              kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 2, bandwidth = 31.84, pwidth = 47.76                                                                                                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 2, bandwidth = 48.37, pwidth = 72.55


                                                          (c) Mean revenue by Credit Score                                                                                                                                  (d) Mean revenue by Credit Score
                                                              (control group borrowers)                                                                                                                                   (control group borrowers with 6-11M)

Notes: Panel (a) represents the distribution of our revenue measure for the control group (using sampling weights). Panel (b) rep-
resents the analogous graph for the new to banking strata. For clarity, the histograms are censored at ±20, 000 2007 Pesos. Panel (c)
displays a local polynomial kernel regression of our revenue measure against credit scores in June 2007 done at the individual card
level (for the control group). The grey shaded area denotes point-wise 95% confidence intervals. The x-axis ranges from 5th to the
95th percentiles of the credit score distribution. Panel (d) presents the analogous graph for the new to banking strata.




                                                                                                                                                                     OA - 7
                                                  Figure OA-11: Robustness: Best and Worse Case Bounds (for αi )




                                                                .15
                                                    Fraction of cardholders
                                                      .05       0     .1




                                                                              -20         -10              0              10                                       20
                                                                                          NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)

                                                                                                 worst case                                best case




Notes: Histograms of the revenue measure computed with αi = .05 (low recovery rates) for all borrowers (in brown) and the best case
scenario with αi = 0.95 (in pink). The resulting histograms do not vary significantly from the one constructed using estimated values
of αi for each borrower.



                                                                              Figure OA-12: Revenue and Credit Scores: By Strata

                                         (a) Distribution of Revenue                                                     (b) Distribution of Revenue
                              Full payers with 24+ months with the study card                                 Min. payment payers with 6-11 months with the study
                                                (“Full,24+M”)                                                                card (“Min,6-11M”)
               .4




                                                                                                                       .06
                         .3
  Fraction of cardholders




                                                                                                           Fraction of cardholders
                                                                                                                           .04
            .2




                                                                                                          .02
               .1
               0




                                                                                                                       0




                               -20        -10              0               10                       20                               -20         -10              0               10   20
                                          NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)                                                                    NPV of Revenue (MXN thousand pesos)

Notes: Figures (a) and (c) represent the distribution of the revenue measure for two different strata (the graph is censored at ±20,000
pesos). Figures (b) and (d) display kernel regressions of the revenue measure on credit scores (in June 2007) at the borrower level.
Each kernel regression is censored at the 5th and 95th percentile of the corresponding credit score distribution in the given strata.

Figure OA-10 (a) and (b) plot histograms of our revenue measure for different arms and strata. Figures OA-
10(c) presents a kernel regression of revenue on 2007 credit scores at the borrower level for the control group,
while OA-10(d) carries out the same exercise but for the stratum with the shortest tenure with the bank.
                  Strikingly, clients with low and high credit scores yield low revenues relative to clients with middling

                                                                                                     OA - 8
scores. Low score clients are more likely to default, thus yielding low revenue. On the other hand, high credit
score clients generate little revenue because they accrue lower interest charges and fees (e.g. by paying off the
amount outstanding each month).47




Appendix E.             Are NTB Borrowers Credit Constrained?

Recent and limited participation in the formal credit sector raises the possibility that NTB clients continue to
be credit constrained. Evidence of continuing credit constraints will provide the context for understanding the
experimental treatment effects in the sequel. We test for the existence of credit constraints by examining debt
responses (in the experimental sample) to increases in credit limits for the study card. If borrowers are not
liquidity or credit constrained, their debt should not respond to exogenous increases in credit limits.48 Con-
versely, one can view debt (or more generally consumption) responses to changes in credit limits as evidence
of credit constraints.49 Note, however, increases in borrowing following credit limit expansions for a particular
card could also be consistent with the lack of credit constraints if borrowers replace costlier debt with cheaper
debt. We can partly address this problem by examining all (formal sector) debt responses (using the CB data) to
credit limit changes. However, since we do not observe informal borrowing, we cannot rule out the possibility
of substitution away from informal loans as a response to changing formal sector credit limits.
       First, we use monthly data on debt and credit limits (using the bank data for the experimental sample) to
regress one month changes in debt on 12 lagged one month changes in credit limits.50 Let Debtit be the amount
of debt held by card i at the end of month t, let Limitit denote the credit limit for account i at the beginning
of month t and Xit denotes a set of controls. Following the main specification in Gross and Souleles (2002) we
estimate
                                                          T
                                                          X
                                      ∆Debti,t = δt +           βj ∆Limiti,t−j + γ 0 Xi,t + i,t                                   (5)
                                                          j=0

where ∆ is the first-difference operator and βj represents the incremental increase in debt between month t − 1
                                                                                                      PT
and t associated with a one peso change in credit limit in period t − j. The scalar parameter θ ≡       j=0 βj
then provides us with a summary measure of the long-run (T month) total effect of credit limit on debt; we
report θ̂ ≡ Tj=0 β̂j for each regression.51 Because the bank evaluates a card for credit-limit changes using pre-
           P

determined durations, cards that had received a credit limit change further back in the past will have a higher
present probability of a credit limit change than otherwise identical cards that received a credit limit increase
relatively recently. To address concerns that credit-limits change endogenously, we can therefore instrument
limit changes by the time since the last limit increase, while controlling for the total number of increases in the
sample period.52
       The results are presented in Table OA-5. In all tables, we adopt the convention of three asterisks denoting
  47
      InPfact because of the identity Debtt = Debtt−1 + Buyt − P ayt + (i/12)Debtt + F eest , an alternative representation of equation
(1) is Tt=1 (1 + r)−t [(i/12)Debtt + F eest ]. We have information on late payment fees and overdraft fees, but do not directly observe
merchant discount fees. The merchant discount fee is charged by the acquiring bank (i.e. the merchant’s bank) to the merchant and is
1.7% of purchases in our case.
   48
      Assuming no wealth effects of the increased limits.
   49
      See e.g. Deaton (1991), Carroll (1992), Gross and Souleles (2002).
   50
      Covariates include time dummies, demographics, credit score in June 2007, as well as indicators for the number of credit changes
during the experiment. Results were robust to including card level fixed effects.
   51
      Standard errors were computed using the delta method.
   52
      See Gross and Souleles (2002) for the same approach.


                                                                OA - 9
significance at the .1% level, two asterisks at the 1% significance level and one asterisk at the 5% significance
level. Panel A uses debit and limit data for just the study card while Panel B uses (changes in ) total credit card
debt (from the CB data) as the dependent variable.53 For Panel B, since we only have annual data, we modify
equation (5) and regress one year changes in debt on one year changes in credit limits (i.e T = 2). Column (1)
presents results for the entire experimental sample while the subsequent columns estimate the model on the 9
different strata.
       First, focusing on the entire sample we find that after 12 months a credit limit increase of 100 pesos for the
study card translates into 32 pesos of additional debt (Row 1). This number remains essentially unchanged
when we add controls (not reported) while the IV estimate is substantially larger (73 pesos). This propensity
to consume out of increases in the credit limit is about thrice as large as the figure for the US and suggests that
these Mexican borrowers are credit constrained and significantly more so than their US counterparts.54
       This conclusion finds further support in the stratum-specific results where we document two main find-
ings. First, longer tenure with the bank (controlling for baseline payment behavior) corresponds to lower
estimated responses – for instance borrowers who have had the card for more than two years are on average
less than half as responsive to changes in credit limits relative to those who have been with the bank for less
than a year. Second, controlling for bank tenure, borrowers with worse baseline repayment behavior are more
responsive to credit limit changes relative to borrowers with good baseline repayment behavior. For instance,
borrowers who have historically paid close to the minimum amount each period are about three times (or
more) as responsive to changes in credit limits relative to borrowers who have historically paid off their entire
balance each month. These results suggest that a shorter tenure with the bank and poor repayment behavior
are in part at least reflective of greater credit constraints.
       Finally, in Panel B we estimate equation (5) for the experimental sample using (annual) credit bureau data
(with T = 0 — i.e. we only include once lagged credit limit changes) and debt and credit limits are now total
debt and total credit limit summed across all of the borrower’s formal credit history. This allows us to partly
address the issue of credit substitution raised earlier. The results largely confirm the previous panel although
the point estimates are now, on average, smaller than earlier. Our overall conclusion from the preceding
exercise is that the experimental sample’s response to changes in credit limits are consistent with the existence
of credit constraints and these credit constraints appear to be stronger for borrowers with shorter bank tenure
and poorer repayment histories.




  53
    Adding non-revolving loans would induce a mechanical effect as debt is equal to the limit for these.
  54
    Gross and Souleles (2002) find estimates in the range of 0.11 − 0.15 relative to our baseline estimate of 0.32. Our estimates are
also higher than those obtained by Aydin (2018) who induces experimental variation in credit card limits (in an unnamed European
country) and estimates a response of 0.20 (with T = 9).


                                                             OA - 10
Table OA-5: Suggestive Evidence for Credit Constraints: Cumulative Effect of Credit Limit Changes on Debt

                                                               6-11 months                          12-23 months                            24+ months
                                          All       Minimum        Two +       Full     Minimum         Two +       Full     Minimum           Two +      Full
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)             (9)       (10)
       Panel A. Bank A’s debt (dependent variable) and Card A’s credit limit (independent variable)
       Baseline estimate              0.32***       0.69***    0.41*** 0.23***         0.56***      0.47***        0.13***        0.33***      0.13***   0.03**
                                       (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.05)      (0.05)         (0.02)          (0.06)       (0.03)   (0.01)
       IV estimate                    0.73***       2.14***    1.24***       0.47      1.60***      1.06**          0.09          0.62**         0.52    -0.08
                                       (0.14)       (0.32)      (0.28)      (0.37)      (0.28)      (0.39)         (0.09)          (0.19)       (0.27)   (0.14)
       Observations                    1,366,035     118,687      143,397    170,791      125,859      145,077     174,305        14,6291      155,290   186,338
       Mean dependent variable             70           184         102         59           100          55           23            95            43       23
                                         (2292)       (3631)       (2771)     (1756)       (2639)       (2092)      (1163)         (2863)       (2174)    (1272)
       Mean changes in limit              -104         -141         -115       -105          -97          -90         -77           -100          -97      -120
                                         (1460)       (1532)       (1452)     (1486)       (1149)       (1129)      (1177)         (1446)       (1487)    (1956)
       Mean utilization                   0.52         0.72         0.59       0.39         0.68         0.58         0.4           0.64         0.53       0.3
                                         (2.96)        (.34)       (3.07)      (.33)         (3)        (3.56)      (4.81)          (.35)        (3.6)    (2.82)
       Median utilization                  0.5         0.81         0.58       0.33         0.78         0.58         0.3           0.71         0.51       0.2
       Panel B. Total debt across all cards (dependent variable) and total credit limit across all cards (independent variable)
       Baseline estimate                 0.29***     0.37***      0.40*** 0.32***          0.42***       0.35*** 0.19***          0.29***      0.24***   0.15***
                                          (0.01)      (0.03)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)   (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)    (0.01)
       IV estimate                       0.45***     1.17***      0.76*** 0.51***          0.84***       0.45*** 0.37***          0.38***      0.34***   0.24***
                                          (0.05)      (0.12)       (0.07)      (0.04)       (0.09)        (0.06)   (0.04)          (0.07)       (0.06)    (0.04)
       Observations                     210,886       24,249       23,473     22,932       23,103       22,560     22,250         23,959       23,789    24,571
       Mean dependent variable             598         1440          889        549          808          453        258            577          360       198
                                         (4402)       (7023)       (5220)     (3342)       (5045)       (3886)     (2140)         (5095)       (3769)    (2257)
       Mean changes in limit               657          485          558        722          564          584        744            730          711       770
                                         (2228)       (2058)       (2163)     (2438)       (1726)       (1807)     (2131)         (2246)       (2285)    (2820)
       Mean utilization                   0.45         0.67          0.5       0.33         0.62         0.47       0.28           0.54         0.42      0.22
                                          (.38)        (.42)        (.38)      (.31)        (.39)        (.37)      (.28)          (.37)        (.35)     (.24)
       Median utilization                 0.38         0.65         0.45       0.24         0.59         0.41        0.2           0.51         0.35      0.14


Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression and displays estimates of θ̂ ≡ Tj=0 β̂j from Equation 5; all regressions include month
                                                                                  P
dummies. The first row (“Baseline”) in each panel displays estimates from regressions of current debt on past changes in credit limits
(equation 5) estimated using OLS. The second row in each panel (“IV”) displays results from estimating the equation using (dummies
for the) months since the last credit limit change as instrumental variables. For the IV specification equation 5 controls directly for the
total number of credit limit increases and decreases as well. Column (1) estimates include probability weights based on the size of each
of the strata in the population. Columns (2)-(8) present stratum specific estimates. Both panels use the experimental sample albeit at
different frequencies. Panel A presents results from estimating (5) at the monthly level with T = 12. The dependent variable is the total
debt on the study card and the independent variable of interest is the credit limit for the study card. The dependent variable for Panel
B is the total debt across all cards in the credit bureau for the experimental sample and the main independent variable is the total limit
among across all cards. Since we only observe data at the annual level for the credit bureau, Panel B has T = 2. The instrument for
both panels is months since last credit limit change in the study card only. Standard errors are shown for the baseline and IV estimates
in parentheses and are clustered at the individual level. Standard deviations are shown for the mean of the dependent variable, the
mean changes in limit, and the mean utilization in parenthesis. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and
0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                             OA - 11
E.0.1     Variation Across Strata

       A direct test of whether the strata vary systematically in terms of credit constraints is to estimate equation
(5) separately for each stratum and compare the magnitudes of the estimates of θ across strata. The results
are presented in Table (OA-5) and show that by this metric the stratum with the newest borrowers and the
poorest repayment history (i.e. the “6-11 Month ,Min Payer” stratum) is the most credit constrained and the
stratum containing the oldest borrowers with the best ex-ante repayment history (the “24+Month, Full Payer”
stratum) is the least constrained. For the former stratum, a 100 peso increase in the credit limit leads to debt
increase of 69 pesos twelve months later, while the corresponding figure for the latter stratum is only 3 pesos
(Panel A Row 1).55 This pattern is confirmed across the remaining seven strata: controlling for tenure with the
bank, poorer repayment histories are correlated with higher estimates of θ and correspondingly, controlling for
baseline repayment history, increased tenure with the bank is correlated with lower debt responses to credit
limit changes.




Appendix F.            Exit, study card closings and new cards


                                          Figure OA-13: Card Exits: Experimental Data
                                         Card Closings in Experiment, by Type of Closing
                                                 .5        .4
                                    Proportion of accounts
                                         .2      .1
                                                 0 .3




                                                         Jan/07                 Jul/07            Jan/08                Jul/08     Jan/09     Jul/09
                                                                                                           Fecha

                                                                             Client cancelled                    Revoked by bank            Other
                                                                Note: Other includes lost cards and cardholder deaths




Notes: This figure plots card closing rates over the course of the experiment for the control group. Card closings are subdivided into
(a) bank initiated revocations (i.e. default), (b) (borrower initiated) cancellations, and (c) other reasons (e.g. death of owner). For
comparison, Figure OA-14 in the online appendix plots the analogous graphs for this figure for two different strata.
  55
    The IV estimates are substantially larger for the most constrained stratum – a 214 peso increase in debt – but unchanged for the
least constrained stratum.




                                                                                                   OA - 12
                                                              Figure OA-14: Card Exit during the Experiment: Selected Strata

              (a) Full payers with 24+ months with the credit card                                                   (b) Min. payment payers w/ 6-11 months with the card
               50%




                                                                                                                                 50%
                         40%




                                                                                                                                          40%
  Percentage of accounts




                                                                                                                     Percentage of accounts
               30%




                                                                                                                                 30%
      20%




                                                                                                                         20%
               10%




                                                                                                                                 10%
                        Jan/07                  Jul/07       Jan/08          Jul/08         Jan/09         Jul/09                        Jan/07                       Jul/07       Jan/08         Jul/08       Jan/09           Jul/09

                                            Others          Cancelled by client             Cancelled by bank                                                     Others          Cancelled by client          Cancelled by bank

Notes: These figures plot card exit rates over the course of the experiment for the control group and for two different strata. Card
closure is subdivided into whether it was a (a) default/revocation, (b) cancellation or (c) closure for some other reason (primarily lost
cards or death). The aggregate exit rates (for the entire sample) are in Figure OA-13 in the main paper.




                                                                      Figure OA-15: Cancellations and opening of new cards
                               .08




                                                                                                                                                 .25
         Proportion of closed accounts
         from June 2008 to May 2009




                                                                                                                             from June 2008 to May 2009
                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                  .06




                                                                                                                                Proportion that get loan

                                                                                                                                              .15
                         .04




                                                                                                                                     .1
             .02




                                                                                                                            .05
                               0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                         -100                 -50                     0                         50                                             -100                 -50                     0                      50
                                                 Change in credit score from June 2007 to June 2008                                                                    Change in credit score from June 2007 to June 2008

                                                                      Cancelled by Client                                                                                  With any other bank             With the same bank


                                 (a) Card Closings and Changes in Credit Scores                                                                               (b) New Loans and Changes in Credit Scores

Notes: These figures use data from borrowers in the experiment who had been with the bank between six and eleven months (as of
January 2007) and for whom the study card was the first card of any kind (24,146 individuals satisfy these criteria). Panel (a) shows
a local polynomial kernel regression where the explanatory variable is the change in the credit score from June 2007 to June 2008.
The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a borrower cancelled the study card between June 2008 and May 2009. Panel (b)
shows two local polynomial kernel regressions where the explanatory variable in each case is the same as in panel (a). The dependent
variables are binary variables for whether a borrower obtained a new card (between June 2008 and May 2009) either from Bank A (red
dotted line) or from any other bank (blue line with triangles). Dashed lines represent point-wise 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                             OA - 13
Appendix G.              Predicting Default, Cancellations, Revenues and Interest Paid

We show the results from predicting default, cancellations, revenues and which consumers end up paying
interest at least once on Tables OA-6 and OA-7. The results in both Tables focus on the benchmark model, OLS
and Random Forests. We use cross validation to fine tune the depth of each tree and the number of minimum
samples within each leaf in the Random Forest model. For each model we predict the dependent variables (one
at a time) using different sets of covariates. Each panel uses a different information set starting with a minimal
set (most closely corresponding to the bank’s information set when it issued the card) to progressively larger
ones. Panel A includes variables measured at the time of application while Panel B uses the same variables
but as observed in March 2007 (i.e. after the card was awarded) as well as the credit score in June 2007.56
Panel C adds purchases, payments and total debt in March 2007 yielding the richest set of covariates. The
most successful model, the Random Forest, has an out-of-sample R2 of 0.06 in Panel A and 0.17 in Panel C.
For revenues, the out-of-sample root MSE is 7,204 pesos for Panel A and 4,474 for Panel C, which are about
the same as the intercept-only model. Performance improves somewhat in Panel C so that interactions with
the bank (measured here in terms of payment, purchase and debt history) are useful indicators of revenue.
We note, however, that even the best performing ML tool does not significantly out-perform the simplest
intercept-only model on all measures. We also attempted to predict default and cancellations using the same
covariates and strategy.
    The general message from the differing information sets and methods is the same – it is quite difficult
to predict which NTB borrowers will generate revenues for the bank and that adding a range of subsequent
information (unavailable to the bank at the time of application such as payments, purchases and debt) does
improve prediction, but only modestly.57 A caveat is in order. We only observe successful applicants (rather
than the entire applicant pool) and the prediction exercise is carried out on this (presumably positively) se-
lected sample. This is clearly a limitation, but even this screened sample is by no means homogeneous or risk
free and as we show above this risk is hard to predict. Even though the bank presumably screened as best it
could, the result appears unsatisfactory – that the bank decided to shut down the study card provides further
evidence of this.
   56
      The variables include zip code, marital status, sex, date of birth, number of prior loans, number of prior credit cards, number of
payments in the credit bureau, number of banks interacted with, payments in arrears, date of previous default and tenure with the
credit bureau.
   57
      However, see e.g. Björkegren and Grissen (2017) that also uses machine learning methods to predict loan default with more
promising results (using borrowers’ mobile phone usage patterns).




                                                               OA - 14
                      Table OA-6: Predicting Revenue and Default with Different Information Sets


                                                                Revenue                                           Default
                                                                   Linear        Random                             Linear        Random
                                                Benchmark                                        Benchmark
                                                                 Regression       Forest                          Regression       Forest
                                                     (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)             (5)           (6)
            Panel A. Public information available at the moment of application
               ρ(predicted,realized)              0.00           0.04              0.28               0.00            0.45           0.45
               Out of sample root MSE            7452           7444               7204               0.43            0.38           0.38
               Out of sample MAE                 5198           5136               4954               0.32            0.29           0.28
               Out of sample R-squared            0.00           0.00              0.06               0.00            0.19           0.20
               AUC - ROC Curve                      -              -                 -                0.50            0.79           0.79
            Panel B. March 2007 public information
               ρ(predicted,realized)            0.00                0.05           0.28               0.00            0.45           0.45
               Out of sample root MSE           7399                7389           7149               0.43            0.38           0.38
               Out of sample MAE                5161                5096           4914               0.32            0.29           0.28
               Out of sample R-squared          0.00                0.00           0.06               0.00            0.19           0.20
               AUC - ROC Curve                    -                   -              -                0.50            0.79           0.79
            Panel C. March 2007 public and private information
               ρ(predicted,realized)            0.00                0.33           0.41               0.00            0.46           0.49
               Out of sample root MSE           7409                7023           6765               0.43            0.38           0.37
               Out of sample MAE                5169                4695           4474               0.32            0.28           0.26
               Out of sample R-squared          0.00                0.11           0.17               0.00            0.21           0.24
               AUC - ROC Curve                    -                   -              -                0.50            0.81           0.81

Note: MODELS: We predict revenues and default using a range of standard machine learning methods including Support Vector Machines, Neural
Networks, Boosting, and Random Forests. Model parameters are tuned using out-of-sample (OoS) cross validation. The table shows results for the
Random Forest in columns (3) and (6) since it achieved the smallest out-of-sample mean squared error across all the methods mentioned above.
Columns (1) and (2) present results for a constant only model and a linear regression model to provide benchmarks. INPUTS: The Table contains three
panels, which differ in the input variables. Panel A uses variables measured at the moment of application. These include the state, applicant/borrower
zip code, marital status, gender, date of birth, number of prior loans, number of prior credit cards, number of payments in the credit bureau, number
of banks interacted with, number of payments in arrears, number of payments in arrears specifically for credit cards, length of presence (in months)
in the credit bureau, the date of the last time the borrower was in arrears, and the date of the last time the borrower was in arrears for any credit
card. Panel B uses all variables from Panel A, but measured in March 2007, i.e. after our experimental cards were awarded. We are thus easing the
lender’s prediction problem by including information unavailable to the lender at the time of application. In addition, we also include a the credit
score (measured in June 2007) – this is our earliest credit score measure). Panel C adds further information (that was likewise unavailable to lender at
the time of application): beside using all variables in Panel B, it adds purchases, payments, debt, and amount due from the study card, all measured in
March 2007. GOODNESS OF FIT: We partition the control group into a training sample composed by cardholders who have had the experimental card
for more than one year (i.e. those that belong to the 12-23M and 24+M strata and all payment behaviors) and a test sample composed by individuals
who have had the experimental card for more than 6 months but less than a year (i.e. those that belong to the 6-11M strata and all payment behaviors).
We estimate the 3 models (for each panel) using the training sample, and then evaluate each model by comparing its predicted predicted outcome to
the true observed outcome in the test (holdout) sample. The cells above show different goodness-of-fit measures for each model and set of inputs. The
first row in each panel represents the correlation between the predicted value (in the case of discrete variables we use predicted probabilities) and the
realized value in the test sample. The second row presents the mean squared error, the third shows the mean absolute error, the fourth displays the
“R-squared” (defined as 1 minus the ratio of the variance of the prediction errors relative to the variance of the dependent variable), and the fifth row
shows the area under the ROC curve, used for indicator outcomes.



       Regarding AUCs for default, they are lower than those documented in several studies. They are lower than
those found for credit cards in the US58 , lower than those from loans in Australia, Japan, and Poland;59 lower
than those in the housing market in the US;60 lower than those for credit default swaps in the US.61 They are
higher than those to predict repayment using cellphone data in an unnamed South American country;62 and
  58
      Khandani et al. (2010) shows AUCs between 0.89 to 0.95 for credit cards in the US in a similar time period to our paper
  59
      Ala’Raj and Abbod (2016) reports AUCs of 0.80, 0.94, 0.93, 0.77 and 0.84 for loan data from Germany, Australia, Japan, Iran, and
Poland, respectively. Abellán and Mantas (2014) reports AUCs of 0.93, 0.93 and 0.78 for loan data from Japan, Australia, and Germany,
respectively.
   60
      Fuster et al. (2017) reports an AUC of 0.86 for US mortgage data from 2009 to 2014.
   61
      Luo et al. (2017) reports AUCs around 0.92 for credit default swaps on 2016.
   62
      Björkegren and Grissen (2017) reports AUCs between 0.61 and 0.76.




                                                                       OA - 15
higher than those for a micro-finance lender in Bosnia Herzegovina.63


                                     Table OA-7: Predicting cancellations and paid interest


                                                           Cancellations                    Paid interest at least one month
                                                                Linear       Random                      Linear       Random
                                              Benchmark                                  Benchmark
                                                              Regression      Forest                   Regression      Forest
                                                   (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
             Panel A. Public information available at the moment of application
                ρ(predicted,realized)              0.00           0.14            0.15       0.00          0.42         0.44
                Out of sample root MSE             0.35           0.35            0.34       0.50          0.45         0.45
                Out of sample MAE                  0.27           0.26            0.26       0.50          0.42         0.42
                Out of sample R-squared            0.00           0.02            0.02       0.00          0.17         0.18
                AUC - ROC Curve                    0.50           0.62            0.62       0.50          0.75         0.75
             Panel B. March 2007 public information
                ρ(predicted,realized)            0.00             0.14            0.15       0.00          0.41         0.44
                Out of sample root MSE           0.35             0.35            0.35       0.50          0.45         0.45
                Out of sample MAE                0.27             0.26            0.26       0.50          0.42         0.42
                Out of sample R-squared          0.00             0.02            0.02       0.00          0.17         0.18
                AUC - ROC Curve                  0.50             0.61            0.62       0.50          0.75         0.75
             Panel C. March 2007 public and private information
                ρ(predicted,realized)            0.00             0.26            0.31       0.00          0.45         0.52
                Out of sample root MSE           0.35             0.34            0.33       0.50          0.44         0.42
                Out of sample MAE                0.27             0.24            0.23       0.50          0.41         0.38
                Out of sample R-squared          0.00             0.07            0.10       0.00          0.20         0.27
                AUC - ROC Curve                  0.50             0.66            0.70       0.50          0.78         0.80

Notes: MODELS: We predict cancellations using a range of standard machine learning methods including Support Vector Machines,
Neural Networks, Boosting, and Random Forests. Model parameters are tuned using out-of-sample cross validation. The table shows
results for the Random Forest in column (3) since it achieved the smallest out-of-sample mean squared error across all the methods
mentioned above. Columns (1) and (2) present results for a constant only model and a linear regression model as benchmarks.
INPUTS: The Table contains three panels, which differ in the input variables. Panel A uses variables measured at the moment of
application. These include the state, applicant/borrower zip code, marital status, gender, date of birth, number of prior loans, number
of prior credit cards, number of payments in the credit bureau, number of banks interacted with, number of payments in arrears,
number of payments in arrears specifically for credit cards, length of presence (in months) in the credit bureau, the date of the last time
the borrower was in arrears, and the date of the last time the borrower was in arrears for any credit card. Panel B uses all variables
from Panel A, but measured in March 2007, i.e. after our experimental cards were awarded. We are thus easing the lender’s prediction
problem by including information unavailable to the lender at the time of application. In addition, we also include a the credit score
(measured in June 2007) – this is our earliest credit score measure). Panel C adds further information (that was likewise unavailable to
lender at the time of application): beside using all variables in Panel B, it adds purchases, payments, debt, and amount due from the
study card, all measured in March 2007. GOODNESS OF FIT: We randomly partition the control group into two samples: a training
sample composed by cardholders who have had the experimental card for more than one year (i.e. those that belong to the 12-23M
and 24+M strata and all payment behaviors) and a test sample composed by individuals who have had the experimental card for more
than 6 months but less than a year (i.e. those that belong to the 6-11M strata and all payment behaviors). We estimate the 3 models
(for each panel) using the training sample, and then evaluate each model by comparing its predicted predicted outcome to the true
observed outcome in the test sample. The cells above show different goodness-of-fit measures for each model and set of inputs. The
first row in each panel represents the correlation between the predicted value and the realized value in the test sample. The second
row presents the mean squared error, the third shows the mean absolute error, the fourth displays the “R-squared” (defined as 1 minus
the ratio of the variance of the prediction errors relative to the variance of the dependent variable), and the fifth row shows the area
under the ROC curve, used for indicator outcomes.




  63
       Van Gool et al. (2012) reports an AUC of 0.71 for a mid-sized Bosnian microlender.


                                                                    OA - 16
Appendix H.       Experiment Set Up

H.1   Experiment Details and Randomization Check

                                         Table OA-8: Experimental Design

             Panel A: Stratification
                                       Full-balance payer     Minimum payer     Part-balance payer     Total
               6 to 11 months                18,000               18,000              18,000          54,000
               12 to 23 months               18,000               18,000              18,000          54,000
                 24+ months                  18,000               18,000              18,000          54,000
                     Total                   54,000               54,000              54,000         162,000


             Panel B: Sample Sizes for Arms Within Strata
                 Interest Rate                 Minimum payment
                                             10%                      5%
                     15%                     2000                  2000
                     25%                     2000                  2000
                     35%                     2000                  2000
                     45%                     2000                  2000
                    Control                  2,000




                                           Table OA-9: Sampling weights


                                                       Cardholder’s payment behavior
                                                                                                         Total
                                          Minimum payer        Part-balance payer   Full-balance payer
                                               (1)                     (2)                  (3)           (4)
            Months of credit card use
             6 to 11 months                      9.8                   1.6                 0.6           12
             12 to 23 months                    10.7                   1.7                 0.7           13
             24+ months                         61.5                   9.8                 3.8            75
            Total                                82                    13                   5            100




                                                            OA - 17
                                                         Table OA-10: Randomization Check - Baseline statistics for March 2007


                                                     r = 15 %                   r = 25 %                        r = 35 %                    r = 45 %
                                   CTR                                                                                                                       Total     P-value   Observations
                                              mp = 5 %    mp = 10 %      mp = 5 %    mp = 10 %          mp = 5 %         mp = 10 %   mp = 5 %    mp = 10 %
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)           (5)          (6)               (7)               (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)      (12)         (13)

                                                                                           Panel A. All observations
                 Age                 39           39           39            39           39                 39              39          39           39        39      0.70       160,935
                                     (6)          (6)          (6)           (6)          (6)                (6)             (6)         (6)          (6)       (6)
                 Female (%)          47           47           46            48           47                 48              48          47           47        47      0.63       161,878
                                    (50)         (50)         (50)          (50)         (50)               (50)            (50)        (50)         (50)      (50)
                 Married (%)         64           65           64            65           65                 65              65          64           65        65      0.86       157,822
                                    (48)         (48)         (48)          (48)         (48)               (48)            (48)        (48)         (48)      (48)
                 Debt              1,191        1,195        1,184         1,259        1,202              1,299           1,111       1,136        1,208     1,198     0.22       161,590
                                  (3,368)      (3,468)      (3,402)       (3,744)      (3,559)            (3,742)         (3,245)     (3,457)      (3,669)   (3,521)
                 Purchases          333          332          352           344          329                352             328         351          324       338      0.43       161,590
                                  (1,041)       (975)       (1,145)       (1,069)       (964)             (1,016)         (1,014)     (1,056)       (909)    (1,023)
                 Payments           708          694          762           722          704                704             704         698          703       711      0.77       161,590
                                  (1,457)      (1,292)      (1,878)       (1,541)      (1,391)            (1,359)         (1,587)     (1,302)      (1,352)   (1,473)
                 Credit limit      7,814        7,867        7,937         7,853        7,927              7,999           7,739       7,925        7,848     7,879     0.61       161,590
                                  (6,064)      (6,003)      (6,279)       (5,948)      (6,226)            (6,269)         (5,632)     (6,403)      (6,186)   (6,117)
                 Delinquent (%)      1.4          1.8          1.6           1.9          1.4                1.7             1.8         1.5          1.5       1.6     0.37       161,590
                                   (11.9)       (13.2)       (12.7)        (13.5)       (11.7)             (13.0)          (13.3)      (12.1)       (12.1)    (12.6)

                                                                                          Panel B. Excluding attriters
                 Age                 39           39           39            39           39                39               39          39           39        39      0.35        96,928




OA - 18
                                     (6)          (6)          (6)           (6)          (6)               (6)              (6)         (6)          (6)       (6)
                 Female (%)          46           48           47            47           48                49               49          46           47        47      0.32        97,163
                                    (50)         (50)         (50)          (50)         (50)              (50)             (50)        (50)         (50)      (50)
                 Married (%)         65           65           66            64           65                66               66          65           66        65      0.78        94,835
                                    (48)         (48)         (48)          (48)         (48)              (47)             (47)        (48)         (47)      (48)
                 Debt               805          728          747           811          844               871              680         713          828       780      0.13        97,248
                                  (2,693)      (2,764)      (2,775)       (3,099)      (3,133)           (3,027)          (2,533)     (2,591)      (3,225)   (2,882)
                 Purchases          386          379          412           395          376               395              367         386          358       384      0.46        97,248
                                  (1,045)      (1,051)      (1,237)       (1,163)      (1,037)           (1,092)          (1,092)     (1,152)       (982)    (1,099)
                 Payments           752          715          769           727          711               717              690         686          733       722      0.33        97,248
                                  (1,417)      (1,264)      (1,701)       (1,342)      (1,227)           (1,291)          (1,390)     (1,234)      (1,345)   (1,363)
                 Credit limit      7,865        7,897        7,916         7,932        7,933             7,941            7,688       7,782        7,757     7,859     0.71        97,248
                                  (6,291)      (5,977)      (6,319)       (6,021)      (6,189)           (6,291)          (5,430)     (5,930)      (6,147)   (6,070)
                 Delinquent (%)      0.2          0.2          0.4           0.2          0.1               0.2              0.2         0.2          0.2       0.2     0.11        97,248
                                   (3.9)        (4.9)        (6.2)         (4.5)        (2.9)             (5.0)            (4.6)       (4.3)        (4.9)     (4.7)


          Notes: Columns (1) to (10) tabulate the mean (standard deviation in parentheses) for the various treatment arms in the experiment. The standard error for the mean estimates can be
          computed by dividing the standard deviation by the (square root of the) number of individuals in each treatment arm. Time-varying variables are measured here at the beginning
          of the experiment. Panel A includes all individuals, whereas Panel B excludes those individuals who exit the experiment at any point. Column (11) shows the mean and standard
          deviations of the complete sample. Column (12) shows the p-value of a test of the null hypothesis that all means from (1)–(10) are equal.
H.2                            Minimum Payments Bind for a Substantial Fraction of Borrowers
                                                                          Figure OA-16: Payment as a fraction of debt before the experiment


                                                                                                                                         (a) Mar/07 - all treatment arms




                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                        0.39




                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                              Fraction of cardholders
                                                                                                        .2



                                                                                                                          0.14
                                                                                                                                               0.12
                                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                 0.08                                                                                                                                 0.07
                                                                                                                                                      0.06

                                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                                                                                                                                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                                                            0.02 0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                          0                       .1              .2             .3                                                        .4                            .5
                                                                                                                                                        Payment as proportion of amount due

                                (b) Oct/07 - treatment arms with mp = 5%                                                                                                                                             (c) Oct/07 - treatment arms with mp = 10%
                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4


                                              0.35


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.32
                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .3
   Fraction of cardholders




                                                                                                                                                                                         Fraction of cardholders
             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.17
                                                                                                                                                                           0.15                                      0.15
                                0.14



                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.09
                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1




                                       0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.06
                                                            0.05
                                                                   0.03                                                                                                                                                            0.03                        0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.03
                                                                          0.02                                                                                                                                              0.02                                              0.02
                                                                                 0.01 0.01                                                                                                                                                                                           0.01 0.01
                                                                                           0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00                                                                                                                                                                  0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
                                                                                                                              0.00 0.00 0.00
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                0                       .1              .2             .3                                                       .4                            .5                                     0                       .1              .2             .3                                        .4                    .5
                                                              Payment as proportion of amount due                                                                                                                                                  Payment as proportion of amount due



Notes: We plot monthly payment divided by the amount due. In Figure (a) this is the ratio of monthly payments in April 2007 and
the amount due in the March 2007 statement. In Panels (b) and (c) we examine the ratio of monthly payments in October 2007 to the
amount due in the September 2007 statement. We right-censor all figures at 0.5, so the rightmost bin for each panel includes those
whose payment ratio is 0.5 or higher. The leftmost bin starts at 0, and all bins have a width of 0.25. The number above each bin
represents the fraction of cardholders in the given bin. The variable in the x-axis is only an approximation to the minimum payment
since the minimum payment may include some fees or discounts that we do not observe.




                                                                                                                                                                            OA - 19
H.3    Credit Limits Are Orthogonal to Randomization


                                                         Table OA-11: Credit Limits and Treatment Arms


                                                                                                   Card Limit
                                                                                                 (1)        (2)
                                                                r = 15, MP = 5                    45          37
                                                                                                (210)       (210)
                                                                r = 15, MP = 10                   41          43
                                                                                                (218)       (218)
                                                                r = 25, MP = 5                   -84         -89
                                                                                                (209)       (209)
                                                                r = 25, MP = 10                 -108        -103
                                                                                                (211)       (211)
                                                                r = 35, MP = 5                   119         116
                                                                                                (220)       (220)
                                                                r = 35, MP = 10                 -312        -305
                                                                                                (208)       (208)
                                                                r = 45, MP = 10                 -227        -216
                                                                                                (209)       (209)
                                                                Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)     11,778***   11,780***
                                                                                                (157)       (157)
                                                                Time fixed effects               No          Yes
                                                                Observations                  3,201,085   3,201,085
                                                                p-value Treatments              0.438       0.486
                                                                p-value Strata                  0.000       0.000
                                                                R-squared                       0.021       0.030
                                                                Dependent Variable Mean         11157       11157


Notes: Each column represents a different regression. The dependent variable is credit limit in month t for individual i. Independent
variables comprise treatment and strata indicators. Column (2) adds month fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the
individual level are shown in parenthesis. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level
respectively.



                                                    Figure OA-17: Credit Limits by Month by Treatment Arms
                      8.5 9.5 10.5 11.5 12.5 13.5
                        credit limit (thousands)
                                    7.5




                                            Mar/07              Sep/07               Mar/08               Sep/08          Mar/09

                                                    MP,r (%):            5, 15              10, 15                5, 25     10, 25
                                                                         5, 35              10, 35                5, 45     10, 45




                                                                                    OA - 20
Appendix I.                                      Experiment Results: Dynamics in Treatment Effects

Figure OA-18 examines the evolution of treatment effects over the entire 26 month period by plotting the
regression coefficients from estimating equation (2) month-by-month. The default measure at time t is a cu-
mulative measure: i.e. Yit = 1 if i has defaulted at any point up to t. Recall that it takes 3 consecutive months
of delinquency for the loan to be classified in default. This plus the fact that the borrower may have some sav-
ings to cushion increases in minimum payments and interest rates means that it could take time for changes
to manifest in default.
    Overall we find zero or very small effects in the long run and in the short run for default, and somewhat
larger — but still small— effects for cancellations.


                                                  Figure OA-18: Default/Revocation and Client Initiated Cancellations


                                        Dependent variable: cumulative cancellations                                               Dependent variable: cumulative cancellations
                                                          Treatment: interest rate                                                             Treatment: minimum payment
                                0.04                                                                                       0.04
      Treatment Effect (prop)




                                                                                                 Treatment Effect (prop)
                                0.02                                                                                       0.02

                                0.00                                                                                       0.00

                                -0.02                                                                                      -0.02

                                -0.04                                                                                      -0.04

                                    Mar/07       Sep/07         Mar/08       Sep/08    Mar/09                                  Mar/07       Sep/07     Mar/08     Sep/08    Mar/09



                                             Dependent variable: cumulative default                                                     Dependent variable: cumulative default
                                                          Treatment: interest rate                                                             Treatment: minimum payment
      Treatment Effect (prop)




                                                                                                 Treatment Effect (prop)




                                0.02                                                                                       0.02


                                0.00                                                                                       0.00


                                -0.02                                                                                      -0.02


                                -0.04                                                                                      -0.04
                                    Mar/07       Sep/07         Mar/08        Sep/08   Mar/09                                  Mar/07       Sep/07     Mar/08     Sep/08    Mar/09


Notes: Figures plot monthly treatment effects. For each month we regress the outcome (default or cancellation) on all treatment
and stratum indicators using sampling weights. For clarity, we only display treatment effects for a subset of treatments. Each dot
corresponds to the coefficient on the treatment indicator for that month along with the point-wise 95% confidence interval. That
is, each point represents the difference between the means of the plotted treatment and comparison group. In all sub-figures, the
comparison group is the (45%, 5%) group. For the graphs on the left – examining the interest rate changes and colored red– the
treatment group is the (15%, 5%) arm. For the graphs on the right – examining the minimum payment treatment and colored blue
– the treatment group is the the (45%, 10%) arm. In all sub-figures the dependent variable is either (a) cumulative cancellations (top
row) or (b) cumulative default (bottom row).




                                                                                            OA - 21
Appendix J.           Experiment Results: Debt, Payment, Purchases


J.1     Methodology
       In Section 3.3 card exit was an outcome of interest in itself; here we view card exit as a threat to the in-
ternal validity. Specifically, we wish to account for card exit as we examine the effect of the experimental
interventions on debt, purchases and payments. We attempt to address attrition in a number of ways: First,
we implement Lee (2009) and present upper and lower bounds on treatment effects that account for attrition.
These bounds are generally wide but for the most part still informative. Second, we present month-by-month
treatment effects and because card-exit is low in the initial months, our short-term estimates are much less
affected by attrition bias. Finally, in some cases (i.e. for card cancellations) it seems plausible to impute a value
of zero to outcomes in the periods after card exit. Such a strategy is useful when we are interested in the effects
of the treatment on the outcome without distinguishing between the extensive and intensive margins.
       We present both short-term (at the six month horizon) as well as long-term effects (after 26 months at
the end of the experiment). We also present month-by-month treatment effects for each of the 26 months of
the experiment.64 In addition, when useful, we also examine treatment effect heterogeneity by presenting
stratum-specific treatment effects for three strata – (a) the “Full, 24M+” stratum comprising borrowers who
had been with the bank for at least 24 months before January 2007 and had always paid their bills in full (4%
of the population) (b) the “Min, 6-11M” stratum consisting of borrowers who had been with the bank for less
than a year before January 2007 and had the poorest repayment history65 (10% of the population) and(c) the
“Min, 24M+” stratum comprising the longest term borrowers in the poorest repayment category (62% of the
population and the largest stratum).
       For each estimand we present point estimates and account for attrition using bounds. We view attrition in
two distinct ways and thus provide two sets of bounds – first, we consider all card exits regardless of reason
(i.e. cancellations, revocations and the other category) as attrition. Second, we set all post-exit outcomes for
card cancellers to zero and only consider the defaulters and other category of card exits to be attriters. The
latter strategy is arguably justified if we are willing to conflate treatment effects on the extensive and intensive
margins. Further, since card cancellers have chosen to set purchases, payments and debt to zero by exiting the
system one can plausibly set those outcomes to zero for cancellers rather than missing.66
       We estimate the full set of treatment effects in the tables but to simplify exposition we focus on only two
contrasts in the discussion here: (a) The effect of an interest rate decrease from 45% to 15% for borrowers with
a minimum payment of 5% (the (45%, 5%) arm vs the (15%, 5%) arm). (b) The effect of a minimum payment
increase from 5% to 10% for borrowers who faced an APR of 45% (the (45%, 5%) arm vs the (45%, 10%) arm).
       Treatment effects for other arms are provided in some cases and the full set of results are available on
request. For both the short- and long-run results we estimate regressions of the form

                                                      7
                                                      X                9
                                                                       X
                                               Yi =         βj Tji +         δs Sji + i                                       (6)
                                                      j=1              s=1


where Yi is the outcome measured either six months after the experiment began or in the last month of the
  64
     These are currently presented in graphical form. Tables available upon request.
  65
     viz. their average payments prior to January 2007 were less than 1.5 times the average minimum payments during this period.
  66
     A similar argument is harder to justify for defaulters.



                                                              OA - 22
experiment. The {Tji }7j=1 are treatment dummies for each of 7 intervention arms. The omitted arm is the
(M P = 5%, r = 45%) arm since it is the group with terms closest to the status quo and we do not use the
control group.67 We include strata dummies {Sji }9j=1 and probability weights in all specifications.68
       We also estimate month-by-month treatment effects throughout the experiment. In the interest of brevity
we restrict discussion to the two main contrasts above. In particular, we estimate separately for t = 1 . . . 26

                                                                       (15%,5%)
                                                   Yit = α1t + β1t Ti             + ν1it                                               (7)
                                                                      (45%,10%)
                                                  Yit = α2t +   β2t Ti            + ν2it                                               (8)

and in both cases the excluded arm is the (45%, 5%) arm.69 We then graph the estimates of β1t and β2t against
time along with the corresponding Lee bounds in Figure OA-19. This is a parsimonious way of presenting the
numerous treatment effects as well as allowing the reader to trace the evolution of the treatments over time.
In most of the graphs, the bounds are typically tight for the first 6 months – reflecting limited attrition – and
the point estimates at six months are of the same sign and typically the same order of magnitude as the long
term (26 month) effects. Having described the general methodology we next turn to describing the effects of
the interventions – first on debt and then on purchases, payments and fees.
  67
      As mentioned earlier, the issue with the control arm is that we do not observe the different interest rates faced by borrowers in the
arm.
   68
      Alternatively we estimate treatment effects stratum-by-stratum and use the stratum weights to arrive at the treatment effect. This
is equivalent to a regression of the outcome on the treatment indicator using probability weighting. The results from this exercise were
very similar to those presented here and are omitted.
   69
      We do not include stratum fixed effects in these regressions in order to present the corresponding Lee bounds in a straightforward
manner. In the appendix we construct Lee bounds conditional on strata and use stratum weights to arrive at unconditional bounds.
The results are qualitatively similar and so we focus discussion on the simpler estimator.




                                                                OA - 23
                                                                                     Figure OA-19: Treatment effect estimates



                                                               Dependent variable: debt                                                                                 Dependent variable: debt
                                                                      Treatment: interest rate                                                                           Treatment: minimum payment
        Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)




                                                                                                                 Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)
                                       1000.00                                                                                                  1000.00
                                         500.00                                                                                                   500.00
                                           0.00                                                                                                     0.00
                                        -500.00                                                                                                  -500.00
                                       -1000.00                                                                                                 -1000.00
                                       -1500.00                                                                                                 -1500.00
                                                 Mar/07       Sep/07        Mar/08       Sep/08   Mar/09                                                  Mar/07       Sep/07    Mar/08     Sep/08    Mar/09



                                                            Dependent variable: purchases                                                                            Dependent variable: purchases
                                                                     Treatment: interest rate                                                                            Treatment: minimum payment
        Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)




                                                                                                                 Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)
                                       300.00                                                                                                   300.00
                                       200.00                                                                                                   200.00
                                       100.00                                                                                                   100.00
                                          0.00                                                                                                     0.00
                                       -100.00                                                                                                  -100.00
                                       -200.00                                                                                                  -200.00
                                                Mar/07       Sep/07        Mar/08       Sep/08    Mar/09                                                 Mar/07       Sep/07     Mar/08     Sep/08    Mar/09



                                                            Dependent variable: payments                                                                             Dependent variable: payments
                                                                     Treatment: interest rate                                                                            Treatment: minimum payment
        Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)




                                                                                                                 Treatment Effect (MXN pesos)




                                       400.00                                                                                                   400.00

                                       200.00                                                                                                   200.00

                                          0.00                                                                                                     0.00

                                       -200.00                                                                                                  -200.00

                                       -400.00                                                                                                  -400.00
                                                Mar/07       Sep/07        Mar/08       Sep/08    Mar/09                                                 Mar/07       Sep/07     Mar/08     Sep/08    Mar/09



                                                          Dependent variable: fees incurred                                                                        Dependent variable: fees incurred
                                                                 Treatment: interest rate                                                                               Treatment: minimum payment
                                       20.00                                                                                                    20.00
  Treatment Effect (prop)




                                                                                                           Treatment Effect (prop)




                                       10.00                                                                                                    10.00

                                        0.00                                                                                                     0.00

                                       -10.00                                                                                                   -10.00

                                       -20.00                                                                                                   -20.00
                                            Mar/07          Sep/07        Mar/08        Sep/08    Mar/09                                             Mar/07          Sep/07     Mar/08     Sep/08     Mar/09




Notes: The left side of the panel shows the effect of increasing the minimum payment to 10% relative to the 5% group. The right side of the panel
shows the effect of decreasing the interest rate from 45% to 15%. For each month t in the experiment, we run yit = αt + βt Ti + δs + it with treatment
being either (45% IR, 10% MP – left side) or (15% IR, 5% MP – right-side) compared to the (45% IR, 5% MP) arm. Dependent variables are – total debt,
monthly purchases, monthly payments, and fees. We also plot Lee bounds (Lee, 2009) for debt, purchases, and payments (though for computational
reasons we do could not include strata dummies δs for the bounds).




                                                                                                       OA - 24
J.2     Debt: Effect of Interest Rate Decrease
       Debt responses to the interest rate changes follow an interesting and, at first-glance, a somewhat counter-
intuitive pattern. Figure OA-19 shows that interest rate increases result in a steady, gradual decline in debt
(even after accounting for attrition). At the six-month mark, with relatively limited attrition, the implied
elasticity bounds are relatively tight at [0.28, 0.42].70 The bounds begin to widen after the first year but remain
consistently negative and even the upper bounds suggest reasonable sized treatment effects. At endline, the
upper bound is a decline of 474 pesos and the lower bound is a decline of 1576 pesos. These final bounds imply
a strictly positive elasticity ranging from +0.34 to +1.12 respectively. Replacing missing values with zeros for
card cancellers provides similar results though the upper bound is now tighter at +0.74. These results suggest
a robust, negative effect of interest rate reductions on total debt.71
       The treatment effects for the other intermediate treatment arms are in line with these results. We compare
debt for the (45, 5) group to the (r, 5) group where r ∈ {25, 35} and debt in the (45, 10) group to the (r, 10)
group where r ∈ {15, 25, 35}. The five ITT estimates are all comparable to the estimate above.72 The implied
elasticities of debt with respect to the interest rate from the five other ITT estimates thus are also in line with
the elasticities from the primary contrast.
       The negative effect of interest rate declines on debt seems counter-intuitive since borrowers appear to re-
spond to price (interest rate) declines by decreasing quantities (debt). We explore this further by examining
the effect of interest rates on purchases, payments and fees which together mechanically determine debt. In
Appendix J.4 and J.6 we establish three facts about these outcomes. First, interest rate declines have inconclu-
sive effects on purchases with the Lee bounds for the long-term effect being a relatively wide [−0.38, +0.25].73
Second, monthly payments declined modestly in response to the interest rate decreases with the long-term
bounds estimated to be [+0.04, +0.39].74 Third, interest rate declines have a modest negative effect on fees (the
Lee bounds for the implied elasticity are [+0.15, +1.22]).
       Jointly, these facts suggest that the relatively large negative debt response to interest rate declines arises
from the fact that lower interest rates result in debt outstanding being compounded at a correspondingly lower
rate.75 This decline more than offsets any increase in purchases as well as the decline in monthly payments
observed earlier. To summarize, there is a fairly robust, though moderate, decline in total debt outstanding as
a result of the interest rate decrease.

J.3     Debt: Effect of Minimum Payments
       Debt response to the minimum payment increase follows an interesting pattern. Figure OA-19 show that
debt increases markedly in the third and fourth month of the experiment, increasing by almost 750 pesos by
June 2007. However, there is an similarly precipitous decline soon after with the increase being wiped out by
  70
      Recall that the interest rate manipulation envisaged here is a decline from 45% to 15% so a resultant decrease in debt will result in
a positive elasticity.
   71
      Other papers examining examining debt responses to interest rate variation are Karlan and Zinman (2017), Attanasio et al. (2008)
and Dehejia et al. (2012) who estimate debt elasticities in Mexico, the United States, and Bangladesh respectively. In all these papers
declines in interest rates are associated with increases in debt though the magnitudes vary considerably. Attanasio et al. (2008) cannot
reject that the elasticity is zero while the three-year elasticity for Karlan and Zinman (2017) is -2.9; Dehejia et al. (2012) provide estimates
in the range of [−0.73. − 1.04].
   72
      For the (45, 5) vs the (15, 5) arm.
   73
      The short-term effects have tighter bounds of [−0.38, −0.18] that suggest modest increases in purchases. More details are in Table
OA-13.
   74
      Bounds for the short-term are qualitatively similar at [+0.06, +0.24]. See Table OA-14 for more details.
   75
      By large we mean relative to the purchases, payments and fees responses.



                                                                  OA - 25
September so that the six-month effects are very small – the bounds for the implied elasticities are quite small
at [0.02, 0.08].
       Part of the increase in debt in the first months of the experiment appears to arise from late payment fees.76
Following that, debt decreases gradually for the rest of the experiment though the Lee bounds become increas-
ingly wide so that by the end of the experiment we cannot rule out declines (971 pesos or an elasticity of -0.46)
or increases (326 pesos or an elasticity of +0.15). In the case of debt, imputing a value of zero for all cancellers is
a particularly reasonable approach if policy makers are interested in the overall effect of minimum payments
on debt, not distinguishing between borrowers who remain with the card and accumulate (or decumulate)
debt or borrowers who cancel their card and cannot by definition accumulate any more debt with the card.
This approach yields qualitatively similar results and the bounds for the implied elasticity tighten on the up-
per end so that the new bounds are [−0.44, −0.01]. These results suggest that doubling the minimum payment
had a statistically significant, modest effect on overall debt.




  76
    The late payment fee is 350 pesos for any payment less than the minimum required payment. We analyzed the long term effects of
fees (results available upon request) and note that most of the increases in fees occurred in in the first few months of the experiment.
Unfortunately, we do not have information on fees for the first three months of the experiment.


                                                               OA - 26
                                                                         Table OA-12: Treatment Effects on Debt with Bank A

                                                             Standard Outcome                               Deflated by Amount Due in t − 1                                 Selected Strata (May/09)
                                            Sep/07                May/09            May/09 w/zeros              Sep/07             May/09              Min.Pay,6-11M             Full Pay,24+M          Min.Pay, 24+ M
                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)                      (4)                (5)                    (6)                        (7)                   (8)
          r = 15, MP = 5                    -271.306*            -602.941***            -419.136***             -0.016*             -0.021**               -632.527*                  -59.693              -684.244***
                                             (82.179)               (62.698)               (40.367)              (0.006)             (0.006)               (254.239)                 (80.647)               (189.418)
          r = 15, MP = 10                  -131.825**            -908.277***            -726.710***               0.004             -0.008**             -1.3e+03***                  -98.833              -968.263***
                                             (37.038)               (74.059)               (59.372)              (0.003)             (0.002)               (246.008)                 (78.507)               (181.610)
          r = 25, MP = 5                  -123.728***            -318.241***            -199.647***              -0.002             -0.012**                -160.146                  -33.820                -326.770
                                              (9.845)               (26.464)               (26.283)              (0.001)             (0.003)               (271.326)                 (91.550)               (212.753)
          r = 25, MP = 10                  -76.255***            -860.327***            -704.486***               0.008               -0.001             -1.1e+03***                -179.102*              -924.682***
                                             (13.474)               (60.496)               (49.118)              (0.003)             (0.002)               (251.472)                 (71.428)               (181.226)
          r = 35, MP = 5                     -14.085              -332.818**             -228.272**               0.010               -0.011                 -98.670                  -70.836               -444.117*
                                             (19.275)               (85.630)               (61.025)              (0.005)             (0.005)               (269.839)                 (88.442)               (196.150)
          r = 35, MP = 10                   -95.723**            -680.189***            -556.369***              0.004*              -0.009*             -1.0e+03***                  52.546               -723.580***
                                             (23.358)               (57.504)               (44.952)              (0.002)             (0.003)               (256.232)                 (97.176)               (191.343)
          r = 45, MP = 10                     24.243             -804.015***            -699.266***              0.007*              -0.018*              -750.309**               -204.448**              -908.631***




OA - 27
                                             (46.438)               (78.336)               (63.856)              (0.003)             (0.006)               (263.820)                 (66.603)               (183.892)
          Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)       1408.794***            2117.133***            1735.354***             0.091***            0.091***             3432.694***               413.443***              2174.629***
                                            (218.089)              (165.882)              (139.343)              (0.012)             (0.006)               (198.896)                 (58.580)               (151.527)
          Observations                       134,385                 87,093                 105,180              120,189              76,082                  7,820                  10,948                     9,839
          R-squared                           0.001                   0.005                  0.004                0.001                0.001                  0.008                   0.001                     0.005
          Lee Bounds IR               [-397.281, -266.049]   [-1.6e+03, -473.775]   [-851.598, -388.340]    [ -0.021, -0.016]   [ -0.091, -0.014]    [-1.8e+03, -385.538]      [-379.885, -45.816]     [-1.8e+03, -529.896]
          Lee Bounds MP                [ 21.827, 106.293]     [-971.173, 326.368]     [-766.284, -0.595]     [ 0.005, 0.027]     [ -0.023, 0.027]     [-1.1e+03, 894.767]     [-205.675, -135.592]      [-1.1e+03, 244.803]
           Lee Bounds IR                  [0.28, 0.42]            [0.34, 1.12]           [0.34, 0.74]         [0.26, 0.35]         [0.22, 1.50]           [0.17, 0.79]            [0.17, 1.38]              [0.37, 1.23]
           Lee Bounds MP                  [0.02, 0.08]           [-0.46, 0.15]          [-0.44, -0.00]        [0.06, 0.29]        [-0.25, 0.29]          [-0.33, 0.26]           [-0.50, -0.33]            [-0.49, 0.11]
           Columns (1) and (4) are estimated for debt 6 months after the start of the intervention and the remainder are for monthly purchases at the end of the experiment (26 months). Columns (2) and (5) present
           OLS results on the non-attriters and account for attrition by presenting Lee bounds (bottom 4 rows). The Lee bounds compare the (r=15, MP=5) and (r=45,MP=10) arms against the (r=45, MP=5) arm.
           Columns (3) and (6) redo the analysis by assigning a zero to card cancellers post exit. Columns (7),(8) and (9) estimate the endline regressions for three different strata – (a) “Min, 6-11M” borrowers who
           were with the bank for less than a year in January 2007 and were in the lowest payment category ;(b) “Full,24M+” who had been with the bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and had were in
           the highest payment category; (c) “Min,24M+” borrowers who had been with the bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and were in the lowest payment category. Standard errors are shown in
           parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.
J.4     Purchases: Effect of Interest Rates
       We begin by examining the effect of the experimental variation in interest rates on purchases in Figure
OA-19 and Table OA-13. Figure OA-19 shows monthly treatment effects over the course of the experiment
and Table OA-13 presents short- and long-term regression results accounting for attrition. We see in Figure
OA-19 that purchases in the 15% arm grew gradually (relative to the 45% arm) over the first year or so of the
experiment. The Lee bounds during the first six months of the intervention are quite tight and the bounds for
the implied short-term elasticity (bottom of Table OA-13 col (1)) are [−0.38, −0.18] indicating modest effectsc.
The long-term results, however, are inconclusive. Attrition starts to widen the bounds particularly after the
first year and by the end of the experiment we cannot rule out increases in monthly purchases of 104 pesos or
declines of 192 pesos. These imply correspondingly wide bounds on the elasticity ranging from -0.38 to +0.69
respectively (bottom of Table OA-13 col (2)). Imputing zeros to purchases for all card cancellers reduces the
upper bound, but it remains positive (bottom of Table OA-13 col (3)).
       The long-term elasticity bounds are wide but even at the lower bound they are substantially smaller (in
absolute value) than those found in other developing country studies that examine the effect of interest rate
changes on total loan quantity.77 For instance, Karlan and Zinman (2017) compute a two year elasticity of −2.9
of loan quantity with respect to interest rate in an experiment in Mexico with Compartemos. Gross and Souleles
(2002) estimate a still high elasticity of −1.3 for credit-card holders in the United States using observational
data. Dehejia et al. (2012) use plausibly exogenous geographic variation in interest rates to estimate slightly
lower but still significant elasticities in the range of (−1.04, −0.73) for micro-credit borrowers in Bangladesh.
Our long-term lower-bound is close to the elasticity of −0.32 documented by Karlan and Zinman (2008) for
short-term individual loans in South Africa and also the approximately zero elasticity for auto-loans docu-
mented in Attanasio et al. (2008).




  77
    The total quantity of loans demanded might perhaps be thought to correspond to total debt in our context. As we see below,
however, debt responds negatively to interest rate reductions in our experiment. Therefore we benchmark our purchase responses to
interest rate changes instead.


                                                           OA - 28
                                                                        Table OA-13: Treatment Effects on Monthly Purchases

                                                           Standard Outcome                           Deflated by Amount Due in t − 1                            Selected Strata (May/09)
                                           Sep/07               May/09           May/09 w/zeros          Sep/07            May/09            Min.Pay,6-11M           Full Pay,24+M          Min.Pay, 24+ M
                                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)               (5)                  (6)                      (7)                   (8)
          r = 15, MP = 5                  98.225***             63.111***            75.424***           0.018***          0.007***                42.462                  12.398               73.787
                                           (14.889)               (8.567)              (5.671)            (0.002)           (0.001)              (49.821)               (101.033)              (38.935)
          r = 15, MP = 10                167.396***            255.839***           219.567***           0.033***          0.041***             208.526***                -14.717             295.633***
                                           (16.508)              (32.453)             (24.176)            (0.003)           (0.003)              (55.631)               (100.848)              (44.391)
          r = 25, MP = 5                   30.758*                 7.482             20.499***           0.008***           0.003*                -15.715                  -5.049                9.415
                                           (11.336)               (5.573)              (3.705)            (0.001)           (0.001)              (50.215)               (105.771)              (33.370)
          r = 25, MP = 10                136.848***            177.373***           145.717***           0.027***          0.032***              134.955*                 -93.924             208.505***
                                           (13.409)              (23.958)             (17.270)            (0.002)           (0.004)              (56.325)                (94.405)              (37.990)
          r = 35, MP = 5                  13.945**                17.590              25.207*             0.003*             -0.001               -47.703                  63.801               28.540
                                            (3.739)              (12.914)             (10.339)            (0.001)           (0.002)              (55.706)               (106.178)              (37.506)
          r = 35, MP = 10                102.988***            151.069***           124.285***           0.021***          0.024***              117.853*                199.461              151.997***
                                            (9.793)               (8.819)              (6.292)            (0.002)           (0.003)              (53.269)               (161.724)              (39.998)
          r = 45, MP = 10                 75.533***             97.397***            64.141***           0.019***          0.022***              125.441*                 61.158               86.869*




OA - 29
                                            (9.333)              (11.186)              (6.560)            (0.002)           (0.001)              (55.897)               (118.180)              (38.139)
          Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)      401.196***            414.738***           339.949***           0.058***          0.060***             353.705***             1340.796***            335.934***
                                           (66.354)             (74.101)              (61.634)            (0.010)          (0.008)               (42.659)                (72.779)              (24.768)
          Observations                      134,385               87,093               105,180            118,732            78,735                7,820                   10,948                9,839
          R-squared                          0.002                 0.004                0.003              0.006              0.010                0.006                    0.001                0.009
          Lee Bounds IR               [ 49.029, 100.533]   [-191.779, 103.874]   [ -56.132, 85.142]   [ 0.018, 0.019]   [ -0.030, 0.013]    [-154.772, 77.406]      [-383.802, 65.484]   [-157.850, 116.218]
          Lee Bounds MP               [ 74.845, 106.839]    [ 64.652, 351.981]   [ 51.012, 231.490]   [ 0.018, 0.031]   [ 0.017, 0.059]     [ 85.467, 401.779]      [ 57.176, 124.061]    [ 61.097, 284.369]
           Lee Bounds IR                [-0.38, -0.18]        [-0.38, 0.69]        [-0.38, 0.25]      [-0.48, -0.47]     [-0.32, 0.76]        [-0.33, 0.66]           [-0.07, 0.43]         [-0.52, 0.70]
           Lee Bounds MP                 [0.19, 0.27]          [0.16, 0.85]         [0.15, 0.68]       [0.30, 0.53]       [0.29, 0.99]         [0.24, 1.14]            [0.04, 0.09]          [0.18, 0.85]
           Columns (1) and (4) are estimated for monthly purchases 6 months after the start of the intervention and the remainder are for monthly payments at the end of the experiment (26 months).
           Columns (2),(4)–(8) drop all card exits and the Lee Bounds are more informative than the point-estimates for these columns. The Lee bounds compare the (r=15, MP=5) and (r=45,MP=10) arms
           against the (r=45, MP=5) arm. Column (3) assigns a zero for all outcomes for card cancellers and the resulting Lee bounds are tighter than in Column (2). Columns (6)-(8) estimate endline
           regressions for three different strata: (a) “Min Payers, 6-11M” borrowers who were with the bank for more than six months but less than a year in January 2007 and were in the lowest payment
           category ;(b) “Full Payers,24M+” borrowers who had been with the bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and were in the highest payment category; (c) “Min Payers,24M+” borrowers who
           had been with the bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and were in the lowest payment category at baseline. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote
           statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.
       We also examined treatment effects after normalizing purchases by the amount due each month and ob-
tained relatively sharp results in the short-run but the effect is even weaker in the long-run. At the six-month
mark, the bounds on fraction purchased is fairly tight around .018 (relative to a comparison group fraction
of .06) while in the long run the bounds include zero and and are consistent with both small increases and
significant declines in purchases.
       In summary, the effect of interest rate reductions on purchases appears to be relatively small relative to the
previous literature.

J.5      Purchases: Effects of Minimum Payments
       Doubling the minimum payment led to an increase in monthly purchases. Figure OA-19 shows that pur-
chases increase gradually over the first six months of the experiment after which there appears to be no sys-
tematic increase. The short-term effect of the raise in payment requirements increased purchases by about
75 pesos per month, with the Lee bounds being relatively tight at[75, 107], and the corresponding elasticity
bounds are similarly tight at [.19, .27] suggesting a modest positive effect.
       This point estimate remains more or less stable over the remainder of the experiment even though attrition
increases and the bounds start to widen. The lower Lee bound at the end of the experiment is 65 pesos and
the upper Lee bound is 352 pesos – implying lower and upper bounds on the elasticities of 0.16 and 0.85
respectively. We obtain broadly similar results if we impute zeros to all cancellations with the only significant
change being that the upper Lee bound reduces to 0.68.
       The increase in purchases is somewhat unexpected. In principle, it could arise from higher payments easing
borrowers credit lines. However, this is not the case since the point estimates and bounds are very similar when
we restrict attention to borrowers who are at less than 50% of their credit limit.78 Alternatively, since higher
minimum payments imply, ceteris paribus, a decrease in debt, the increase in purchases may reflect changes in
borrower behavior as a result of reduced debt. This argument implies that the effect of minimum payments on
purchases should be higher for borrowers who see larger reductions in debt. We explore this implication by
examining the changes in purchases across the various interest rate arms keeping the required payment fixed
at 10%.
       Finally, as expected, the “Full,24M+” stratum is largely unaffected by the minimum payment increase
throughout the intervention while the effect is stronger for the “Min,12M–” stratum and the bounds for the
implied elasticities are consistent with both modest (0.24) and substantive (1.14) effects. Finally, we also nor-
  78
       Results available upon request.




                                                        OA - 30
malized monthly purchases by expressing purchases as a fraction of amount due (cols (4) and (5) of Table
OA-13) and the results were similar to the ones described above so we omit a discussion. To summarize,
monthly purchases rose modestly but persistently and (statistically) significantly for borrowers who were in
the higher minimum payment arm.


J.6     Payments: Effect of Interest Rates
       Figure OA-19 presents the Lee bounds along with the point estimates from equation (8) for each month in
the experiment. We see that there is a gradual decline in monthly payments during the first six months and
the bounds at the six-month mark are [−103, −24] pesos with implied elasticity bounds of [.06, .24] suggesting
relatively modest declines in payments.
       The upper bound remains relatively stable over the remainder of experiment but the lower bound begins
to widen in the last months of 2007 and by the end of the experiment the data is consistent with both small
(17 pesos) and substantial (267 pesos) declines in monthly payments. These final bounds imply elasticities
of monthly payments with respect to interest rates ranging from 0.04 to 0.64 respectively. Estimating the
long-term effects after setting monthly payments to zero for cancelled cards tightens the upper bound for the
elasticity so that the new bounds are [0.04, 0.39].
       The evidence then suggests that declines in interest rates led to modest, yet discernible, declines in monthly
payments. The fact that monthly payments actually decreased when interest rates fell suggests that the pri-
mary channel through which the interest rate effects function is via reducing the rate at which outstanding
debt is compounded.

J.7     Payments: Effect of Minimum Payment
       It is reasonable to expect that the most direct effect of the minimum payment intervention would be on
monthly payments. Figure OA-19 documents a sharp increase in monthly payments in the treatment group in
the third month of the experiment79 (May 2007) and after a small increase in the next month there is a steady
decline over the remainder of the experiment. The six month treatments effects are precisely estimated and
the Lee Bounds for the implied elasticity are very tight at [.24, .29] suggesting small, though robust, effects of
the increase in required payments. The bounds then begin to widen considerably starting in the last months
of 2007 and remain relatively wide throughout the remainder of the experiment. By the end of the experiment
attrition widens the bounds considerably and the bounds for the implied elasticity, while still positive, range
from 0.01 to 0.48. Imputing zero values to card cancellations provides qualitatively similar results with the
upper bound tightened to 0.37. These bounds indicate that the implied effects, even at the upper bound, are
relatively small in substantive terms. We also consider the effect of the treatment on monthly payments mea-
sured as a fraction of the amount due in each month. The results suggest are broadly similar to the previous
analysis with the short term bounds on the elasticity being [0.24, 0.35] and the long-term bounds are some-
what wider at [.16, .58]. The patterns of heterogeneity in treatment effects are as expected with no effects on
the “Full, 24M+” stratum and larger effects for the other strata particularly the “Min,12M–” stratum though
even in that case the effects are not particularly large.



  79
    Initial borrower inattention is a plausible explanation for the lack of response in the first two months. In particular, we see a corre-
sponding increase in delinquencies in the first two months of the intervention followed by a decline. Further, we see a corresponding
increase in late fees as well in the first two months of the intervention.


                                                                 OA - 31
                                                                        Table OA-14: Treatment Effects on Monthly Payments

                                                       Standard dependent variable                      Deflated by amount due in t − 1                           Selected strata in May/09
                                           Sep/07                May/09           May/09 w/zeros            Sep/07             May/09            Min.Pay,6-11M         Full Pay,24+M          Min.Pay, 24+ M
                                             (1)                   (2)                 (3)                    (4)                (5)                  (6)                    (7)                   (8)
          r = 15, MP = 5                   -27.319*             -65.235***              -25.593*              -0.003           -0.012***              -13.831              -101.747               -68.754
                                           (11.696)                (8.418)               (7.922)             (0.001)            (0.002)              (46.611)             (101.912)              (36.571)
          r = 15, MP = 10                 128.597***            107.577***             98.989***            0.031***           0.028***              124.880*               -13.804             134.640**
                                           (16.417)               (20.897)              (15.594)             (0.003)            (0.004)              (48.917)             (109.685)              (43.850)
          r = 25, MP = 5                    -23.121             -62.865***             -32.318**             -0.002            -0.007***              -23.186             -102.743                -65.769
                                           (10.161)                (8.319)               (8.132)             (0.002)            (0.000)              (48.735)             (110.701)              (36.160)
          r = 25, MP = 10                 133.639***             92.100***             75.892***            0.030***           0.029***              99.053*                -74.694             100.199**
                                            (9.086)                (9.075)               (6.674)             (0.003)            (0.003)              (49.672)             (102.718)              (38.464)
          r = 35, MP = 5                   23.434**                10.494                24.524               0.001             -0.002                -32.696                19.624                27.748
                                            (5.526)               (12.718)              (13.363)             (0.001)            (0.001)              (43.325)             (111.886)              (43.193)
          r = 35, MP = 10                 160.415***             99.379***             82.046***            0.034***           0.026***             144.575**                95.171              108.133*
                                           (19.472)                (8.184)               (8.585)             (0.004)            (0.002)              (48.355)             (161.454)              (47.500)
          r = 45, MP = 10                 154.539***              58.212*                26.703             0.029***           0.026***             162.784**               -23.413                32.274




OA - 32
                                           (12.554)               (20.692)              (15.828)             (0.001)            (0.001)              (57.049)             (108.380)              (38.970)
          Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)       637.643***            627.486***            514.333***            0.115***           0.105***             530.369***           1402.374***            575.204***
                                           (45.857)               (53.950)              (45.427)             (0.016)            (0.010)              (33.248)              (86.455)              (29.021)
          Observations                      134,385                87,093               105,180              125,152              79,612                7,820                 10,948                9,839
          R-squared                          0.003                 0.003                 0.002                0.008               0.013                 0.005                 0.000                 0.005
          Lee Bounds IR               [-102.895, -24.498]   [-266.502, -17.273]   [-134.228, -14.158]   [ -0.005, -0.002]   [ -0.043, -0.003]    [-196.583, 31.730]   [-400.173, -50.724]   [-247.656, -16.305]
          Lee Bounds MP               [ 153.445, 184.136]    [ 8.669, 301.360]     [ 6.840, 192.554]     [ 0.028, 0.040]     [ 0.017, 0.061]    [ 102.845, 375.104]    [ -27.578, 84.002]   [ -11.854, 236.821]
           Lee Bounds IR                 [0.06, 0.24]          [0.04, 0.64]          [0.04, 0.39]         [0.03, 0.07]        [0.04, 0.62]         [-0.09, 0.56]          [0.05, 0.43]         [0.04, 0.65]
           Lee Bounds MP                 [0.24, 0.29]          [0.01, 0.48]          [0.01, 0.37]         [0.24, 0.35]        [0.16, 0.58]          [0.19, 0.71]         [-0.02, 0.06]         [-0.02, 0.41]
           Columns (1) and (4) are estimated for monthly payments 6 months after the start of the intervention and the remainder are for monthly payments at the end of the experiment (26 months). Columns
           (2),(5)–(8) drop all card exits and the Lee Bounds are more informative than the point-estimates for these columns. The Lee bounds compare the (r=15, MP=5) and (r=45,MP=10) arms against the
           (r=45, MP=5) arm. Column (3) assigns a zero for all outcomes for card cancellers and the resulting Lee bounds are tighter than in Column (2). Columns (7)-(9) estimate endline regressions for
           three different strata: (a) “Min Payers, 6-11M” borrowers who were with the bank for more than six months but less than a year in January 2007 and were in the lowest payment category ;(b) “Full
           Payers,24M+” borrowers who had been with the bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and were in the highest payment category; (c) “Min Payers,24M+” borrowers who had been with the
           bank for more than 2 years by January 2007 and were in the lowest payment category at baseline. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance
           at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.
   Finally, we also examine two other outcome variables – (a) a binary variable equal to 1 if the borrower
paid at least 5% of the amount outstanding each month and (b) the payment expressed as a fraction of the
amount outstanding each month. The results for both are consistent with the previous results and we omit the
discussion.
   Our overall conclusion from the results above is that a doubling of the minimum payment had a long-term
positive, albeit modest, effect on monthly payments.




                                                  OA - 33
Appendix K.               Experiment Results: Comparison with other studies


                                       Table OA-15: Comparisons with the Literature


                  Paper                             Outcome           Table (page)   Point Estimate (S.E.)   Elasticity (S.E.)
                  Karlan and Zinman (2009)    Account in Collection    3 (p.37)          -1.60 (1.58)          +0.27 (0.14)
                  Karlan and Zinman (2017)        Delinquency          5 (p.42)          -1.96 (1.45)             +1.80
                  Adams et al. (2009)           Default Hazard          4 (p.28)         1.022 (.002)           +2.2 (0.2)
                  Keys and Wang (2019)            Delinquency          2 (p.542)            .4 (.3)            +0.01 (.12)
                  d’Astous and Shore (2017)         Default                p.3                .04                 +0.06


Notes: We use the working paper version of Karlan and Zinman (2009). Table 3 cols (4) and (5) for the “repayment burden effect.” The
table reports a decline from 13.9 to 12.3 in the percentage of accounts in collection status over a four month period. The difference
between the high and the low interest rate was on average 350 basis points. We use the high risk category upper bound for the
interest rate of 11.75 percent as the base rate and convert the monthly interest rates to APR to facilitate comparisons (the calculation
is (−1.6/13.9)(279/ − 120) = .27). For Karlan and Zinman (2017) we use the results from Table 5 (col (4), Panel B) that shows
delinquencies decline by 1.96 percentage points off of a control baseline of 10.5%. Low rate regions faced APRs of 80% while high
rate regions faced APRs of 90%. The implied elasticity is (−2/10)/(80 − 90/90) = 1.8. We could not find the required information
in the paper to compute standard errors for the implied elasticities. Adams et al. (2009) estimate a hazard model and the hazard rate
suggests that a one percent increase in the APR leads to a 2.2 percent increase in the hazard rate of default. Keys and Wang (2019) find
an insignificant increase in delinquency of .4 percent (relative to a base rate past due rate of 8 percent) due to a minimum payment
change on average of 1% (off a base minimum payment average of 2%). d’Astous and Shore (2017) study changes in minimum
payments while the remaining papers examine interest rate variation (standard errors not available). Standard errors for elasticities
are computed using the delta method.




                                                                OA - 34
Appendix L.              Experiment Results: Spillovers (Treatment Effects on Other Loans)

We use the credit bureau data to examine whether the experimental changes in the study card’s contract terms
affected borrowing with other formal lenders. For instance, lower interest rates might lead to increased can-
cellations of other – presumably more expensive – cards or clients might change their overall borrowing or
default behavior on other loans. Similarly, higher minimum payments might lead borrowers to look elsewhere
for more attractive terms.
       Table OA-16 shows that this is not the case. Neither default, cancellations nor new borrowing, (all mea-
sured in June 2009) with all other formal lenders respond to the changes in minimum payments and interest
rates. Although borrowers are more likely to cancel the study card in response to higher minimum payments,
there is no substitution towards other formal credit sources.
       We also attempt to test the hypothesis that lower interest rates during the experiment led to a greater
engagement with formal credit. We were able to obtain information on the experimental sample from the
credit bureau in June 2012, three years after the experiment ended. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 show the
extensive margin treatment effects on other formal sector borrowing at that time. Consistent with the previous
findings, we find that being exposed to lower interest rates or higher minimum payments on the study card
did not (at a five year horizon) lead to a greater number of loans or interactions with a larger number of
lenders.80 Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis.
  80
       Karlan and Zinman (2017) also find no crowd-in or crowd-out among Compartamos borrowers.




                                                            OA - 35
                             Table OA-16: Treatment Effects on Other non-Card Loans
                (Existing loans by March 2007, Outcomes measured in June 2009, Any Loan Type)


                                            Default                          Cancellations                       New loan
                                  Any        Same      Other          Any        Same        Other     Any        Same      Other
                                  Bank       Bank      Bank           Bank       Bank        Bank      Bank       Bank      Bank
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)
     r = 15, MP = 5                0.006      -0.004     0.002        0.017*      0.005      0.013      0.011      0.011      0.009
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 15, MP = 10               -0.006     -0.017    -0.001        0.016*     0.006*      0.011      0.018      0.009      0.011
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 25, MP = 5                -0.002     -0.014     0.003         0.005      0.002      0.003      0.009      0.003      0.003
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 25, MP = 10               -0.001     -0.008     0.002         0.003     0.006*      -0.002     0.013      0.004      0.006
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 35, MP = 5                -0.002     -0.003     0.001         0.004      0.003      0.002      0.010      0.003      0.005
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 35, MP = 10               0.007      0.003     -0.001         0.006      0.002      0.005      -0.003     0.002     -0.007
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     r = 45, MP = 10               -0.014     -0.010    -0.010         0.009      0.000      0.009      -0.004     -0.008     0.001
                                  (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)       (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
     Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)   0.560***   0.336***   0.449***      0.137***   0.021***   0.121***   0.541***   0.165***   0.490***
                                  (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)       (0.005)    (0.002)    (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.007)
     Observations                143,916    143,916    143,916       143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916
     R-squared                    0.009      0.033      0.004         0.001      0.001      0.001      0.001      0.005      0.000

Notes: All regressions include strata dummies and use sample weights. The regressions include all loan types (mortgage, auto loan,
credit card, etc). The dependent variable for Columns (1) to (3) is default (bank-initiated revocations). The dependent variable for
Columns (4) to (6) are (client-initiated) cancellations. The dependent variable for Columns (7) to (9) are new loan originations after
March 2007. All columns exclude the experimental card. Columns (1), (4) and (7) refer to loans issued by any bank. Columns (2), (5)
and (8) refer to loans issued by the same bank as the experimental card (i.e. Bank A). Columns (3), (6) and (9) refer to loans issued
by any bank except for Bank A. All dependent variables restrict to loans that were issued on or before by March 2007 that remained
active by March 2007. All outcomes are measured in June 2009, one month after the experiment ended. Robust standard errors are
shown in parenthesis. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                  OA - 36
                                 Table OA-17: Treatment Effects on Other Credit Cards
                           (Existing loans by March 2007, Outcomes measured in June 2009)


                                               Default                          Cancellations                       New card
                                     Any        Same      Other          Any        Same        Other     Any        Same      Other
                                     Bank       Bank      Bank           Bank       Bank        Bank      Bank       Bank      Bank
                                      (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)
        r = 15, MP = 5                0.004      0.007      -0.001        0.011       0.002     0.010      0.011      0.008      0.012
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 15, MP = 10               -0.009     -0.012     -0.002      0.016**       0.005    0.011*      0.011      0.009      0.010
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 25, MP = 5                0.001      -0.002     0.002         0.004       0.001     0.002      0.003      0.001      0.003
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 25, MP = 10               -0.006     -0.002     -0.006        0.003       0.003     -0.000     0.003      0.001      0.005
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 35, MP = 5                -0.003     0.000      -0.002        0.002       0.000     0.002      0.006      0.001      0.005
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 35, MP = 10               -0.001     0.001      -0.004        0.006       0.000     0.006      -0.005     -0.001    -0.002
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        r = 45, MP = 10             -0.026**   -0.016*      -0.017        0.007      -0.000     0.006      -0.017     -0.008    -0.008
                                     (0.010)    (0.008)    (0.010)       (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.007)    (0.010)
        Constant (r = 45, MP = 5)   0.498***   0.222***   0.428***      0.096***   0.018***   0.082***   0.424***   0.137***   0.366***
                                     (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.007)       (0.004)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.007)
        Observations                143,916    143,916    143,916       143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916    143,916
        R-squared                    0.007      0.033      0.004         0.002      0.001      0.002      0.002      0.005      0.001

Notes: All regressions include strata dummies and use sample weights. This is the analogous table to Table OA-16 but restricted exclu-
sively to credit cards. The dependent variable for Columns (1) to (3) is default (bank-initiated revocations). The dependent variable
for Columns (4) to (6) are (client-initiated) cancellations. The dependent variable for Columns (7) to (9) are new loan originations. All
columns exclude the experimental card. Columns (1), (4) and (7) refer to loans issued by any bank. Columns (2), (5) and (8) refer to
loans issued by the same bank as the experimental card (i.e. Bank A). Columns (3), (6) and (9) refer to loans issued by any bank except
for Bank A. All dependent variables restrict to loans that were issued on or before by March 2007 that remained active by March
2007. All outcomes are measured in June 2009, one month after the experiment ended. One, two and three stars denote statistical
significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                     OA - 37
Appendix M.                                                               Habit formation

M.1                            Comparison of min. payment across treatment arms 3 years after the experiment ended
                                                              Figure OA-20: Payment as a fraction of debt 3 years after the experiment


                                (a) Jun/12 - treatment arms with mp = 5%                                                                                                                 (b) Jun/12 - treatment arms with mp = 10%
                .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.29
                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                    .3
                                                     0.28
   Fraction of cardholders




                                                                                                                                                             Fraction of cardholders
             .2




                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                0.15                                                                                                                                                     0.14

                                                                                                                                                     0.11
                                                            0.11                                                                                                                                                     0.11                                                                                 0.11
                .1




                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                   0.06                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                              0.06                        0.05                                                                                                                         0.05                        0.05
                                                                                 0.04                                                                                                                                                     0.03 0.03
                                                                                        0.03                                                                                                                                                        0.02 0.02
                                                                                               0.02 0.02
                                       0.01                                                                0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                                                                  0.01                                                            0.01 0.01 0.01
                                                                                                                               0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                                                                                                                             0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
                0




                               0                        .1              .2             .3                                         .4                    .5                0              0                       .1              .2             .3                                     .4                    .5
                                                              Payment as proportion of amount due                                                                                                                      Payment as proportion of amount due



Notes: We plot monthly payment divided by the amount due. In Panels (a) and (b) we examine the ratio of monthly payments in June
2012 to the amount due in the May 2012 statement. We examine separately cardholders by the minimum payment group (pooling
across interest rates groups) during the experimental period (Mar/07-May/09). We right-censor all figures at .5, so the rightmost bin
for each panel includes those whose payment ratio is 0.5 or higher. The leftmost bin starts at 0, and all bins have a width of 0.25. The
number above each bin represents the fraction of cardholders in the given bin. The variable in the x-axis is only an approximation to
the minimum payment since the minimum payment may include some fees or discounts that we do not observe.




                                                                                                                                                      OA - 38
M.2     Habit formation regressions


                                          Table OA-18: Habit formation regressions


                                                   No controls           Months with CC strata     Months + Current Terms
                                          First stage   Second stage   First stage Second stage   First stage Second stage
                                              (1)             (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)
               r = 15                      618***                        616***                     295**
                                            (150)                         (150)                     (110)
               MP = 10                       5.1             7.3           4.7           7.5          44            3.8
                                            (138)           (28)          (138)         (28)         (86)          (28)
               Min. payer                  1383***        -475***       1383***       -478***       224*         -433***
                                            (158)           (59)          (157)         (59)        (108)          (34)
               MP = 10 × Min. payer         -159             32           -160           32          -26            28
                                            (233)           (40)          (233)         (40)        (157)          (39)
               Amount due                                 0.097**                     0.097**                      0.14
                                                          (0.035)                     (0.036)                    (0.075)
               Strata FE                      no            no            yes           yes          yes           yes
               Current card terms             no            no            no            no           yes           yes
               Dependent variable mean       6680           748          6680          748          6680          748
               Observations                 33,206        33,206        33,206        33,206       33,206        33,206
               R-squared                    0.0084        0.1683        0.0118        0.1689       0.5109        0.1780


Notes: Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis. The sample is those cards that (i) participated in the experiment (ii) remained
opened by 2010, and (iii) were assigned to either the highest or lowest interest rate groups (eg. [r = 15, MP = 5], [r = 15, MP = 10], [r
= 45, MP = 5], and [r = 15, MP = 10]). Each column represents a different regression. Columns (2), (4) and (6) have as a dependent
variable the amount paid on June 2010, as a function of the minimum payment that was assigned during the experiment and debt.
Since debt can be endogenous, we instrument for debt using the interest rate group cardholders were assigned to. We also allow for
a differential treatment effect for those in the "minimum-payment" strata. The dependent variable of Columns (1), (3) and (5) is the
amount due on June 2010. Columns (1) and (2) show the regression equations without additional controls. Columns (3) and (4) add
the months with credit cards strata dummies. Columns (5) and (6) add both the months with credit cards strata dummies as well as
current contract terms, namely the interest rate and the required minimum payment in pesos in June 2010. One, two and three stars
denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.




                                                                   OA - 39
Appendix N.                Mechanisms

N.1       Severe Consequences of Default May Limit Moral Hazard
In principle, the high default rates could reflect the fact that borrowers do not value the study card (or have
a low cost of default). In this section we document that default has serious consequences for NTB borrowers,
which may explain why default responses were limited. We provide evidence for three claims: first, NTB
borrowers are credit constrained in the formal sector and therefore presumably value formal sector credit.
Second, default sharply reduces access to subsequent formal sector credit. Third, informal credit terms are
substantially worse than formal credit terms. These claims together suggest that the range of variation in
contract terms, even though substantial, was perhaps “infra-marginal” in the light of these concerns and so
borrower responses were limited.

                                           A. NTB borrowers quickly use increases in lines

       One prediction of borrowers having a strong need for credit is that they would quickly use any increases
in credit lines. We find that this is indeed the case. Using the methodology proposed in Gross and Souleles
(2002), we use exogenous credit limit changes (given by the timing since last credit limit change) to estimate
how debt changes when credit lines change. We find that a credit limit increase of 100 pesos on the study card
translates into 32 pesos of subsequent additional debt (see Appendix E.). For comparison, this propensity to
consume out of increases in the credit limit is about thrice as large as the figure for the United States.81

                                             B. Default Reduces Access to Formal Credit

       Default is associated with large declines in subsequent formal sector borrowing. Using the experimental
sample we estimate a cross-sectional regression where the primary explanatory variable is an indicator if a
borrower i defaulted on the study card in the six months after the start of the experiment (i.e. between March
and September 2007) and the dependent variable is an indicators for i obtaining a new loan or card six,twelve,
or forty eight months after September 2007. We include age, gender, and zip code indicators as controls, and
restrict attention to the sub-sample for whom the study card was the first formal sector loan product and who
had been with the bank for between 6 to 11 months at the start of the experiment. Panel A of Table OA-19
shows the results for all types of loans, while Panel B focuses only on credit cards. We further group columns
by lender type (any lender, all lenders except Bank A, and Bank A).
  81
       We observe both credit limit increases and decreases in the data so the parameter is estimated using both types of changes.




                                                                 OA - 40
                         Table OA-19: Probability of getting a new loan or card against default

                                                   Any bank               Any bank except Bank A                     Bank A
                                            September 07 up to               September 07 up to               September 07 up to
                                        Feb/08 Aug/08 Aug/11             Feb/08 Aug/08 Aug/11             Feb/08 Aug/08 Aug/11
                                          (1)     (2)        (3)           (4)     (5)        (6)           (7)     (8)        (9)

       Panel A. Any loan
        Default in Mar/07 - Aug/07      -0.26***   -0.33***   -0.43***   -0.21***   -0.26***   -0.37***   -0.10***   -0.15***   -0.22***
                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)
         mean dep. var non-defaulters    0.29        0.39      0.55       0.25       0.33       0.49       0.08       0.12       0.19
         Observations                   22,813      22,813    22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813
         R-squared                       0.363       0.366     0.370      0.363      0.361      0.369      0.346      0.359      0.365
       Panel B. Credit cards only
        Default in Mar/07 - Aug/07      -0.24***   -0.31***   -0.43***   -0.18***   -0.24***   -0.33***   -0.09***   -0.13***   -0.20***
                                         (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)
         mean dep. var non-defaulters    0.23        0.30      0.42       0.19       0.25       0.35       0.07       0.11       0.18
         Observations                   22,813      22,813    22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813     22,813
         R-squared                       0.354       0.356     0.364      0.356      0.354      0.359      0.349      0.360      0.366

Notes: This table regresses measures of subsequent new card ownership against previous default on the study card. The sample con-
sists of the set of borrowers with (a) the experimental card, that (b) belong to the 6-11 months strata, and (c) for whom the experimental
card was their first formal loan. The observations are at the level of the card holder. Each column within each panel is a different re-
gression. For all regressions the independent variable is equal to 1 if cardholder i defaulted in the experimental card between the start
of the experimental period and 6 months after the experiment started (March 2007 to August 2007). The dependent variable varies
by column. For columns (1), (2) and (3) in Panel A, the dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a borrower obtains
a new loan (any kind of loan: mortgage, auto loan, credit card, etc) in any bank between the periods September 2007 and February
2007, August 2008, and August 2011 (6, 12, and 48 months). Columns (4), (5) and (6) repeat the exercise but restricting to loans with
banks that are not Bank A, whereas Columns (7), (8) and (9) restrict to Bank A, exclusively. All regressions include postal code fixed
effects, age, a male dummy, and a married dummy. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote
statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.


       Default on the study card is associated with a substantial 26 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of
obtaining any new formal sector loans in the next 6 months (relative to a mean of 29 percent for non-defaulters).
The negative consequences of default are also long-lived – we continue to find substantial effects four years
after default. Since default is reported to the Credit Bureau, we might expect the negative correlation to show
up not only in Bank A but in all banks, and indeed this is what columns (4)–(6) reveal. Panel B restricts
attention to credit cards and finds, if anything, even starker results – default on the study card is associated
with an absence of any subsequent credit cards up to four years later. Lenders appear to adopt harsher stances
towards default on uncollateralized debt.
       One concern with the regression above is that omitted variables may drive both default and future loan
demand. We attempt to address this by adding borrower and time fixed effects. This increase in flexibility
forces us to restrict attention to delinquency as the primary outcome rather than default.82 We continue to
find a negative relationship between delinquency and subsequent borrowing. The rate at which borrowers get
loans from any bank is 7 percentage points per month before being delinquent for the first time, but only 5
percentage points after the first delinquency. Borrowers cease to obtain any subsequent additional credit from
Bank A following the first delinquency.
  82
     The problem with using default in an event study of this kind is that default is preceded formally by three events that are reported
to the credit bureau (three consecutive delinquencies over three billing cycles) so that the deterioration in credit access precedes actual
default. As a result we focus on the first delinquency for eventual defaulters.




                                                                   OA - 41
                                  Table OA-20: Access to loans after the first delinquency


                                      any new loan with any bank       any new loan with other banks      any new loan with bank A
                                                 b/se                              b/se                             b/se
                                                  (1)                               (2)                              (3)
       after first delinquency                   -0.02***                          -0.02***                         -0.01***
                                                  (0.00)                            (0.00)                           (0.00)
       mean dep. var before default               0.070                             0.057                            0.015
       Observations                              354,255                           354,255                          354,255
       R-squared                                  0.023                             0.016                            0.012

Notes: This table focuses on the sample of borrowers on the experimental sub-sample for whom the study card was the first formal
sector loan product and who had been with Bank A between 6 to 11 months at the start of the experiment. We observe 55 months of
data, from March/07 to Sept/11. We further restrict the sample to borrowers who defaulted in this period. This leaves us with 6,441
borrowers. For each of those borrowers we locate the first month they were delinquent (i.e. 30 days past due) on the experimental
card, and create an indicator for any time period after this first delinquency I(After 1st Del for i)it . We estimate by OLS the regression
yit = αi + γt + β I(After 1st Del for i)it + it , where yit is an indicator for borrower i getting a new loan (any kind of loan) in period
t with any bank (column 1), non-Bank A (column 2), or Bank A (column 3). The table reports estimated β’s, as well as the mean of
the dependent variable in the periods before default; β’s estimates the within borrower difference of the likelihood of get new loans in
periods after delinquency compared to the likelihood of getting new loans before being delinquent, for the same borrower. One, two
and three stars denote statistical significance at the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.



       We take the evidence above as being primarily suggestive, though the conclusion is unsurprising.83 De-
creased access to formal lending is precisely what one would expect from default on a formal loan given the
Credit Bureau, though the magnitudes are striking. Defaulters are then forced to rely on informal lenders and
this is not an enticing prospect as we see next.


                                         C. Informal Terms are Worse Than Formal Terms
       We use the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS) to compare interest rates, loan amounts, and loan duration
for formal and informal loans.84 We find that informal loan terms are significantly worse than formal loan
terms. Table OA-21 shows the results from regressing contract terms on an indicator for a formal loan and
controls. The first striking fact is that the average annual interest rate for informal loans is 291% while the
corresponding rate for formal loans is 94 points lower (col. 1). The average loan amount is 3658 pesos for
informal loans and 9842 pesos for formal ones (col. 4), and the term of the loan is 0.52 years for informal loans
and 1.07 years for formal loans (col. 9). Figure OA-21 shows that the distribution of interest rates for informal
loans first-order stochastically dominates the distribution for formal loan rates while the opposite is true for
loan terms and loan amounts. These results are robust to controlling for income and wealth proxies (columns
2,4 and 7). The results on loan terms and duration also survive the addition of household fixed effects.85

Based on these results we conclude that it is costly to be excluded from the formal loan market. We conjecture
that default responded only in a muted fashion to even relatively large changes in contract terms precisely
because of the dire outside options outlined above.
  83
     Bos et al. (2018); Dobbie et al. (2018) document similar magnitudes in the United States.
  84
     We define a loan as formal if the lender is a bank and informal otherwise. Informal loan sources comprise: Co-operatives (13%),
money-lenders (8%), Relatives (38%), Acquaintances (20%), Work (11%), pawn-shops (5%), and others (5%). Consistent with the
evidence from a range of developing countries (See e.g. Banerjee and Duflo (2010)) only 6% of borrowers have any formal loans and
91% of borrowers have only informal loans. Note that we do not observe any informal sector loans in our bank data.
  85
     Only about 3 percent of households hold both formal and informal sector loans so that the identifying variation in the fixed effects
model arises from a small (and likely selected sample).


                                                                OA - 42
                                                                                Table OA-21: Formal vs Informal Loan Terms


                                                                                Interest rate                                              Loan amount                                               Loan duration in years
                                                                          (1)           (2)                   (3)                 (4)                    (5)            (6)                         (7)             (8)                 (9)
                   Formal credit                                     -94***        -108**                    -7.08           6,184.3***               4,926***     3,934***                      0.554***       0.544***           0.491***
                                                                      (31)          (48)                      (38)              (288)                  (484.3)      (659.3)                       (0.034)        (0.058)            (0.104)
                   Education dummies                                      No           Yes                   No                  No                     Yes             No                         No              Yes                 No
                   Sample dummies                                         Yes          Yes                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes             Yes                        Yes             Yes                 Yes
                   Household controls                                     No           Yes                   No                  No                     Yes             No                         No              Yes                 No
                   Household FE                                           No           No                    Yes                 No                     No              Yes                        No              No                  Yes
                   Dependent variable mean                             254              254                   231              5022                    5022         5061                          0.732           0.732               0.732
                   Dependent variable SD                               503              503                   423              6,938                   6,938        7,023                         0.757           0.757               0.757
                   Observations                                       2,427             880                   202              8,810                   2,992         423                          4,257           1,522                301
                   R-squared                                          0.006            0.036                 0.860             0.063                   0.171        0.661                         0.083           0.119               0.646

Notes: Data from National Survey of Household Living Standards (Rubalcava and Teruel, 2006) is used to construct the table. The
table shows the difference between formal and informal interest rates (Columns (1)–(3)), peso loan amounts (Columns (4)–(6)) and the
loan duration (Columns (7)–(9)). We consider a loan to be from a formal entity which we define as a banking institution and informal
otherwise. The household controls include age, monthly expenditures, and dummy variables for car ownership, washing machines,
and other household appliances. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at
the 5, 1 and 0.1 percent level respectively.



                                               Figure OA-21: Comparison formal and informal loan market in Mexico

                              (a) Interest rate                                                                      (b) Loan duration                                                               (c) Loan amount


                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                1
      1




                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                .8
      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                        .6
          .6




                                                                                                    .6




                                                                                                                                                                                Fraction
  Fraction




                                                                                            Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                              .4
.4




                                                                                          .4
      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                .2
      0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                0




               0         20          40             60               80          100                     0               1                        2                 3                        0    5000      10000       15000        20000       25000
                                    Annual Interest Rate                                                                      Years to Pay Loan                                                                  Loan Amount
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Formal Loans
                                Formal loans               Informal loans                                              Formal Loans               Informal loans                                                                Informal loans

Notes: The above figures compare the formal and informal credit market in Mexico using the annual interest rate (a), the loan tenure
in years (b) and the loan amount in pesos (c). This data comes from ENNVIH survey reported by the INEGI on years 2002, 2005, and
2009. The lines represent the cumulative distribution of the three variables; divided between formal and informal.




                                                                                                                          OA - 43
Appendix O.              Effects of unemployment: alternative method

This section provides some evidence that shocks indeed precipitate default using an alternative sample and
an altenrative specification. We observe employment spells for the the subset of our CB sample employed in
the formal sector by matching the CB data with Mexican social security data (the IMSS). The matching yields
a panel of 86, 363 individuals with information on employment history in the formal sector as well as
       their formal credit records.86
       We estimate the following regressions using OLS for individual i living in state s in month t:

                          defaultjit = αij + γs,t
                                              j
                                                                                        βkj × 1( months unemployedit = k) + jit
                                                                                X
                                                  +                                                                                        (9)
                                                                                k≥1


where αi is an individual fixed effect and γs,t controls for trends at the state month level. The independent
variables are a set of dummies 1( months unemployedit = k) that are equal to 1 if individual i in month t has
been unemployed for k months. For individuals who are employed 1( months unemployedit = k) is equal to
zero for all k. The dependent variable, def aultjit is equal to one if individual i at month t has a ‘default code’
of j months, meaning that she has at least one loan in delinquency for j or more months.



                        Figure OA-22: The “Effect” of Unemployment Spells on Delinquency
                                                .1
                                   increase in probability (β)
                                        0       -.05 .05




                                                                 1   2      3   4   5     6    7    8     9 10 11     12   13   14    15
                                                                                        Months since last employed

                                                                 dep. var           >1m             >2m              >3m             >6m




Notes: The figure presents βbkj estimates from (9) estimated using OLS. The data is matched CB-IMSS data at the borrower-month level.
We observe employment for 86,363 borrowers from 10/11 to 05/14 (unbalanced panel). Each line corresponds to a regression with a
different measure of delinquency – delinquency is defined as j-months past due where j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 6}. The β coefficients are intended
to capture the associational effect of unemployment spells (by duration of unemployment) on delinquency . For instance βˆ63 is the
correlation between having been unemployed for 6 consecutive months (relative to being employed during that time) and being 3
months delinquent in the current month.
  86
    The matching proceeds as follows: Of the 1m borrowers in our 2014 CB data, 542, 959 had both a tax identifier as well as a
bank loan at some point between January 2011 and May 2014. We used the tax identifier to match borrowers to the IMSS monthly
data from October 2011 to May 2014. We observe employment for at least one month for 86,363 individuals. Since the IMSS is
a census of all formal sector workers, a match indicates employment in the formal sector and we assume that a lack of a match
indicates no employment in the formal sector. Since we do not observe employment in the informal sector, we cannot construct a more
comprehensive indicator of employment.




                                                                                           OA - 44
       Figure OA-22 plots β̂kj for different values of k and j. The likelihood of default is increasing in the length of
the unemployment spell so that for instance, being unemployed for 10 months is associated with a 5 percentage
point higher likelihood of being delinquent on at least one loan – the unconditional mean is is 12 pp, so this
is a 41% increase.87 These results demonstrate the severe effect of one particular shock (unemployment) on
default (even after controlling for individual fixed effects). This is consistent with the view that large negative
shocks, such as prolonged unemployment (or health shocks), could increase default markedly. At the same
time, these results are only partial since unemployment in the formal sector is likely only one possible shock
affecting NTB borrowers.88




  87
       The unconditional mean for the dependent variables are 18 pp. (>1m), 16 pp. (>2m), 15 pp. (>3m) and 12 pp. (>6m).
  88
       Only about 20% of our experimental sample is employed in the formal sector.


                                                               OA - 45
Appendix P.             Closing of Study Card Not Taken up by Other Lenders


        Figure OA-23: Study card demise coincides with smaller share of loans going to NTB borrowers




                                                           1
                                     share of NTB borrowers from non MFI banks
                                          .2        .4     0   .6      .8




                                                                                 2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013


                                   (a) Share of new loans going to NTB in Mexico, all lenders

This figure plots the fraction of total newly originated loans (for the whole of Mexico) going to borrowers with no previous formal
credit history each year, from 2006 when our study card was in its peak throughout the period in which Bank A reduced its rate of
issuance (2007-2009), and when Bank A stopped issuing it altogether in 2010. We normalize 2006 to 1, so that changes in the share of
new loans awarded to NTB borrower can be easily read. In 2008, when the Bank A reduced issuance of the Study Card, the share of
loans going to NTB borrowers declined by 40 percent. Note that the big decline comes before the Great Recession (Mexico grew at 1.1
percent in 2008). The graph not necessarily reflects a causal relationship between the closing of the Study Card and financial inclusion,
but it is suggestive. There was no recovery of the share of loans going to NTB borrowers afterwards.




                                                                                                      OA - 46
