                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EMPTYING THE TANK:
                      GETTING THE MOST OUT OF LIMITED DATA

                                        M. Scott Taylor

                                      Working Paper 24855
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24855


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2018




Thanks to A. Magesan, A. Jacobsen, J. W. Laliberte, K. Head, F. Mayer, and A. Whalley for
helpful comments, and J. Taylor-McGregor for help with the title. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Emptying the Tank: Getting the most out of Limited Data
M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 24855
July 2018
JEL No. A2,Q0,Q4

                                         ABSTRACT

All empirical researchers know that having more sources of variation in a dataset is valuable.
What is not known is how valuable, and if the marginal value of adding another source of
variation diminishes or increases. This note provides explicit answers to these questions. It
defines "valuable" as the number of independent questions the data can potentially answer, and
provides a surprisingly simple and useful rule that tells the researcher not only when they have
"emptied the tank" of their data's valuable implications, but also the marginal value of further
data collection. An illustration using home heating costs is provided.


M. Scott Taylor
IEE Canada Research Chair
Department of Economics
The University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, N.W.
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
m.scott.taylor1@gmail.com
1         Introduction

Researchers are always limited by their data. And data issues are many: measurement error,

limited observations, selective sampling, truncation, etc. are but a few of the common issues

the empirical researcher has to surmount to proceed to analysis. This note investigates a

different dimension of the data problem facing researchers – the limited sources of variation

in their data. For example a dataset containing only a cross-section of GDP across countries

has one source of variation; if we added industry or sectoral observations within each cross-

sectional unit, we would have two; and if, for example, we had in addition observations over

at least two time periods, then we would have three: country × industry × time.1

        All empirical researchers understand that more sources of variation are useful and valuable

because issues of identification and sources of variation are intimately connected. This is

often reflected in the common seminar question: what source of variation are you exploiting

to identify that parameter or effect?

        While more sources are always good, what is less clear is how useful are they? Is it always

useful to expand a dataset to include another source of variation? And further, how does

this benefit diminish as our dataset becomes “wider”? This note provides explicit answers

to these questions.

        There is an alternative way to pose the question. In many cases, the sources of variation

in a dataset are fixed and largely set by government agency procedures, administrative rules,

historical accident, or, just as effectively, by steeply rising costs of further collection. In those

cases, the question for the researcher is flipped on its head – it becomes how to maximize
    1
    Some may prefer to substitute the term dimension for source of variation as they read. They are
synonymous. I have chosen source of variation in the belief it is more familiar to most readers and clearly
tied to data per se.


                                                    2
the information you can glean from a dataset with a given number of sources of variation.

    To answer our two questions, consider the logical basis for the common seminar question

mentioned above. Since the answer to any empirical question requires the identification of

a parameter or effect from the data, at bottom the remark is asking what question can the

data potentially answer. A successful answer links a source of variation in the dataset to

the estimation of a key parameter or effect, that in turn answers the hypothetical question

posed.




2     How many questions can you answer?

A concrete example will help fix ideas. Suppose we have a dataset with three sources of

variation. We have prices for natural gas and fuel oil, across a country with many states,

and we have this data collected, annually, over several years. By construction we have three

sources of variation: fuel × state × time. Natural gas and fuel oil are used in home heating.

The researcher sees the yearly home heating bill. When across fuel variation is available

she also sees the breakdown across natural gas and fuel oil purchases. When across state

variation is available she also sees the state of residence.

    With this as our starting point let’s ask how many independent questions we can ask

of this dataset. A useful way to visualize this problem is shown in Figure 1 below. The

schematic shows an n × n (3×3 in our case) face of a cube that has equal height, width, and

depth. Down the side of the cube, across its face, and running through its depth are the

labels for each source of variation: fuels, states, and time.

    Within each face of the cube is written an example of the type of question the relevant


                                                3
                                          Figure 1




                                                                            s
                                                                          te he
                                                                       ta     t f
                                                                            e o
                   Fuels            States               Time         S   v
                                                                         a es e
                                                                       Hi  c
                                                                        r mg
                                                                       p o in
                                                                         h t s
               Is natural gas   Are the prices       How have the        ea l
                                                                       h fue edy
               cheaper than                          prices of fuel          g l
      Fuels




                                of fuel oil and                             n t
                                                                          a en
                  fuel oil?     n. gas high in       oil and n. gas    cher ss
                                   the same              changed         f o
                                                                       if r s?
                                    states?            over time?     d ac te
                                                                           a
                                                                        st




                                Is home heating Have home
      States




                                cheaper in some heating costs
                                     states?    risen more in
                                                 some states
                                               than in others?



                                                     Is the cost of
                                                     home heating
      Time




                                                        rising or
                                                         falling
                                                       over time?




combination of variation in the data can answer. The X’s signify combinations that provide

no new information. Since having state × time variation is the same as having time × state

variation only one of these faces carries a question. The reader should work through a couple

of combinations to convince themselves of how the schematic works.

   Along the diagonal, only one source of variation is exploited and the potential questions

reflect this fact. So for example, if we pooled the data across states and collapsed its time



                                             4
dimension, we are at the top left face and we can only ask whether on average natural gas

(n. gas) is cheaper or more expensive than fuel oil. Similarly, the other diagonals lead to

questions requiring only the remaining source of variation.

       Moving off the diagonal implies the researcher exploits two sources of variation, and as

a result the set of potential questions expands. Consequently, the entry on the second row

and third column allows us to exploit across state and time variation to ask whether home

heating costs have risen more in some states than others.2

       Finally, consider the schematic’s cut-away third dimension. As shown this cut-away

contains all X’s except for one entry. This one entry is where the researcher exploits all

three sources of variation to answer a question about how the time series of home heating

fuel prices across states differs (or not!).

       The schematic makes it very clear how and why different sources of variation matter to

empirical researchers, since it gives them the ability to pose and then potentially answer more

questions of the data. Presumably the next step is to determine how these answers bear on

the researcher’s chosen hypothesis about home heating costs, their geographical variation or

time-series properties. But the schematic also provides us with a hint as to how we could

approach our question more generally. The astute observer may notice that in our simple

case, with three sources of variation we can answer seven questions, and this follows because

our schematic method of analysis adds up in the following way.


                                             
                                         3   3   3
                                           +   +    =7                                                   (1)
                                         1   2   3
   2
    Importantly all of these questions are independent in the sense that knowing any two answers on the
face of the cube won’t give you an answer to a third related question. Consider answers to questions at (2,2)
and (3,3) and ask whether these determine our answer (2,3). They do not and hence our method identifies
the number of independent questions the data could answer.

                                                     5
          3
              
          1
                  are the number of questions you can answer with one source of variation along the
                     3
                      
diagonal,            2
                          the number of questions answered with two sources in play off the diagonal; and
 3
     
 3
         is the final combination that yields the final question answered by exploiting the third

variation (dimension). Therefore, by construction, we know that a dataset with n sources of

variation can provide, in theory, answers to M independent questions where M is given by:


                                                          n  
                                                         X   n
                                                      M=       .                                      (2)
                                                         k=1
                                                             k


         Fortunately, if we recall the binomial theorem implies that


                                                             n  
                                                           n
                                                            X   n k
                                                  (1 + x) =       x                                   (3)
                                                            k=0
                                                                k


                                             n        n
                                                      
and set x = 1 in (3) and recall              0
                                                  =   n
                                                           = 1, M becomes far simpler and equal to:



                                                      M (n) = 2n − 1                                  (4)



M is commonly referred to as a Mersenne number after the French polymath and Minim

friar Marin Mersenne (1588-1648) who investigated its properties as specifically related to

primes.3

         Here our derivation of M (n) shows it is simply the number of independent questions that

can be posed and potentially answered by our data when it has n sources of variation. In

our example M (3) = 23 − 1 = 7 questions.
     3
    A Mersenne prime is a prime number one less than a power of 2. Mersenne primes are often used in
cryptography.




                                                               6
    While M (n) provides a simple and clear answer to our first question, there are also dif-

ferent interpretations and potential uses. For example, while we arrived at the rule construc-

tively by generalizing a purely graphical approach, the abstract minded may now recognize

M (n) as the Power Set of n elements minus one. Why? The Power Set of n elements gives us

all the possible subsets of the n sources of variation that led to our questions; but since the

empty set contains no variation, and therefore produces no questions, we need to subtract

it from 2n . Alternatively, to the very applied researcher M (n) − 1 is nothing more than the

number of fixed effects a researcher can include in a regression framework before trivially

explaining all of their data.




3     Is more always better?

With (4) in hand it is now easy to show that M is strictly convex in n (if we take n to be

continuous). Alternatively, and preferably, we can take n to be an integer and note how the

sequence of M (n) given by {0, 1, 3, 7, 15, . . .} exhibits the property that



                       M (n + 1) − M (n) = 2n+1 − 2n = 2n (2 − 1) = 2n                       (5)



and therefore we have an answer to our final question. The marginal value of adding further

sources of variation to our dataset is positive, strongly increasing in n, and surprisingly equal

to 2n . Clearly from (5) this marginal value explodes with n. This implies, for our example,

that the marginal value in terms of new questions we can pose of the data if we added one

more source of variation is 23 = 8 additional questions. And these together with those shown



                                                7
in Figure 1 would allow us to ask M (4) = 24 − 1 = 15 questions in total.

   Why is an additional source of variation so useful? Again our example is useful. Suppose

we added to our dataset the knowledge of fuel purchase choices across those living in older

homes (age > 25 years) and those living in newer homes (age ≤ 25 years). This additional

source of variation not only allows us to ask new questions about its own variation. For
                   n
                       
example, the       1
                           terms in M (n) rise linearly with n and allow us to now ask whether it is

more expensive to heat an old house or a new house. Similarly, the new source of variation

also allows us to ask a finely detailed question that exploits the new type of variation in
                                                    n
                                                     
conjunction with the earlier three. These           n
                                                            terms also rise linearly with n, and allow us

to ask, for example, how the time pattern of natural gas and fuel oil purchases across new

and old homes differs across states. But the true benefit of adding a new source of variation

comes from the many new combinations of variation we can now exploit to answer so so

many more questions with the data. All of these new combinations exploits age in some way

to ask and then answer new questions. These remaining new questions are represented by
               n
                   
all the new    k
                       terms in (2).

   In our specific case, our new source of variation gives us the ability to ask in total 8 new

questions. Example questions, together with the variation they exploit, are given below:

  1. Are home heating costs more for older homes? (age)


  2. What share of new homes are heated by natural gas? (fuel × age)


  3. In states with high natural gas prices, do home owners of both old and new homes

     purchase less gas? (fuel × state × age)


  4. How have home heating costs risen for older homes that primarily use fuel oil? (fuel

                                                        8
      × time × age)


  5. Have new homes heated exclusively by natural gas had their home heating costs rise

      less quickly than the national average during the shale gas boom? (state × time ×

      fuel × age)


  6. Is heating an old home less expensive than heating a new home in some states? (state

      × age)


  7. Have newer or older houses seen home heating costs rise most in the last decade? (time

      × age)


  8. Have home heating costs for old homes risen more in some states than others? (state

      × time × age)


   It is now obvious that the researcher who can answer these questions has a far richer un-

derstanding of the available fuel switching possibilities, how these have varied geographically,

and how they have or have not improved for all fuel and home types. What is less obvious,

and perhaps surprising, is the scale of the change in information provided to the researcher.

And only by knowing (4) and (5) can the diligent researcher exhaust all the possibilities and

in doing so – empty the tank of all potential, but yet unasked, questions of the data.

   Finally, a caveat. Although the simplicity of the rule is helpful in finding the volume

of questions, the value of answering an additional question may decrease with n, or in the

extreme only one question may be of value to the researcher. All of this is surely true, but

(4) still plays a constructive role in providing guidelines for data collection and analysis.

Some sources of variation are more useful than others, but diminishing returns in terms of


                                               9
their value would need to be exceedingly severe to offset the exponential growth in volume

shown by (4).




4       Conclusion

This note asked how valuable is further information by focusing on one dimension of the

problem – the number of sources of variation in a dataset. While empirical researchers

have always known more variation is better, I have shown exactly why this is true and

provided a simple rule linking the sources of variation to new questions that can be answered.

Surprisingly, the marginal value of additional sources of variation is increasing and not

diminishing. With this knowledge in hand, empirical researchers can squeeze all the potential

out of their current datasets – emptying the tank, while referees and advisors can ask how an
                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                
author’s theory matches with the perhaps unnoticed or conveniently ignored remaining                        k


implications of the data they employed. And theorists can now turn to examine whether the

empirical researcher should prefer more data of given types to further sources of variation

(i.e. dimensions). For example, if the researcher has access to N observations in total, and

these could be split across M ≤ N sources of variation there is clearly a trade-off between

the number of questions posed (increasing in M ), and the ability to answer these questions

well (increasing, presumably with N/M ).4 This issue awaits further investigation.




    4
    Answering this question will be both difficult and context specific. Difficult because it involves weighing
the benefit of further observations of a given type much like problems in the sequential testing literature,
together with costs in terms of the degrees of freedom lost as the set of parameters to estimate expands (which
can be especially severe in a non-parametric setting). Context matters as well because some questions are
more valuable than others, and weighing these relative values will depend on the specific problem at hand.


                                                      10
