NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF ELIMINATING TAX HAVENS
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Working Paper 24850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24850

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018, Revised December 2019

I am very grateful for comments and suggestions from James Albertus, Joe Altonji, Rosanne
Altshuler, Peter Arcidiacono, Alan Auerbach, Johannes Becker, Anusha Chari, Michael Devereux,
Dhammika Dharmapala, Jonathan Dingel, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, John Friedman, Clemens Fuest,
Tarek Hassan, Jim Hines, Niels Johannesen, Lisa Kahn, Karam Kang, Amit Khandelwal, Henrik
Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk, Brian Kovak, Adam Looney, Jon Meer, Peter Merrill, Tom Neubig, Eric
Ohrn, Toan Phan, Jim Poterba, Brendan Price, Nirupama Rao, Josh Rauh, Ethan Rouen, Stephen
Ryan, Nathan Seegert, Joel Slemrod, Chris Stanton, Max Todtenhaupt, Ludvig Wier, Daniel Xu,
Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, Gabriel Zucman, and Eric Zwick, as well as from seminar participants at
ASSA, CESifo Venice Summer Institute, Columbia, HBS, ITFP, NBER Public Economics and
Business Tax Conferences, NTA, NY Federal Reserve, Trinity University, UC Davis, UNC, University
of Copenhagen, University of Michigan, University of Notre Dame Conference on Unilateralism,
University of Zurich Conference on Public Finance in Developing Countries, US Treasury,
Washington University (Olin), World Bank, and Yale. I am thankful to Nirupama Rao for sharing
code, to Eric Ohrn for sharing data, and to John Oliver and Lin-Manuel Miranda for bringing
x936 to my attention. Dan Garrett, Yamac Isik, Xian Jiang, Stephanie Karol, Ethan McClure, Linh
Nguyen, Matt Panhans, Harsh Parikh, and Kevin Roberts provided outstanding research assistance. This
project benefited from funding from the Kauffman Foundation and the International Tax Policy
Forum and from visiting fellowships at Chicago Booth's Initiative on Global Markets and Yale
University. All errors remain my own. Email: jc@jcsuarez.com; Web: www.jcsuarez.com. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Unintended Consequences of Eliminating Tax Havens
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
NBER Working Paper No. 24850
July 2018, Revised December 2019
JEL No. F23,H25,H26,H32,J23
ABSTRACT
Eliminating firms' access to tax havens can have unintended consequences for their domestic
economic activity. We study a policy that limited profit shifting by US multinationals and show it
raised the tax cost of domestic investment. Firms affected by the policy responded by reducing
investment and domestic employment. Firm-level responses were amplified to local labor
markets through the establishment networks of profit-shifting firms. More exposed local labor
markets experienced declines in employment, income, and home values and saw increases in
government transfers. Policy proposals that limit profit shifting should therefore consider effects
on economic activity in addition to tax revenue.

Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

1

Introduction

Profit shifting to tax havens by multinational corporations lowers tax revenues and is a key
motivation for tax reform. For instance, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 introduced new
taxes on intangible income with the aim of limiting profit shifting. While the debate over
profit shifting focuses on tax revenues, this paper shows that policies that succeed at limiting
profit shifting also raise the cost of domestic investment and incentivize multinationals to shift
employment and investment abroad.
We show that eliminating tax havens has unintended consequences for the domestic activities
of US multinationals. We study the repeal of Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, which
limited the ability of US multinationals to shift profits to affiliates in Puerto Rico.1 Under §936,
US corporations had an incentive to shift profits to Puerto Rico, since §936 essentially excluded
the income of Puerto Rican affiliates from corporate taxes. This unique tax advantage allowed
US multinationals to repatriate income without paying taxes. In contrast, multinationals benefit
from other tax havens by deferring when they pay US taxes. After the repeal of §936, the effective
tax rate of exposed multinationals rose by 4.65–6 percentage points (pp) relative to other firms.
We exploit two complementary research strategies to estimate the effects of repealing §936
on domestic economic activity. We first use firm-level data to show that §936 firms responded
to the repeal by lowering domestic investment and employment. Relative to non-exposed firms,
§936 firms reduced their global investment by 10%, increased their share of investment abroad
by 12%, and reduced their US employment by 6.7%. Our second empirical strategy uses the
establishment networks of exposed firms to measure geographic exposure to the policy. We
find that more exposed local labor markets saw slower growth in employment that persisted 15
years after the repeal of §936. Moving a location from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the
distribution of exposure to §936 reduced employment growth by 7.2pp—about 35% of the growth
in non-exposed locations. Spatial variation allows us to characterize the broader effects of the
repeal. More exposed places experienced relative decreases in income, wages, and home values,
and these areas also became more reliant on government transfers.
Our results reassess the view that profit shifting mainly distorts tax revenue.2 Indeed, our
results show that domestic employment and investment may decrease when enforcement efforts
significantly limit profit shifting. A full accounting of policies that limit profit shifting should
include the intended effects of revenue collection along with unintended effects on economic
activity. Our results also highlight the importance of considering the regional implications of tax
1

Puerto Rico is a US possession but is treated as a foreign country for purposes of taxation. This paper studies
measures of real economic outcomes in the continental US, excluding Puerto Rico.
2
For instance, Gravelle (2016) argues that “profit shifting is largely a problem of lost revenue rather than
inefficient location of investment,” and the Tax Foundation (2016) notes “lawmakers are concerned about profit
shifting because it has an impact on the amount of revenue that the corporate income tax ultimately collects.”
Relative to these views, effects on domestic economic activity are unintended consequences of the policy.

1

reforms, as fiscal shocks can have long-lasting effects on local economies.
We establish these findings in three steps. We first construct a model of multinational investment and profit shifting. Since profits generated in high-tax countries may be shifted to low-tax
locations, firms with access to tax havens face a lower effective cost of investing in high-tax
countries. Repealing §936 raised the effective cost of investing in the US. The model predicts
that multinationals respond by lowering investment and employment and by shifting economic
activity to foreign affiliates.3 These predictions can be understood using the hierarchy of behavioral responses of Slemrod (1992, 2001). When firms can avoid policies that limit profit shifting
through financial or accounting responses, they may respond merely by moving “paper profits”
across tax havens. However, enforcement efforts that prevent firms from using accounting maneuvers may escalate responses down the hierarchy and may trigger adjustments to real margins
of production. By analyzing production and profit-shifting behaviors jointly, the model reveals
that policies that succeed in limiting the use of tax havens are subject to the standard tradeoffs
between tax revenue and economic activity.
The second part of the paper tests these predictions using firm-level datasets. Our differencein-differences methodology compares the investment and employment decisions of firms exposed
to §936 with those of similar control firms. Using data from Compustat, we estimate that
exposed firms decreased their overall investment by 10%. Relative to the change in effective tax
rates, this investment response implies a semi-elasticity of 1.77.4 In addition to lowering overall
investment, US multinationals also increased their share of investment in foreign affiliates. These
investment responses were accompanied by declines in firm-level employment. Using the National
Establishment Time Series (NETS) database, we find that, relative to control firms, exposed firms
reduced their US employment by 6.7%. The data confirm the model predictions and show that
firms viewed the repeal of §936 as an increase in the effective cost of investing in the US.
This difference-in-differences approach yields unbiased estimates of the effects of repealing
§936 if investment and employment in exposed firms would have been similar to that of control
firms had §936 not been repealed. This parallel trends assumption is supported by four facts.
First, we present graphical evidence that control firms and firms exposed to §936 were on similar
trends prior to the policy change. Second, we rule out that changes in other tax policies can
confound the effects of §936. Third, the estimates are robust to analyzing firm-level changes, to
including firm fixed effects, and to inverse probability reweighting, which further ensures that
3

The model is based on work by Hines and Rice (1994). Tax complementarities arise from profit shifting and
are not due to complementarities in production or demand, as in Desai et al. (2009). Repealing §936 would lower
US employment and investment if firms view the US as a high-tax country and if capital complements labor.
4
Firms in more exposed industries see relative investment declines of 14–18.7%, implying semi-elasticities of
2.3–3.1. By comparison, de Mooij and Ederveen (2008) conduct a meta-analysis and find a median semi-elasticity
of 2.9, Zwick and Mahon (2017) find a semi-elasticity of 3.7 from bonus depreciation, Ohrn (2018) estimates a
semi-elasticity of 4.7 from the domestic production activities deduction, Moon (2019) finds a semi-elasticity of
3.7 from capital gains taxes in Korea, and Chen et al. (2019) estimate a semi-elasticity of 3.2 in China.

2

treatment and control firms are comparable. Fourth, we find similar effects when we analyze
changes in industry-level investment using data from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. These
facts significantly reduce the likelihood that our results are due to a spurious statistical anomaly.
In our third and final step, we show that firm-level responses had persistent effects on local
labor markets. The establishment networks of firms exposed to §936 allow us to measure the
degree to which each local economy was affected by this limit on profit shifting. We relate the
fraction of establishments in a given county that could benefit from §936 to data on employment
growth at the industry-county-year level from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages.
We find that increasing a county’s exposure to §936 from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the
exposure distribution reduces employment growth by 7.2pp and income growth by 12.5pp. Using
a long-difference specification across Census years, we also find relative decreases in wage rates
that are concentrated in the wages of workers without a college degree as well as decreases in
housing prices and rental costs. Finally, we show that more exposed areas receive an additional
$16 in unemployment benefits per person and $30 in income replacement programs per capita.
Overall, the repeal of §936 had long-lasting impacts on more exposed local labor markets.
As in the firm-level analysis, we provide auxiliary evidence that spatial variation identifies
the regional effects of repealing §936. The key identifying assumption behind the local labor
market effects is that exposure to §936 is not correlated with other shocks that could affect local
labor markets. Several pieces of evidence justify this assumption. First, we show graphically
that locations with different degrees of exposure have parallel trends prior to the repeal of §936.
Second, the dynamic effects match the phase-out of §936, and the effects stabilize after §936 is
fully phased out. Third, our preferred specification controls for industry-year fixed effects, which
rule out concerns that the observed change in employment is due to industry-specific trends.
Fourth, we show that exposure to §936 is not related to a battery of potential confounders and
that the results are robust to including them as controls. Fifth, we find similar effects when we
analyze different geographical units (counties, commuting zones, and conspumas); when we study
changes in the employment-to-population ratio, which rules out the possibility that migration
fully accommodates labor demand shocks; and when we use data from several different sources
(QCEW, BEA, and IRS). Sixth, we conduct “placebo tests” that show that our results are not
driven by exposure to firms with similar characteristics to §936 corporations, which rules out
that the results are driven by changes in the firm size distribution or by exposure to industries
that were heavy users of §936. In the face of these facts, the most likely scenario is that the
slower economic growth in more exposed local labor markets is driven by the firm-level responses
we document in this paper.
We conclude our analysis of §936 by reconciling the firm-level effects on employment with the
local labor market effects. If firm-level responses to the repeal of §936 had effects on suppliers of
inputs, interacted with agglomeration effects, or affected local non-tradable industries, layoffs at
3

§936 corporations could have spillover effects that amplified job losses within local labor markets.
Our results suggest that every §936 layoff led to the loss of an additional 3.87 jobs in the local
labor market, which is consistent with employment multipliers from Moretti (2010). In addition,
an event-study across industries shows that tradable employment—which included most §936
firms—was the first to decline in response to the repeal of §936 and was then followed by declines
in the non-tradable and construction sectors.
This paper contributes to the public finance literature by challenging the view (e.g., in Gravelle, 2016) that profit shifting mostly affects tax revenues and is not a primary concern for real
economic outcomes. While this view is prevalent in policy circles, our empirical evidence provides
support for a central force in models of international taxation.5 Our results are particularly valuable for the study of international taxation, where natural experiments are few and far between.
By shining a light on long-lasting effects of tax reform on local economies, this paper shows that
the policy debate should also consider unequal geographic burdens from international tax reform.
To appreciate the lessons of §936, it is worth noting that Puerto Rico was a unique tax
haven for US multinationals. Puerto Rico was especially desirable because of the close cultural
and institutional connections with the US and, most importantly, because it allowed for the
immediate repatriation of foreign profits at a zero tax rate. These benefits surpassed those of
other tax havens, which allow multinationals to defer when they pay US taxes.6 For this reason,
repealing §936 increased the effective tax rates of exposed firms. In a companion paper (Garrett
and Suárez Serrato, 2019), we show that §936 firms did not expand to other tax havens after
the repeal. We also show that the firm value of exposed firms decreased following news of the
repeal of §936 (see Appendix C). These facts are consistent with the view that repealing §936
eliminated a valuable profit shifting avenue that lacked a close substitute for US multinationals.
Thus, while the repeal of §936 was a unique natural experiment, the lessons from this reform
provide a policy-relevant case study for when enforcement succeeds at limiting profit shifting.
This paper is related to research quantifying profit shifting by multinational corporations.
Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Hines and Rice (1994) showed in pioneering work that reported
pretax profits are negatively correlated with corporate tax rates. Recent papers updating seminal
studies (Mutti and Ohrn, 2019) and using firm-level earnings shocks for identification (Dharmapala and Riedel, 2013) find smaller effects than earlier work. Clausing (2009) estimates that
profit shifting lowers US tax revenues by $100 billion annually. According to this methodology,
§936 accounted for 10–15% of the total profits shifted out of the US at the time of its repeal.7
5

This force is present in both seminal models of international tax as well as in more recent papers, including
Hines and Rice (1994); Grubert and Slemrod (1998); Gordon and Hines (2002); Altshuler and Grubert (2003);
Hong and Smart (2010); Slemrod and Wilson (2009); Dharmapala (2008); Auerbach and Devereux (2018).
6
The massive repatriation of foreign profits during the 2004–2005 tax holiday showed that US multinationals
value repatriation (at a discounted tax rate) over deferral (Blouin and Krull, 2009; Dharmapala et al., 2011).
7
See Dharmapala (2014) for an in-depth review of this literature and Heckemeyer and Overesch (2013) for a
meta-analysis. Recent approaches that consider non-linear models (Dowd et al., 2017), as well as recent work by

4

Our results also contribute to the literature studying real responses of multinational corporations to international taxation. Grubert and Slemrod (1998) analyze the investment and
profit-shifting decisions of §936 corporations and show that investments in Puerto Rico followed
from a profit shifting strategy to avoid US taxation. Desai et al. (2009) show that foreign investment is complementary to domestic investment. Becker and Riedel (2012) find evidence of
cross-border effects of taxes, such that taxation at the parent location may affect investment
by affiliates. Kovak et al. (2017) show that increases in foreign employment are not associated
with decreases in domestic employment. Finally, de Mooij and Liu (2018) study the effects
of transfer pricing regulations and find that anti-avoidance rules lead to a decrease in domestic investment. While most papers in this literature use variation in taxes or regulations across
countries, this paper exploits a natural experiment that limited access to an important tax haven
for US multinationals.8
Finally, we advance the corporate and international tax literatures by using the establishment
networks of multinationals to trace out the regional implications of fiscal policy. Spatial variation
provides alternative identification strategies that researchers can use to evaluate fiscal policies
when firm- or industry-level comparisons are not feasible. In the case of §936, the regional
analysis confirms that the finding that repealing §936 affected workers in more exposed labor
markets does not depend on specific firm-level comparisons. As in recent contributions that study
the propagation of firm shocks across establishments (e.g., Huber, 2018; Giroud and Mueller,
2019), spatial variation complements firm-level analyses by characterizing how fiscal policy is
transmitted to regional economies. For instance, in Garrett et al. (2019) we use this approach
to measure how the tax incentives for investment analyzed by Zwick and Mahon (2017) impact
local labor markets. Finally, spatial variation also allows us to measure the broader impacts of
policies, including effects on housing values and governments transfers, as in Autor et al. (2013).
We proceed by describing §936 in Section 2, presenting the model in Section 3, and measuring
exposure to §936 in Section 4. Section 5 tests the model predictions on firm-level data. Section
6 shows that more exposed local labor markets experienced slower employment growth following
the repeal of §936. Section 7 concludes.
Clausing (2016) and Tørsløv et al. (2018), argue for larger estimates of profit shifting. Guvenen et al. (2017) also
argue that profit shifting biases estimates of productivity growth and GDP. However, Blouin and Robinson (2019)
note that correcting for differences in accounting definitions significantly lowers estimates of profit shifting.
8
See Hines (1999) and Gordon and Hines (2002) for excellent reviews of this literature. Devereux and Griffith
(1998) show that multinationals locate production facilities in countries with lower tax rates. Mintz and Smart
(2004) show that income shifting across Canadian jurisdictions may increase investment. Overesch (2009) also
finds significant effects of home country tax rates on inbound investment to Germany. Buettner et al. (2012) show
that thin capitalization rules affect the choice of equity and debt at the firm level. Egger and Wamser (2015)
and Albertus (2017) find that investment is hampered by controlled foreign corporation (CFC) laws. Schwab and
Todtenhaupt (2019) show tax cuts can generate cross-border effects on R&D. Bilicka et al. (2019) find that the
UK worldwide debt cap also led multinationals to relocate activity away from the UK. Grubert and Altshuler
(2006) show that governments may allow multinationals to engage in profit shifting to avoid reductions to their
domestic operations.

5

The Possessions Tax Credit and the Repeal of §936

2

Starting with the Revenue Act of 1921, the US government exempted US multinationals from
income taxes if the income originated in affiliated corporations located in Puerto Rico.9 While
the Tax Reform Act of 1976 replaced the exemption with a tax credit, possessions corporations
were essentially exempted from US taxes under the new regime. The new credit was formally
known as the US Possessions Corporations Tax Credit, but it was commonly referred to as §936,
in reference to the relevant section of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. §936, 1976).
§936 was especially susceptible to profit-shifting maneuvers. To see this, first consider the
role of intangibles in profit shifting. A US multinational can shift tax obligations from the US
to a tax haven by assigning a patent to a low-tax affiliate. The company can then use royalty
payments from the US parent to the low-tax affiliate to lower its US taxable income, as well as
its overall tax payments. In general, this strategy is limited by rules on the pricing of intra-group
transactions as well as by taxes on the transfer of intangible assets. In the case of possessions
affiliates, however, transfers of intangible assets were essentially untaxed (Eden, 1994). The Joint
Committee on Taxation (2006) describes an example where a US pharmaceutical could develop
a drug patent in the US, deduct labor and R&D costs for the purposes of the federal income
tax, and then assign the patent to the affiliate in Puerto Rico, where royalty income would go
untaxed.10 In addition to the weak rules governing the transfer of intangible assets, relatively lax
transfer pricing rules facilitated profit shifting by US multinationals operating in Puerto Rico.
Finally, note that §936 allowed for the immediate repatriation of foreign profits, which was more
valuable than the deferrable benefit obtained through other tax havens.
Political support for §936 rested on the belief that the tax credits benefited the economy of
Puerto Rico. This support eroded with the growing concern that §936 was mainly a conduit for
profit shifting. As an example of these worries, the GAO (1993) reported that the tax credits
exceeded the average compensation of Puerto Rican employees in §936 firms.11 §936 was repealed
in the Small Business and Job Protection Act of 1996.12 The law allowed for a 10-year transition
9

The exemption also applied to other US possessions including Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana
Islands, and the US Virgin Islands. However, the vast majority of exempted income originated in possessions
corporations located in Puerto Rico. The government of Puerto Rico also provided tax holidays that exempted
most of their income from local corporate taxes for up to 25 years (Bond, 1981).
10
Even though the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 put an end to this particular maneuver,
possessions corporations benefited from relatively lax transfer pricing rules until 1986, when §936 was harmonized
with transfer pricing regulations (§482 of the IRC). Hexner and Jenkins (1995) and Eden (1998) argue that
intangible assets transferred to Puerto Rico represented profit-shifting motives with little or no real investment.
11
According to the GAO (1993), the tax credit per worker was about $25,000, which was greater than the
average employee compensation. The cost per employee was even higher for drug companies, who received over
$70,000 in tax credits per employee (Eden, 1998).
12
§936 was a minor provision in the law, which focused on increasing capital expense limits for small businesses
and raising the minimum wage. In contrast to bills where lobbying activity affects whether a piece of legislation
is enacted (Kang, 2016), this bill was passed by the House almost unanimously (414-10), had bipartisan support
in the Senate (74-24), and moved from committee to final passage very quickly (HR3448, 1996). This timing

6

period during which companies that had previously claimed §936 credits could continue to do so.
While the technical details of the phase-out are complicated, many firms saw the value of their
credits decrease to 40% of their original value by 1998.13
To understand the effects of the repeal of §936, it is important to note that Puerto Rico
was an especially attractive tax haven for US multinationals. First, tax havens are only able
to attract foreign investment if they have strong governance (Dharmapala and Hines, 2009).
Because of the strong cultural link with the US and the fact that Puerto Rico’s legal system
operates within the US federal system, US firms view Puerto Rico as a safe destination for
their intellectual property. A second reason is that operations in Puerto Rico were essentially
condoned by the US Treasury. Operations in other tax havens were more likely to raise red flags
that US multinationals were pursuing aggressive tax planning strategies. Affiliates in other tax
havens also faced the risk that unrepatriated earnings could be classified as passive (Subpart F)
income and be subject to repatriation taxes. Finally—and most importantly—§936 allowed US
multinationals to immediately repatriate income at an effective zero US tax rate. In contrast,
the benefit from shifting profits to other tax havens comes from delaying—or deferring—when
US taxes are paid.14
Consider now the fiscal cost of §936. Panel A of Figure 1 displays the fiscal cost of §936 to
the US Treasury at the industry level using data from the IRS (2017a). This panel shows the
gradual elimination of the tax credits, starting from about $4.9 billion in 2017 dollars and ending
in their full phase-out by 2006. This graph shows large drops in the value of these credits after
1996 and 1998, which matches statutory limits on the tax credits. Panel B shows the composition
of these credits by industry. In 1995, about 57% of these credits were claimed by corporations
in the chemical manufacturing industry. Firms manufacturing equipment, food, beverages, and
tobacco claimed about 26% of the credits, while other industries claimed the remaining 17%.
Table 1 shows US and Puerto Rico employment for selected US multinationals in 1995 using
suggests the legislation was not subject to intense lobbying pressure. We find no explicit mention of this bill or
§936 in lobbying expenditure data (OpenSecrets.org, 2018). Note that the 1996 reform repealed the tax credits for
tax years starting after December 31, 1995 (26 U.S.C. §936, 1996). For this reason, we use 1995 as the reference
year in our empirical analysis. We also show our results are robust to defining exposure to §936 in 1993.
13
Firms could elect to use an economic activity or an income credit method to compute the value of the credits
(Joint Committee on Taxation, 2006). For firms using the income credit method, the credit was limited to a
fraction of the pre-repeal value of the credit. This limit was set to decrease to 40% by 1998. For firms using the
economic activity method, the credits were determined by 60% of the sum of wage expenses plus a fraction of
intangible property depreciation and local income taxes.
14
While deferral strategies can lower the present value of taxes (Altshuler and Grubert, 2003), these avoidance
schemes are costly and may reduce the profitability of domestic and foreign activities (Grubert and Altshuler,
2013; Dyreng and Markle, 2016). The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 provides a test of the value of deferral.
The act allowed US multinationals to repatriate income at a reduced tax rate for the years 2004–2005 (e.g., Blouin
and Krull, 2009; Dharmapala et al., 2011). If deferral conferred the same benefit as immediate repatriation, US
multinationals would not have responded to this incentive. The fact that US corporations repatriated close to
$300 billion shows that immediate repatriation is significantly more valuable than deferral.

7

data from the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS).15 This table shows that just a few
§936 firms accounted for about 2.3 million jobs in the US and that the 682 firms with Puerto Rican
affiliates employed close to 11 million workers in the US. Many of these firms are in the chemical,
food, and electronic manufacturing industries. The pharmaceutical industry established a strong
presence on the island since companies like Abbott Laboratories, Wyeth, Bristol-Myers Squibb,
and Merck could shift profits by locating their intellectual property in Puerto Rican affiliates.16
Several of these large firms, including Baxter International, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and General
Electric, decreased their US employment significantly after the repeal of §936. These examples
suggest that repealing §936 could have important implications for the domestic employment of
these US multinationals.
An important question is whether the repeal impacted the effective tax rates (ETRs) of §936
firms. Using data from IRS (2017a) and NETS, we find that the ETRs of exposed firms increased
Repeal
: the effective tax rate of industry i during
by 4.65–6pp. To see this, we first compute ET Ri,t
Repeal
the repeal.17 Panel C of Figure 1 shows that exposed industries had a relatively stable ET Ri,t
Repeal
that hovered around 27% between 1996 and 2006. We make two adjustments to ET Ri,t
to
No Repeal
: the effective tax rate that exposed industries would have faced absent
estimate ET Ri,t

the reform. First, we add back the credits that firms would have claimed absent the reform
as a share of pretax income. Second, we allow for firms to respond to the repeal of §936 by
claiming other tax credits more aggressively.18 We find that firms avoid close to 20% of the
No Repeal
reduction in tax credits through this behavioral response. Panel C plots ET Ri,t
and shows

that exposed US multinationals would have seen a decline in ETRs absent the repeal of §936.
This pattern is remarkably consistent with results from Dyreng et al. (2017), who document a
similar decline in ETRs for US corporations during this period. Therefore, §936 firms saw an
increase in their tax rates relative to peer firms that experienced an overall decline in ETRs.
On average, we find that by 2006, §936 firms experienced a relative increase in ETRs of 5.73pp.
We also compute this relative increase for firms in sectors and industries that were prominent
15

Several of these firms were identified by press accounts of firms that took advantage of §936 (Business Week,
1993; Los Angeles Times, 1993).
16
In some cases the Puerto Rican operations of these large firms were not in their main industrial lines of
business. For example, while Sara Lee is best known for its consolidated foods, the Puerto Rican operations
focused on hosiery. Sara Lee cut employment in Puerto Rico in 2001 and then again in 2003, with no indication
that these jobs would be shifted to US plants (New York Times, 2003).
17
Because only eligible firms received tax credits, we divide the observed tax credits by p̂i : the fraction of an
industry’s employment that is eligible for §936 credits in 1995. We calculate p̂i using NETS data on exposed
Taxes Paidi,t −§936 Tax Creditsi,t /p̂i
Repeal
firms (as in Table 1) to obtain: ET Ri,t
=
.
Taxable Incomei,t
18
The mechanical loss in tax credits is ŝi × Taxable Incomei,t , where ŝi is the ratio of §936 credits to taxable
§936 Creditsi,t −ŝi ×Taxable Incomei,t
income prior to the repeal. The mechanical increase in ETRs is
, where p̂i is the
p̂i ×Taxable Incomei,t
fraction of employment eligible for §936 credits. We estimate the effect of tax credits on ETRs, β, by regressing
industry-level ETRs on §936 credits. We use a value of β̂ = 0.8, which is a mid-range of the estimates reported
§936 Creditsi,t −ŝi ×Taxable Incomei,t
No Repeal
No Repeal
+ β̂ ×
in Table A.1. Finally, ET Ri,t
= ET Ri,t
. Note that the case
p̂i ×Taxable Incomei,t
with no accounting responses (β = 1) implies an ETR increase of 7pp. Appendix B provides additional details.

8

users of §936. Depending on the sector, we estimate relative increases in ETRs of 4.65–6pp.19
To complement these calculations that use aggregate data, in Section 5, we study firm-level data
on taxes paid and find similar increases in ETRs.20
The effects of repealing §936 on effective tax rates suggest that US multinationals were not
able to fully avoid the fiscal costs of its repeal. In Garrett and Suárez Serrato (2019), we use data
on exposure to other tax havens from Dyreng and Lindsey (2009) to study whether §936 firms
expanded to other tax havens after the repeal. We find that exposed firms did not respond to
the repeal by expanding activities to other tax havens. We also find that firms exposed to §936
experienced declines in firm value immediately following news of the repeal of §936 (see Appendix
C).21 These are positive results from the perspective of enforcement. They are also consistent
with the understanding that repealing §936 eliminated a unique tax haven for US multinationals.
These facts help us interpret our results as tracing out the consequences of successfully limiting
the fiscal benefit of shifting profits to tax havens. While not all enforcement efforts succeed at
limiting profit shifting, our results provide the policy-relevant case study for when enforcement
meaningfully limits profit shifting.22
Finally, while the repeal of §936 is credited with contributing to Puerto Rico’s crisis, it is
worth noting that the crisis began after the full phase-out of §936. Outside of the 2001 recession,
overall employment in Puerto Rico grew until the onset of the crisis in 2006 (see Figure A.1).23
Chari et al. (2017) analyze the effects of the debt crisis on growth in Puerto Rico. They argue that
the cointegration of the economies of Puerto Rico and the United States broke down after 2012.
This timing is convenient for our analysis as it assuages the concern that the domestic effects on
employment and investment were caused by changes in Puerto Rico’s economic prospects.
19

Sectors identified by NAICS codes 22, 31-33, and 48-89 were major users of §936. To study industries that
were major users of §936, we exclude industries that claimed less than 0.1% of tax credits: NAICS codes 321-324,
327, 331, and 336-337. Differences in ETRs are driven by differences in p̂i and ŝi across industries.
20
We follow recent work in accounting (Dyreng et al., 2017) and finance (Desai and Dharmapala, 2009) by
focusing on the effect on ETRs. Because the marginal tax rate requires an adjustment for profit shifting (Grubert
and Slemrod, 1998), we cannot compute how §936 impacts the marginal tax rate. Gruber and Rauh (2007)
discuss difficulties in computing marginal tax rates using financial statement data and argue than an aggregate
approach—as in Figure 1—can circumvent these drawbacks.
21
Many firms continued operating in Puerto Rico after the repeal of §936. While profit shifting to Puerto Rico
is an ongoing concern, this strategy only produced the more limited benefit of deferral until 2018. These facts are
consistent with the loss in firm value and the lack of observed substitution to other tax havens, as well as with
arguments in Bilicka (2019) that setting up tax haven affiliates involves significant fixed costs.
22
In contrast, we would expect that financial or accounting responses would diminish real responses to the
repeal of §936 (Slemrod, 1992, 2001). For this reason, we would not expect to find changes in employment or
investment when enforcement efforts do not meaningfully limit profit shifting, as in Bustos et al. (2019).
23
While this paper does not study the effects of §936 on the Puerto Rican economy, Feliciano and Green (2017)
use industry-level data to show that the repeal of §936 led to a decline in manufacturing establishments. Mora et
al. (2017) provide an in-depth study of the origins of the crisis. La crisis boricua had manifold causes including
new sales taxes in Puerto Rico; demographic trends related to population control policies that started in the
1930s; high costs of living due to increased trade costs from the Jones Act; increased public indebtedness; and
a reliance on imported oil for electricity generation, which deeply affected the economy as oil prices doubled
between 2005 and 2012. In 2006, these conditions coalesced into the “perfect storm” behind Puerto Rico’s crisis.

9

3

A Model of Profit Shifting with Tax Complementarities

This section builds on the frameworks of Hines and Rice (1994) and Grubert and Slemrod (1998)
to show theoretically that profit shifting lowers the cost of capital in other countries. These
tax complementarities generate empirical predictions that answer the question: How would the
repeal of §936 affect investment and employment in the US?
Suppose a firm is located in Puerto Rico, the United States, and a third country C and has
after-tax profits given by:
(1 − tC )fC (KC ) + (1 − tU S )(fU S (KU S ) + fP R (KP R )) + tU S fP R (KP R ) − ρ(KC + KU S + KP R ),
where ρ is the nondeductible opportunity cost of equity capital and fj (·) is a firm’s production
function in country j, which is increasing in capital, fj0 (K) > 0, and exhibits decreasing returns
to investment, fj00 (K) < 0. The possessions tax credit is tU S fP R (KP R ), which gives a zero tax rate
on profits from operations in Puerto Rico.24 Our analysis generalizes beyond the three-country
P
case, where global after-tax profits are given by j [(1 − tj )fj (Kj ) − ρKj ].
Firms make two sequential decisions. They first decide where to locate their capital. In
the second period, firms choose a profit shifting strategy. Firms engage in profit shifting by
misreporting their profitability as rj , which may deviate from their actual profitability f¯j =
fj (Kj )/Kj in country j. Misreporting is costly to the firm since it may face penalties, litigation
costs resulting from challenges from tax authorities, and real costs of transferring intangible
assets.25 We assume misreporting costs are proportional to local capital, are convex in the
degree of misreporting, and take the form:
Kj (rj − f¯j )2
¯
C(rj , fj , Kj ) =
.
2a
The parameter a modulates these costs with high values of a implying low misreporting costs.26
We start by analyzing profit shifting in the second period. Given a capital allocation {Kj },
firms solve the tax planning problem:


X
(rj − f¯j )2
max
Kj (1 − tj )rj − ρ −
,
{rj }
2a
j
24

subject to:

X
j

f¯j Kj =

X

rj Kj ,

j

We assume that corporations in Puerto Rico would pay the US corporate rate absent §936 and that profits
from country C would be reinvested in the country C in the case that tC < tU S . While Puerto Rico has positive
corporate taxes, their magnitude is negligible in practice, and we omit them from the analysis. As in Hines and
Rice (1994), we assume firms reinvest profits abroad. Finally, we assume the cost of capital ρ is not affected by
small changes in tax rates.
25
This analysis takes the network of affiliates as given. As we show in Garrett and Suárez Serrato (2019), §936
firms do not expand to other tax havens after the repeal of §936. For analyses of the extensive margin of operating
in a tax haven, see Grubert and Slemrod (1998), Desai et al. (2006), and Gumpert et al. (2016).
26
This formulation of misreporting costs follows general features of evasion costs, as in Slemrod (2001). While
the closed-form results depend on this formulation, we obtain similar qualitative patterns from alternative functional forms that capture convex misreporting costs that are proportional to the firm’s activity in the country.

10

where the constraint implies that the firm must report total profits truthfully but may shift the
location of its profits.
Proposition 1 (Optimal Profit Shifting). Firms over-report (under-report) profits in countries
where the corporate tax rate is below (above) the capital-weighted average:
rj = f¯j + a(t̃ − tj ),
where the capital-weighted average tax rate t̃ is given by t̃ =

P
tj Kj
Pj
.
j Kj

See Appendix D for detailed proofs of the results in this section. Proposition 1 states our
version of the result in Hines and Rice (1994) that reported profitabilities are negatively correlated
with the country’s tax rate.27 Panel A in Figure 2 describes this result graphically. Firms overreport profits in countries with low taxes (t̃ > tj ) and under-report in countries with high taxes
(t̃ < tj ). The degree of misreporting depends on the cost of profit shifting: the relationship
between rj and the tax differential is relatively flat (solid line) when a is low (high cost of
misreporting) and is steeper (dashed line) when a is large (low cost of misreporting).
In the first period, firms foresee their profit-shifting strategies and invest across countries
to maximize a combination of economic and profit-shifting incentives. Substituting the optimal
profit-shifting strategies into the objective function and rearranging, we obtain:


X
X
(t̃ − tj )2
max
[(1 − tj )fj (Kj ) − ρKj ] +a
Kj (1 − tj )(t̃ − tj ) −
.
{Kj }
2
j
j
|
{z
}
{z
}
|

(1)

Net Benefit from Profit Shifting

Economic Incentives

Firms’ optimal investment plans trade off economic and profit-shifting incentives in Equation 1.
This tradeoff includes the “avoidance-facilitating effect” (Slemrod and Gillitzer, 2013) whereby
real activity in a given country enables profit shifting. In addition, the firm takes into account
how its capital allocation affects the capital-weighted average tax, t̃.
Proposition 2 (Profit Shifting Lowers the User Cost of Capital (UCC)). Profit shifting (weakly)
lowers the UCC in all countries. The decline is largest in countries with tax rates that are most
different from t̃. UCCs can be observed from the first-order condition of Equation 1:
a(t̃ − tj )2
≡ ρ̃ ≤ ρ.
(1 −
=ρ−
2
The effective cost of capital ρ̃, which Grubert and Slemrod (1998) call the “income shifting
tj )fj0 (Kj )

adjusted user cost of capital,” is reduced by the net marginal benefit from profit shifting.28 Panel
27

As in Huizinga and Laeven (2008), misreporting for a given firm depends on its capital-weighted mean tax, t̃.
a(t̃−tj )2
(r −f¯ )2
Given the quadratic misreporting costs in the model, the net marginal benefit is given by:
= j 2a j .
2
Gordon and Hines (2002) discuss a similar expression in their presentation of Hines and Rice (1994). See also
Overesch (2009) and Mintz and Smart (2004). Note that this result relies on the assumption that the production function does not exhibit complementarities across countries. Since employment in Puerto Rican affiliates
accounted for about 1.6% of employment in §936 firms, we view this as an innocuous simplifying assumption in
this application. See Desai et al. (2009) and Becker and Riedel (2012) for models with such complementarities.
28

11

B in Figure 2 describes the intuition of this result. Without profit shifting, the firm sets capital
so that the after-tax marginal product of capital equals the cost of equity ρN P S (dotted line).
When firms can shift profits, the income-shifting adjusted user cost of capital ρ̃0 (dashed line) is
below ρN P S , which results in a higher level of investment Kj0 > KjN P S .
While Proposition 2 shows profit shifting lowers the effective cost of capital in all countries,
the mechanism for this effect is different across high- and low-tax countries. Affiliates in high-tax
countries know the returns from investment will be partly shifted to tax havens, which lowers the
required return on investment. Multinationals have an incentive to invest in tax havens as real
investment lowers the cost of profit shifting. When a country increases its tax rate, tax havens
see additional investment as the higher tax rate increases the returns from profit shifting. In
contrast, high-tax countries see a decrease in investment as the returns from investment will now
be taxed at a higher rate. The main result of the model formalizes this intuition by characterizing
which countries are tax complements and tax substitutes with tax havens.
Proposition 3 (Profit Shifting Generates Tax Complements and Substitutes).
• Investment in high-tax countries (tj > t̃) is decreasing in ti for all j 6= i;
• Investment in low-tax countries (tj < t̃) is increasing in ti for all j 6= i; and, formally,



∂Kj
= sign t̃ − tj .
sign
∂ti
To clarify the intuition behind Proposition 3, note that the repeal of §936 can be viewed as
Puerto Rico introducing a corporate tax, tP R . Differentiating the expression in Proposition 2,
we see that repealing §936 would increase the effective cost of capital and reduce US investment:
∂ t̃
a(t̃ − tU S )
rU S − f¯U S
∂ t̃
∂KU S
=
=
< 0 ⇔ rU S < f¯U S .
00
00
∂tP R
−fU S (1 − tU S ) ∂tP R
−fU S (1 − tU S ) ∂tP R
| {z }
| {z }
>0

>0

In Appendix D, we show that increasing tP R raises the firm’s average rate t̃ even after firms
reallocate capital across countries. The second equality substitutes the optimal profit-shifting
rule from Proposition 1, which shows that repealing §936 would lower US investment as long as
profits are under-reported in the US, rU S < f¯U S . We show this graphically in Panel B of Figure
2, where the dot-dashed line shows that a tax increase in a tax haven raises the cost of investing
in a high-tax country, ρ̃1 , which lowers domestic investment: Kj0 > Kj1 > KjN P S .
Proposition 4 (Profit Shifting and Labor Demand). Suppose production depends on capital and
labor and that capital complements labor in country j. Then:
• Employment in high-tax countries (tj > t̃) is decreasing in ti ∀j 6= i;
12

• Employment in low-tax countries (tj < t̃) is increasing in ti ∀j 6= i; and, formally,




∂Lj
∂ 2 fj (Kj , Lj )
sign
= sign (t̃ − tj ) ×
.
∂ti
∂Kj ∂Lj
Proposition 4 shows that when labor and capital are complements, the tax complementarities
in Proposition 3 also extend to the labor market. Panel C of Figure 2 shows the effects of profit
shifting on the labor market. Since capital and labor are complements, labor demand depends
on the cost of capital (LD (w, ρ)), and it shifts outward when firms can shift profits to tax havens:
LD (w, ρ̃1 ) > LD (w, ρN P S ). Conversely, labor demand shifts inward when there is a tax increase
in the low-tax country: LD (w, ρ̃0 ) < LD (w, ρ̃1 ). This figure shows that there is more domestic
employment when tax havens reduce the effective cost of capital: EjN P S < Ej1 < Ej0 .
Overall, the model shows that profit shifting to tax havens complements economic activity
in high-tax countries and has the following empirical predictions for the repeal of §936:
Empirical Predictions. Assuming the US is a high-tax country, t̃ ≤ tU S , and that capital
complements labor in the US, repealing §936 would:
• Decrease profit shifting toward Puerto Rico and increase reported profitability in the US;
• Lower global investment and employment for exposed firms; and
• Shift investment and employment from the US toward low-tax countries.
While most of the literature focuses on the first empirical prediction, the contribution of this
paper is to provide empirical evidence that profit shifting has real effects on the economy by
using variation from §936 to test the last two predictions of the model.29

4

Measuring Exposure to §936

This section summarizes the data we use to test the predictions of the model and to quantify
the effects of the repeal of §936 on local labor markets. Appendix A provides further details.

4.1

Firm-Level Exposure and Outcomes

We measure firm-level exposure to §936 using the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS,
Walls & Associates, 2012), which links the universe of US establishments to firm headquarters.
There are 682 US firms that had establishments in Puerto Rico in 1995 and that could have
benefited from §936. These firms had broad networks of establishments and many employees.
29

OECD (2018) confirms the US was a high-tax country in 1996. We do not test the first model prediction
as we cannot measure affiliate-level profitability in our data. Appendix D discusses extensions of the model and
shows that Propositions 1-4 are robust to allowing for heterogeneous costs of profit shifting across countries.

13

In Appendix A, we validate this measure of exposure by showing that it is close to estimates of
take-up of §936 based on tax data and that it identifies firms with similar characteristics to §936
firms. As we discuss below, we conduct a number of tests to ensure that our results are robust
to our definition of exposure.
We use data from Compustat (Capital IQ, 1980-2014) on firm-level (global) investment.30
In 1995, §936 firms were responsible for 16.1% of all capital investment reported by Compustat
firms.31 We also use the geographic segments variables to analyze whether repealing §936 led to
offshoring of investment as predicted in our model in Section 3. While these data allow us to
measure the effects of repealing §936 on offshoring of investment, one drawback of these data is
that the fraction of firms with missing observations is higher than in the overall investment data
series.32 Compustat data on taxes paid also allow us to study the effects of repealing §936 on
effective tax rates. Following Dyreng et al. (2017), we define effective tax rates (ETRs) as federal
taxes paid divided by global pretax income. This definition ensures that changes in ETRs are
not driven by where firms report their income. As in Figure 1, §936 firms had an average ETR
of 26% in Compustat data.33
We complement the firm-level analysis by using data from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (1997, ASM) to measure the effects of repealing §936 on investment at the state-industry
level. These data measure investment in US plants owned by both public and private firms. The
relative benefit of using these data over the geographic segments data is that they avoid issues
of missing values as well as potential reporting issues related to FASB (1997).

4.2

Geographic Exposure and Outcomes

To assess the effects of the repeal of §936 on local labor markets, we create a geographic measure
of exposure. We begin by linking the exposed firms to their network of establishments in the
US. Our measure of exposure is the fraction of establishments in each US county that belongs to
firms that were exposed to §936. Figure 3 plots the distribution of this measure across the US.
Panel A shows that labor market exposure varies from 0% to 5%. Panel B shows that there is
30

We merge the list of exposed firms by name, confirm and extend the merge manually, and further crawl the
SEC’s EDGAR database to confirm that we include all firms related to Puerto Rico or §936. There are 219
exposed firms in Compustat, which are responsible for 69.5% of the total employment of §936 firms. Grubert and
Slemrod (1998) note that in their data, 96% of the tax credits were claimed by 214 firms.
31
We restrict our data to firms with at least three observations before and after the repeal of §936. Our sample
starts after 1990 to avoid missing data problems in earlier years. To avoid outliers, we winsorize investment-tocapital ratios at the 5% level.
32
Geographic segments data divide global investment into US and foreign segments. It is generally not possible
to separate investment by individual countries. To avoid potential issues related to changes in reporting due to
FASB (1997), we include non-identified segments in the foreign category and we restrict the sample to firms that
report foreign segments three years prior and three years after the repeal.
33
To avoid negative ETRs, our analyses on ETRs restrict estimation samples to firms with non-negligible pretax
income. Appendix A provides additional detail on data sources, and Table A.2 reports summary statistics.

14

substantial variation across counties within a given state by plotting a standardized measure of
exposure that subtracts state averages and divides by the national standard deviation.
Figure 3 shows that the regional exposure to §936 is not geographically clustered. Nonetheless,
one may be concerned that exposure to §936 is correlated with demographic characteristics,
industrial compositions, state policies, or other economic shocks that may confound the effect
of §936. Figure 4 shows that exposure to §936 is generally not correlated with minimum wages
and right-to-work laws (Valletta and Freeman, 1988; Meer and West, 2016); state taxes and
tax revenues (Suárez Serrato and Zidar, 2017); R&D tax credits (Wilson, 2009); exposure to
competition through trade with China (Autor et al., 2016) and NAFTA (Hakobyan and McLaren,
2016); the share of routine labor (Autor and Dorn, 2013); demographic and industry employment
(US Census); or capital stocks (BEA). The only statistically significant correlation is a positive
one with the fraction of workers with a college education (Table A.4 reports these correlations).
In Section 6, we confirm that our results are robust to controlling for these potential confounders.
In addition to the baseline measure of exposure in Figure 3, we show our results are robust
to using alternative measures of exposure. While our main measure of exposure is based on the
fraction of establishments in exposed firms, we show similar results when we use a measure of
exposure based on the fraction of workers in exposed firms.34 We also find similar results when
we study different geographical levels of aggregation including commuting zones and conspumas,
when we define the shock two additional years before the repeal of §936, and when we focus on
exposure to public firms and those with very high employment.35
Our main dataset on labor market outcomes is the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW, 2017). These data are constructed mostly from administrative sources, with
unemployment insurance systems providing highly reliable data on employment and earnings.
These data are available at the 3-digit-NAICS industry-by-county level. This is important for our
study since it allows us to control for industry-by-year fixed effects, which rule out the concern
that §936 firms faced industry-specific shocks that may confound the effect of repealing §936.
We use three additional datasets on labor market outcomes at the county level. First, we
use BEA data on personal employment and income, which include other forms of employment
and income, including proprietor’s income (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2018). Second, we use
data from IRS tabulations at the county level on the number of filers and total taxable income
34

Barnatchez et al. (2017) evaluate the properties of the NETS data. They show the NETS measures firm-level
employment and establishment location very well, but that establishment-level employment is imputed for some
firms. Figure A.2 compares the establishment- and employment-based measures of exposure. These metrics are
highly correlated. Table A.3 displays the counties with the largest and smallest exposure for both measures.
For this reason–to avoid problems related to imputation of establishment-level employment–our main measure of
exposure is the fraction of exposed establishments in industries that were major users of §936.
35
Figure A.3 plots the exposure to §936 for counties, states, commuting zones, and conspumas. The conspuma
level is an aggregation of counties that respects state boundaries and is the smallest consistently identifiable
geographic unit that can be traced between the 1980 and 2010 US Censuses.

15

(IRS, 2017b). Third, we use data from the BEA on public transfers, such as unemployment
insurance payments. While the BEA and IRS data have broader definitions of income, they are
not available at the industry-county level.
Finally, we use data from the 1980–2000 US Censuses and the 2009 American Community
Survey (Ruggles et al., 2010) to construct average wage rates at the conspuma-decade level that
control for changes in workers’ demographic characteristics. We construct these measures for all
workers and for workers with and without a four-year college education. We also use these data
to construct indexes of rental costs and home values.
These different datasets allow us to measure the exposure to §936 for firms and local labor
markets, how exposed firms may have responded by adjusting employment and investment, and
how these responses affected local labor markets.

5

Firm-Level Effects of Repealing §936

This section tests the predictions of the model and shows that exposed firms responded to the
repeal of §936 by adjusting the scale and location of their investment and employment.

5.1

Effects of Repealing §936 on Firm Investment

We begin by showing that the repeal of §936 led to a decline in the investment of exposed firms.
We use data from Compustat to estimate the following regression:
Ict
Kc,1990−1995
where

Ict
Kc,1990−1995

= γt + β t Exposure §936c + Xit0 Γ + εict ,

(2)

is the ratio of capital investment to the pre-reform capital of the firm, and where

we allow the firm-level indicator of Exposure §936c to have year-specific effects, β t . We control for
firm size in Xit and cluster εict at the firm level. The identifying assumption of this regression is
that firms that took advantage of §936 were not on a differential trend from other firms and that
exposed firms were not subject to other shocks or policy changes that coincided with the repeal
§936.36 Figure 5 reports the results of this regression with 95% confidence intervals. Exposed
36

While the assumption that exposed firms were not affected by unobserved, time-varying shocks that coincide
with the repeal of §936 is fundamentally untestable, there are no other tax reforms that could confound the
effect of §936. For instance, the 2003 dividend tax cut studied by Yagan (2015) affects all of the firms in the
sample equally since they are all C-corporations. Similarly, periods of bonus depreciation in 2001 and 2008 have
differential effects across industries that rely on assets with different tax lives, as studied by Zwick and Mahon
(2017). We rule this out by comparing exposed firms to control firms in similar industries and by including
sector-by-year fixed effects. Finally, other changes such as the adoption of “check-the-box” regulations by the
IRS in 1997 would not confound the effect of §936. “Check-the-box” allows multinationals to avoid paying foreign
taxes by limiting Subpart F regulations on income transferred between related closely held corporations. Since
these transactions are between affiliates in third-party countries and tax havens, they would not interact with
§936, and they would not differentially affect §936 firms.

16

and non-exposed firms had similar trends in investment before the repeal of §936. After the
reform, exposed firms saw a decline in investment relative to control firms.37
Table 2 reports the average effect of exposure after the repeal and shows that the decline
in investment is robust across a number of specifications. Columns (2) and (3) show that this
result is not affected by including sector-by-year fixed effects or firm fixed effects. Columns
(1)–(3) imply that, by 2006, §936 firms reduced investment by 9.9–11.1% relative to other firms.
Column (4) restricts the sample to firms in sectors that were major users of §936, and column
(5) further restricts the sample to firms in the main industries that used §936.38 Finally, the last
column of Table 2 follows Yagan (2015) by using the methods of DiNardo et al. (1996, DFL,
henceforth) to weight observations so that exposed and unexposed firms have similar observable
characteristics.39 Columns (4)–(6) show that firms that were heavy users of §936 experienced
larger investment declines of 14–18.7%. These estimates confirm the model prediction that firms
respond to limits on profit shifting by lowering their investment.40
The results of Table 2 are comparable to previous estimates of the effects of corporate taxes
on investment. de Mooij and Ederveen (2008) conduct a meta-analysis of studies that analyze
the effects of corporate taxes on investment and find a median semi-elasticity of investment of
2.9 with respect to the tax rate. Given our calculations in Section 2 that §936 raised ETRs by
4.65–6pp, the median estimate from de Mooij and Ederveen (2008) would predict a decline in
investment of 13.5–17.4%, which is consistent with the upper range of our estimates.
To allow further interpretation of our estimates, Table 2 compares the percentage change in
investment to the change in ETRs using data from IRS (2017a). For column (3), the estimated
increase in ETR of 5.73pp implies a semi-elasticity of investment of 1.77. Columns (5)–(6) imply
semi-elasticities of 2.33–3.11 for the firms that were most exposed to §936. As an alternative
approach to quantifying the responsiveness of investment to tax changes, we use Compustat data
to measure the effect of the reform on ETRs. Table 3 shows that relative to non-exposed firms,
the post-reform ETRs of exposed firms increased by 3.5pp for all firms (column 3) and by 5.4pp
for the most affected firms (column 6).41 Together with estimates from Table 2, these data imply
37

Figure A.4 plots average investment rates. This graph is consistent with panel C of Figure 1, since unexposed
firms see a decline in ETRs and an increase in investment. In contrast, exposed firms have a flat ETR and a more
moderate growth in investment. The relatively slower growth in investment rates for exposed firms results in the
negative β t coefficients for Equation 2 displayed in Figure 5.
38
We define major sectors and industries as in Section 2 (footnote 18) to match data from IRS (2017a).
39
As in Yagan (2015), these weights ensure that exposed and control firms receive equal weight across 3-digit
industries and 20 bins of firm size. Appendix A.4 discusses the construction of these weights in detail.
40
The results in Table 2 are robust to using alternative measures of investment or controls. We obtain similar
results when the dependent variable is the percentage change in investment (Table A.5 and Figure A.5) or when
the investment-to-capital ratio is winsorized at the 1% level instead of the 5% level (Table A.6 and Figure A.6).
Table A.7 shows that we obtain similar results when we use different controls for firm size or 3-digit NAICS-by-year
fixed effects. Finally, Figure A.7 shows similar investment trends using other specifications in Table 2.
41
Because the denominator in the ETR is global income, the effects in Table 3 are lower bounds on the ETR
on domestic profits. In Table A.8, we approximate the share of income that originates in the US using data on

17

semi-elasticities of 2.89 (column 3) and 2.59 (column 6).42 By both accounts, the changes in
ETRs imply elasticities that are comparable to the median value from de Mooij and Ederveen
(2008). These semi-elasticities are also in the lower range of estimates from more recent papers.
For example, Zwick and Mahon (2017) find a semi-elasticity of 3.7 when studying depreciation
deductions, Ohrn (2018) estimates a semi-elasticity of 4.7 in response to tax breaks for domestic
manufacturing, Moon (2019) finds a semi-elasticity of 3.7 with respect to the capital gains tax
rate in Korea, and Chen et al. (2019) estimate a semi-elasticity of 3.2 for Chinese firms.
We now test the model’s prediction that, in addition to lowering investment, exposed firms
would decrease domestic investment relative to investment in other low-tax affiliates. We use two
complementary strategies to test this prediction. First, we use geographic segments data from
Compustat to show that §936 firms shifted investment to foreign affiliates. We follow Rao (2015)
by analyzing the effects of the repeal on the share of foreign investment, ForInvSharect =

F
Ict
F
US
Ict +Ict

,

and we estimate the following specification:
ForInvSharect − ForInvSharec1995
= γt + β t Exposure §936c + Xit0 Γ + εict .
ForInvSharec1995

(3)

Figure 6 reports the results of this specification. This figure shows that exposed and non-exposed
firms were on a similar trend before the repeal of §936 and that, consistent with the model,
exposed firms increased the share of investment conducted abroad after the reform.
Table 4 quantifies the size of this effect using similar specifications as in Table 2.43 Column (3)
shows that the foreign investment share increased by 12.3%, and column (6) shows an increase of
15.1% for the most affected firms. Since the average of ForInvSharec1995 was about 43pp, columns
(3) and (6) imply an increase of 5.3–6.5pp to about 48.3–49.5pp. Using the evidence in Figures
5-6, we can estimate the decrease in US investment. The combined effect of the decrease in
global investment and the shift to foreign investment implies a decrease in domestic investment
by exposed firms of 19.3–25.7%.44
the (fixed) share of US revenue multiplied by global income as the denominator. This approximates the ETR on
domestic profits and—as in Table 3—is not sensitive to where firms report profits. This table shows that §936
increased ETRs on US income by 4.6pp for all firms (column 3) and by 7.2pp for the most affected firms (column
6). Table A.9 shows that the point estimates of Table 3 are robust to including foreign taxes in the ETR.
42
While we obtain quantitatively similar semi-elasticities using aggregate and firm-level data, there are several
benefits to relying on aggregate data for our baseline. First, as noted by Gruber and Rauh (2007), financial
statement data and tax data can differ substantially. Dyreng et al. (2017) discuss other limitations of using
financial statement data to measure ETRs. Second, Compustat data show patterns of sticky reporting of taxes
over time. Third, to obtain well-behaved ETRs, we need to restrict the analysis to firms with non-negligible
profits. Finally, because multinational corporations can inter-temporally optimize their tax liabilities by not
repatriating income or by deferring certain credits, changes to tax payments in financial statement data may not
line up with when companies respond to tax incentives. Thus, while Figure A.8 presents an event study on ETRs
from Compustat, we rely on Figure 1 as the baseline picture describing the impact on the ETRs of exposed firms.
43
Since the percentage change specification absorbs the firm fixed effect, column (2) controls for industry fixed
effects. Table A.5 shows that we obtain similar effects on investment when we use this specification.
ForInvShare
44
The percentage change in domestic investment is β Inv −β ForInvShare × 1−ForInvShare
, where β Inv and β ForInvShare
come from Tables 2 and 4, respectively.

18

As a complementary strategy to measure the effects on domestic investment, we use data
from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. Because these data are available at the industry-year
level, we generate a measure of exposure to §936 by collapsing the data in Figure 3 to estimate
the following specification:
CAPXist − CAPXis1995
= αi + γt + β t Exposure §936is + εist .
CAPXis1995

(4)

We include industry and year fixed effects and allow for arbitrary correlation of standard errors
at the state level. The continuous exposure measure is fixed in 1995, but we allow the effects of
exposure to §936 to vary over time by estimating the year-specific coefficients β t . We normalize
the exposure measure by its inter-quartile range (IQR), so the interpretation of β t is the effect of
increasing exposure to §936 from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of the distribution.
The identifying assumption of Equation 4 is that exposure to §936 is not correlated with other
trends or omitted variables that may also affect capital investment. Figure 7 plots the results of
this estimation and shows that Exposure §936is is not correlated with investment growth prior to
the reform. Following the reform, however, we see a persistent decline in the flow of investment.
Table 5 reports the average effect of Exposure §936is by pooling the years after the repeal.
This table shows that the decline in investment is robust to including state fixed effects, stateby-industry fixed effects, year-by-industry fixed effects, and year-by-state trends. These specifications show that the effects of Exposure §936is are not driven by trends at the industry or
state level that are somehow correlated with investment patterns. The last column in Table 5
suggests that going from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution results in a decline
in investment of 66% of the capital expenditures in 1995.45
The results of Figures 5-7 provide compelling evidence that investment responded to the
repeal of §936. One notable feature of these graphs is that investment responds very quickly. This
dynamic is consistent with the forward-looking nature of investment decisions (e.g., Auerbach
and Hines, 1987). Thus, even though the tax credits were phased out over time, firms adjust
investment immediately if they expect that they will not be able to shift their profits in the
future.46 Additionally, even though Figures 5–7 show a sharp decrease in the flow of investment,
the stock of capital decreases gradually and more smoothly. Relative to a steady state where
investment replaces depreciating capital, a decrease in investment allows the stock of capital to
adjust over time to its new long-run level.47
These results show that efforts to limits profit shifting—such as the repeal of §936—can
45

Since the mean CAPXis1995 was about $349,000, this effect represents a decline of about $230,000.
Consistent with this view, we show in Garrett and Suárez Serrato (2019) and Appendix C that exposed firms
experienced a decrease in value following the repeal of §936.
47
We discuss numerical examples in Figure A.9 and Appendix E. For example, for capital assets with an
economic depreciation rate of 0.069—as in the case of industrial machinery—a 25.7% reduction in investment
would result in a 13.2% reduction in the capital stock over 10 years.
46

19

increase the cost of domestic investment and cause multinational firms to reduce their domestic
investment or to shift investment abroad.

5.2

Effects of Repealing §936 on Firm Employment

This section tests the model prediction that exposed firms would reduce their employment in
the US in response to an increase in the income-shifted adjusted cost of capital. We test this
hypothesis using data from NETS on the domestic employment of firms exposed to §936. As
discussed in Section 4, we have data on 682 firms that had an establishment in Puerto Rico
before the repeal of §936. We match these firms to firms that were not exposed to §936 but that
operated in the same industry, were headquartered in the same Census region, and had a similar
number of employees and establishments in 1995.48
We measure the effect of the repeal of §936 on the US employment of exposed firms by
estimating the following regression:
Empct − Empc1995
= γt + β t Exposure §936c + εct ,
Empc1995

(5)

where the exposure measure is a firm-level indicator, we control for year fixed effects, and the
standard errors are clustered at the firm level.49 The identifying assumption is that firms with
exposure to §936 had similar trends to the matched control firms. Figure 8 presents estimates
of this regression and shows a lack of differential pre-trends between exposed and control firms.
The figure also shows that exposed firms gradually reduced employment during the phase-out of
§936. As discussed in the previous section, while investment responded shortly after the repeal,
capital stocks likely declined over time. The dynamics in Figure 8 are consistent with a decline
in employment that matches the gradual decline in capital stocks.50
Figure 8 shows that exposed firms saw a relative decrease in employment of 6.7% by 2006.51
One way to grasp the magnitude of this effect is to compare the change in employment to the
change in investment using our merged Compustat-NETS data. The data show that a 1% increase
in capital expenditures is associated with a 0.39% increase in US employment (Figure A.12). The
10–18.7% reduction in capital expenditures from Table 2 would then be consistent with a 3.9–
7.3% decrease in employment, which brackets the estimate from Figure 8. In contrast to the
effect of corporate taxes on investment, there is scant evidence on how corporate taxes affect
48

See Appendix A.3 for details of the matching procedure used to identify the control firms.
Because the dependent variable is the firm-level change in employment, this regression absorbs firm fixed
effects. Figure A.10 and Table A.10 report similar effects across the specifications used in other tables.
50
In Figure A.11, we plot a figure similar to Figure 8 except that the dependent variable is the change in
the number of US establishments. This figure shows that the change in US establishments lagged that of US
employment. This is consistent with a dynamic where downsizing firms first lay off workers across locations and
then incur the fixed costs of consolidating establishments.
51
Table A.11 shows the employment decline was concentrated in industries that were heavy users of §936 (e.g.,
chemicals and electronic device manufacturing).
49

20

labor demand.52 The repeal of §936 provides a valuable opportunity to estimate this important
parameter. Compared to the tax increase of 4.65–6pp, the 6.7% reduction in employment implies
a labor semi-elasticity between 1.2 and 1.44 over a 10-year period.
These results confirm the model prediction that limiting profit shifting can incentivize US
multinationals to reduce domestic employment.

Effects of Repealing §936 on Local Labor Markets

6

We now study whether the firm-level responses to §936 documented in the previous section also
affected the communities exposed to §936 firms. This approach has three main benefits. First,
spatial variation in exposure to §936 provides an alternative identification strategy to measure
the effects of repealing §936. By comparing outcomes across local labor markets that differed
in their exposure to the network of establishments of §936 firms, we can measure the effects of
repealing §936 without relying on firm-level comparisons. A second benefit of this approach is
that it allows us to measure whether firm-level responses are absorbed or amplified within local
labor markets. Finally, this approach also allows us to characterize the broader impacts of tax
policy, including effects on housing markets and transfers from the government.

6.1

Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment Growth

We now use the geographic measure of exposure to §936 in Figure 3, Exposure §936c , to estimate
the relative effect of the repeal of §936 on employment growth at the industry-county level.53
Our main outcome of interest is the employment growth between 1995 and a given year t:
Empict − Empic1995
,
Empic1995
where the unit of observation is employment at the industry (i), county (c), year (t) level. Figure
9 provides a non-parametric comparison of places with different degrees of exposure by plotting
the average employment growth for counties in the top and bottom terciles of Exposure §936c .
This figure shows that while county-industries in the top and bottom terciles of Exposure §936c
had similar trends before 1995, more exposed counties (top tercile) grew relatively more slowly
after the repeal of §936. By the end of the phase-out in 2006, places in the bottom tercile (low
exposure) experienced employment growth above 20% relative to 1995, while places in the top
tercile (high exposure) had an average growth rate below 10%.
We build on Figure 9 by estimating a regression model that separates the effects of §936 from
52

One exception is Bilicka et al. (2019), who estimate a labor semi-elasticity of 2.5.
As discussed in Section 4, Exposure §936c is the fraction of the county’s establishments that could have taken
advantage of §936 in 1995.
53

21

time trends. Consider the following regression:
Empict − Empic1995
= αic + γit + β t Exposure §936c + εict .
Empic1995

(6)

This regression includes industry-year fixed effects, γit , and industry-county fixed effects, αic .
Since industry-county pairs vary in the number of jobs they represent, we weight these regressions by the share of national employment in each industry-county in 1995. The variable Exposure §936c is normalized to allow interpretation of β t as the effect of increasing the
Exposure §936c from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution. Finally, the standard
errors are clustered to allow for two-way arbitrary correlations at both the state and industry
levels.
Panel A of Figure 10 shows estimates of β t for t = 1990, · · · , 2012. The main result is that
more exposed counties saw slower employment growth starting with the repeal of §936. This
decline in employment growth persisted even after the end of the phase-out. For 2006, the graph
shows that increasing the exposure to §936 from the 25th to the 75th percentile would decrease
employment growth by 7.8pp. The decline in employment growth stabilizes after the full phaseout of §936 in 2006.54 Panel B of Figure 10 plots the fitted values of this regression for different
levels of exposure. This figure shows that going from almost zero exposure (5th percentile) to
the mean level of exposure would decrease employment growth by 7pp from about 23% to 16%
in 2006, which is a change in employment growth of about 30% (≈

7
).
23

This graph provides

compelling evidence that networks of establishments can propagate the effects of fiscal policy
and have persistent effects on regional employment.

6.2

Robustness Checks and Placebo Tests

The identifying assumption of Equation 6 is that Exposure §936c is independent of time-varying
shocks that could explain the pattern in Figure 10. This section presents evidence that severely
limits the likelihood that this assumption is violated in the data.
A useful check of the validity of this research design is to test for trends in employment
growth prior to the repeal of §936. Panel A of Figure 10 shows that prior to the repeal of §936,
exposure to §936 is not predictive of employment growth, which is consistent with the differencein-differences assumption. Table 6 presents alternative specifications of this regression. The
first column includes industry-by-year fixed effects, which ensures that the results are not driven
by differential exposure to industries that are growing or declining during this time period.
The second column adds county fixed effects. Column (3) includes county-by-industry fixed
54

Notably, the graph is relatively stable during Puerto Rico’s debt crisis, which started in 2006. The fact that the
effects stabilize after 2006 also rules out other policy changes that could be potential confounders. Specifically,
the hypothesis that “check-the-box” regulations that were adopted in 1997 are responsible for these effects is
inconsistent with this dynamic pattern since profit shifting under check-the-box continued to grow between 2006
and 2012 (e.g., Wright and Zucman, 2018).

22

effects, which ensure that the estimated β t s are not confounded by differential growth rates in
employment at the industry-county level. Columns (4)–(5) explore the robustness of the results
to using alternative weights. In Column (4), we winsorize the weights to limit the influence of
large counties on the results. In Column (5), we drop county-industries with less than 1000
employees in 1995. The pattern of results is consistent across these specifications.
These results are robust to using alternative geographic definitions of local labor markets and
data sources. Panel A of Figure 11 plots the last two columns of Table 6, which show that we
obtain similar results when we study employment at the conspuma or commuting zone level.
These results rule out the concern that our main results are driven by very local geographic
spillovers. Table 8 summarizes these results by estimating the effect for the years 1990–1995 and
2004–2008. The first row of results shows that we obtain similar estimates at the conspuma or
commuting zone level and when we use data on employment from the IRS or the BEA.55 The last
columns of Table 8 report effects on income growth. Consistent with the effects on employment,
we also find that more exposed areas have slower income growth and that this result is robust
across different data sources and different definitions of local labor markets.56
As we discuss in Section 4, our main measure of exposure to §936 is based on the fraction of
establishments in a county that could have taken advantage of §936. Panel B of Figure 11 shows
the results of an estimation where we measure Exposure §936c as the fraction of the county’s
employment that could have benefited from §936 in 1995. To avoid bias from measurement error,
we instrument exposure to §936 with our establishment-based measure of exposure. This figure
and column (1) of Table 7 show that we obtain similar results when we use the employment-based
measure of exposure.57
The results in Figure 10 are also robust to using alternative measures of exposure to §936. The
first alternative measure excludes large retailers that are likely located in most counties in the
US and Puerto Rico. A second alternative measure excludes firms with uncertain headquarters
locations. Panel B of Figure 11 and columns (2)–(4) of Table 7 show that we obtain similar
results when we use these measures of exposure. These results rule out the concern that our
main results are driven by secular trends in the retail industry or by errors in the coding of the
headquarters location. Because §936 credits were concentrated on a small number of large firms
(Joint Committee on Taxation, 2006), we now explore whether the results are robust to focusing
on exposure to large firms. In panel B of Figure 11, we obtain similar results when exposure is
defined to include only firms in Compustat. Panel C of Figure 11 shows similar results when we
restrict exposure to firms with more than 50,000 employees. Finally, panel C also shows that
55

Since IRS and BEA data are not available at the country-industry level, we only control for year fixed effects.
Note that the definitions of income vary across data sources. While QCEW data report wage earnings, BEA
data include proprietor’s income, and IRS data correspond to total adjusted gross income in a county. These
differences may explain the larger effects on income growth in IRS and BEA data.
57
Table A.12 provides additional estimates using the employment measure of exposure.
56

23

our results are robust to defining exposure at two years prior to the repeal of §936. We do this
in two ways. We first use firms that had an establishment in Puerto Rico in 1993 to construct
a measure of exposure. We then construct an additional measure that only uses firms that had
employment in Puerto Rico in both 1993 and 1995. These results show that our results are not
sensitive to how we construct the measure of exposure.58
We also explore the robustness of these results to using alternative measures of employment
growth. If workers left counties that saw declines in employment after the repeal of §936, we
might see no effects on the employment to population ratio. Panel A of Figure 11 (column (5) of
Table 7) shows results when the dependent variable is the percentage change in the employment
to working age population ratio, which shows similar if slightly smaller effects. This suggests
that, while some workers do relocate in response to the shock, local workers are affected by
the repeal of §936, since the effect on per-capita employment sees a significant decline (e.g.,
Yagan, 2017). Column (6) focuses on the ratio of manufacturing employment to the working age
population, as in Autor et al. (2013), and finds slightly larger effects. Finally, panel C of Figure
11 shows that our results are robust to also including state-specific trends.59
We now rule out the concern that our results are driven by exposure to firms with certain
characteristics by conducting placebo tests that isolate potential confounding channels. One
concern is that our results are driven by exposure to large firms that may have already been in
decline. In Panel A of Figure 12, we use the set of control firms in Section 6.1 to generate a
“fake shock.” Since these firms have a similar size, are headquartered in a similar location, and
have similar industrial characteristics, this test rules out that our exposure measure is picking up
employment trends in large firms that had similar characteristics as exposed firms. Since a large
fraction of §936 tax credits were claimed by the pharmaceutical industry, a second concern is that
the exposure measure is picking up industry-specific trends that are not related to §936. Panel
B of Figure 12 defines exposure as the fraction of employment in the pharmaceutical industry
and shows that this is not the case. Both of these “placebo tests” show that these alternative
mechanisms are not driving our main result.60
In our final robustness check, we explore the possibility that the exposure to §936 is correlated
58

The estimates used to plot these graphs are presented in the Appendix. Table A.13 provides estimates for the
measure that drops retailers, Table A.14 provides estimates for the measure that drops firms with an uncertain
headquarters location, and Table A.15 provides estimates for the measure that relies solely on Compustat firms.
Figure A.15 and Table A.16 show that results using the exposure of large firms are robust to using different cutoffs
to define large firms. Table A.17 reports results using the 1993 networks of firms to define exposure. Table A.18
defines exposure using firms with operations in Puerto Rico in both 1993 and 1995.
59
We obtain similar results when we use specifications close to those of Autor et al. (2013). Panel A of Figure
A.13 (Table A.19) plots the event study on manufacturing jobs per capita and panel B of Figure A.13 (Table
A.20) presents results on the level change in the ratio of manufacturing jobs to the working age population. Figure
A.14 and Table A.21 provide additional results controlling for state-specific trends.
60
Table A.22 provides estimates for the placebo test using the fraction of employment in the control firms. Table
A.23 provides estimates for the placebo test using the fraction of employment in the pharmaceutical industry.

24

with a shock that could confound the effects of the policy. Our base specification in column (3)
of Table 8 shows an effect in years 2004–2008 of -7.2%. Figure 13 plots this baseline result as
well as robustness checks that control for local incentives for job creation and worker training
(Bartik, 2017); right-to-work laws and minimum wage rates (Valletta and Freeman, 1988; Meer
and West, 2016); state R&D and investment tax credits (Wilson, 2009); state tax revenue and
state taxes for personal income, corporate income, sales and property (Suárez Serrato and Zidar,
2017); measures of exposure to trade from NAFTA and China (Autor et al., 2016; Hakobyan and
McLaren, 2016); and the share of routine workers (Autor and Dorn, 2013). The last specification
includes all controls and further controls for changes in the local firm size distribution.61
The litany of robustness checks and placebo tests in this section show that the effects of §936
on local labor markets are not confounded by other shocks, are not sensitive to how we measure
exposure to §936, and do not depend on the data we use to measure labor market outcomes.
These facts strongly support the conclusion that the local labor market results are caused by the
firm-level responses we document in Section 5.

6.3

Spillovers and Heterogeneous Effects of Repealing §936

The results from the previous section provide strong evidence that more exposed local labor
markets experienced a diminished rate of growth that persisted years after the repeal of §936. In
this section, we consider the role of local spillovers as a mechanism that can amplify firm-level
changes in employment. We might expect to find spillover effects if the reduction in economic
activity in §936 corporations reduced the demand for locally sourced material inputs, if it affected
the supply of inputs to competitors, or if the reduction in employment in §936 firms affected local
non-tradable sectors.
To compute an estimate of job spillovers, we first calculate the expected number of layoffs
in §936 firms in the county with the average level of exposure. Using the firm-level estimates
from Figure 8, we calculate that the average county experienced a loss of 283 jobs in §936
firms. We now compare this number to the total number of jobs lost in the county with the
average level of exposure. Using the average estimate between 2004 and 2008 from Table 8,
going from no exposure to the average level of exposure results in a loss of 1,293 jobs for the
average county. This implies that, for every layoff in §936 firms, the county also lost an additional
3.57 (≈

1,293−283
)
283
62

estimates.

jobs. Moretti (2010) studies local employment multipliers and finds similar

This suggests that the firm-level changes in employment and investment in §936 firms

61

We control for the percentage growth in establishments of different sizes in each location using data from
County Business Patterns (Census Bureau, 2018). Tables A.24–A.25 report the full results of these 18 regressions.
62
Moretti (2010) finds that when a local labor market loses a skilled job in the tradable sector, this results in
a loss of about 2.5 jobs in the non-tradable sector, in addition to about 0.26 jobs in the tradable sector. Moretti
(2010) reports considerable heterogeneity across industries, including a loss of 4.9 jobs in the non-tradable sector
for every layoff in the electronic manufacturing industry (which was represented among §936 firms).

25

were not absorbed by other firms in the same county and that these job losses had multiplier
effects for other workers in the local labor market.
An additional implication of the spillover hypothesis is that jobs in the tradable sector should
be the first to be affected by the repeal of §936. Moreover, as argued by Moretti (2010), we
would expect workers in tradable industries to be more mobile, so that the long-term effect on
tradable jobs should be smaller than that on service jobs. We test these hypotheses by estimating
heterogeneous effects of the repeal of §936 across sectors, as in Mian and Sufi (2014).63 Figure 14
tests these hypotheses and shows that tradable jobs were the first to decline and were followed by
a decline in non-tradable jobs and construction. In addition, the decline in tradable jobs is the
first to stabilize, while other sectors decline for a longer period of time.64 These results suggests
that local employment multipliers amplified the firm-level effects of the repeal of §936.

6.4

Effects of Repealing §936 on Wage Rates, Costs of Living, and
Government Transfers

We now study whether the repeal of §936 impacted local wage rates and costs of living. We use
data on wage rates and rental cost data from the Census. While these data are only available
every 10 years, they allow us to examine effects on skilled (college-educated) and non-skilled
workers and to adjust for changes in observable characteristics. We estimate regressions of the
form:
∆yc,t = αs + γt + βExposure§936c + εct ,
where ∆yc,t is the 10-year percentage change in wage rates, rental costs, or home values in a
given conspuma. These regressions include state and year fixed effects, and the standard errors
are clustered at the conspuma level.
Table 9 reports the results of estimating the parameter β as a stacked difference for the years
1990–2000 and 2000–2010. We find that more exposed conspumas saw a decline in wage growth
after the repeal of §936. Going from the 25th to the 75th percentile of exposure reduced wages
by 1.0%. Figure 15 plots these results and shows that exposure to §936 was not correlated with
wage growth before the repeal of §936.
The results of the previous section show that non-tradable employment faced a larger reduction in labor demand. If low-skilled workers are concentrated in non-tradable sectors, we would
expect to see a larger decrease in their wages. Column (3) of Table 9 shows that the wages of
63

Mian and Sufi (2014) show local shocks to demand were an important driver of the employment drop in the
great recession. We use their sectoral definitions and find evidence of a supply-side response to the repeal of §936.
64
Figure A.16 shows these estimates with confidence intervals, and Table A.26 provides more details. Note that
while the biggest decline is in construction, this sector usually experiences higher volatility. Moreover, while the
tradable sector declined by 10% nationally from 1995 to 2006, the construction industry grew overall by 49%.

26

low-skilled workers fall by 1.4%.65 Consistent with the broad decline in employment, income, and
wages, we also find reductions of 1.8% and 2.5% in rental costs and home values, respectively.
Finally, we consider the possibility that decreases in employment and income increased workers’ reliance on government transfers. Table 10 estimates a similar specification on government
transfers per capita at the county level using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2018).
Panel A shows the effects of an IQR increase in Exposure §936c on the percentage change in
transfers per capita relative to the 1995 level. We find that, in 2004–2008, compensation from
unemployment insurance increased by 25.7% for every IQR increase in exposure. We also find
an effect of 10.2% on transfers from income replacement programs.66 However, we do not find
significant changes for other forms of transfers, including retirement, disability, Medicare, and
public medical benefits. Panel B shows the effect of Exposure §936c on the dollar change in
transfers per capita relative to 1995. Since income replacement programs are larger than unemployment insurance programs, we see that an IQR increase in Exposure §936c would raise
income maintenance transfers by $30 per person and unemployment insurance transfers by $16
per person. Panel B also shows a positive effect of $6 per person in education benefits. This
effect is not statistically significant in Panel A. These results show that, while repealing §936
increased corporate tax revenue, the repeal also increased government expenditures in the form
of transfers to affected workers.
This section shows that regions that were exposed to §936 through the establishment networks
of multinational firms experienced slower growth after the repeal of §936. The regional effects
on employment suggest that firm-level shocks were not dissipated within local labor markets
and were instead amplified. The persistent effects of employment growth as well as the broader
impacts on wages, costs of living, and government transfers show that changes to the tax code
can have more geographically concentrated effects than previously thought.

7

Conclusion

This paper studies the repeal of §936 as a natural experiment that limited the ability of firms to
shift profits to affiliates in Puerto Rico. We use two complementary research strategies to test
theoretical predictions that limits to profit shifting raise the effective cost of capital and reduce
the domestic activities of exposed firms. Exploiting firm-level exposure to §936, we show that
exposed firms lowered their investment and employment in the US. The establishment networks
65
The larger decline in the wages of low-skilled workers is also consistent with relatively higher mobility costs.
Table A.27 provides estimates on wages and costs of living that do not adjust for observable characteristics.
66
According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2018), income replacement programs include Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP), welfare payments (Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), previously Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)), and nutrition programs for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). Table
A.28 shows that Exposure §936c is uncorrelated with growth in government transfers prior to the repeal.

27

of these firms give rise to spatial variation in exposure to §936. This variation reveals that firmlevel effects were amplified into persistent declines in employment growth for more exposed local
labor markets. Overall, we find that reducing the attractiveness of Puerto Rico as a tax haven
also reduced employment and investment in firms and regions exposed to §936.
The effects of the repeal on the domestic economy were unintended consequences for policymakers who did not consider these potential repercussions when repealing §936. Our analysis
shows that cost-benefit analyses of policies that aim to limit profit shifting should account for
these unintended consequences in addition to the intended consequences of raising tax revenue.
The persistent effects on local labor markets also suggest that policymakers should be particularly
mindful of the regional consequences of changes in tax policy.
When considering the lessons of this natural experiment, it is worth bearing in mind that
Puerto Rico was an especially desirable tax haven for US multinationals. This was primarily
because §936 allowed for the immediate repatriation of profits at an effective zero tax rate.
Tight cultural and institutional connections between the US and Puerto Rico also lowered the
cost of setting up and operating affiliates on the island, and these operations were essentially
condoned by the US Treasury. In a companion paper (Garrett and Suárez Serrato, 2019), we
study whether §936 corporations increased their exposure to other tax havens after the repeal.
Consistent with the view that firms did not have access to a tax haven with the same tax benefits
as those bestowed by §936, we do not find that firms expand to other tax havens. The decrease
in stock prices of §936 firms following the repeal also shows that investors viewed the repeal as
the loss of a unique tax haven (see Appendix C). While the lessons of any natural experiment
depend on the specific context, the repeal of §936 informs the international tax literature by
providing a valuable case study where limits to profit shifting significantly affect the operations
of multinational corporations.
Understanding the repeal of §936 as a case study that significantly limited profit shifting
informs the effects of potential reforms to the international tax system (e.g., Zucman, 2015;
Devereux et al., 2019). If firms are able to escape enforcement by substituting across methods
of profit shifting (e.g., Saunders-Scott, 2015; Bustos et al., 2019), we may not expect to see
real effects on economic activity. Following the hierarchy of behavioral responses to taxation
of Slemrod (1992, 2001), limits to profit shifting that cannot be averted through accounting or
financial responses may trigger real changes in investment and employment. While it is hard to
know which efforts will succeed in policing profit shifting, our results show that efforts that do
succeed at limiting profit shifting can also affect domestic employment and investment. We view
these results as motivation for researchers and practitioners to design policies that best balance
tax revenue gains with such unintended consequences on economic activity.

28

References
26 U.S.C. §936, “Tax Reform Act of 1976,” 1976. Tax Reform Act of 1976, Pub. L. 94-455, 90
stat. 1643, codified as amended at title 26 U.S.C. §936.
, “Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996,” 1996. Pub. L. 104-188, 110 stat. 1832, codified
as amended at title 26 U.S.C. §936.
Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo, “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
Markets,” Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2017.
Albertus, James F., “The Real Effects of U.S. Tax Arbitrage by Foreign Multinational Firms,”
SSRN (February 1, 2017). 2017.
Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, “Repatriation taxes, repatriation strategies and
multinational financial policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87 (1), 73 – 107. Proceedings of the Trans Atlantic Public Economics Seminar on “Taxation of Financial Incomet“
22-24 May, 2000.
Annual Survey of Manufacturers, “Report Series (Volume 1),” November 1997.
Auerbach, Alan J., “Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment and
Market Value,” International Economic Review, 1989, 30 (4), 939–962.
and James Hines, “Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing of Investment,” in “Taxes
and Capital Formation,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 1987, pp. 85–88.
and Michael P. Devereux, “Cash-Flow Taxes in an International Setting,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, August 2018, 10 (3), 69–94.
Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1553–97.
,
, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of
Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, October 2013, 103
(6), 2121–68.
, , and , “The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes
in Trade,” WP 21906, NBER 2016.
Barnatchez, Keith, Leland Crane, and Ryan Decker, “An Assessment of the National
Establishment Time Series (NETS) Database,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017110, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.) November 2017.
Bartik, Timothy J., “A New Panel Database on Business Incentives for Economic Development
Offered by State and Local Governments in the United States,” Technical Report, W.E. Upjohn
Institute 2017.
BEA, “BEA Depreciation Estimates,” Technical Report https://bea.gov/national/pdf/
BEA_depreciation_rates.pdf (Accessed: June 28, 2018), Bureau of Economic Analysis 2018.
Becker, Johannes and Nadine Riedel, “Cross-border tax effects on affiliate investment—
Evidence from European multinationals,” European Economic Review, 2012, 56 (3), 436 –
450.
Bilicka, Katarzyna Anna, “Comparing UK Tax Returns of Foreign Multinationals to Matched
Domestic Firms,” American Economic Review, August 2019, 109 (8), 2921–53.
, Yaxuan Qi, and Jing Xing, “Real responses to anti-tax avoidance policies: Evidence from
UK’s worldwide debt cap,” Working Paper, 2019.
29

Blouin, Jennifer and Leslie Robinson, “Double Counting Accounting: How Much Profit of
Multinational Enterprises Is Really in Tax Havens?,” Working Paper SSRN, 2019.
and Linda K. Krull, “Bringing It Home: A Study of the Incentives Surrounding the
Repatriation of Foreign Earnings under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004,” Journal of
Accounting Research, 2009, 47 (4).
Bond, Eric, “Tax Holidays and Industry Behavior,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
1981, 63 (1), 88–95.
Buettner, Thiess, Michael Overesch, Ulrich Schreiber, and Georg Wamser, “The
impact of thin-capitalization rules on the capital structure of multinational firms,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2012, 96 (11), 930–938. Fiscal Federalism.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “State Personal Income and Employment: Methodology,”
Technical Report, Washington, D.C. 2010.
, “National Data: Private Fixed Assets by Industry,” Web Site, Washington, D.C. 2017.
, “Local Area Personal Income Accounts, CA35,” Web Site, Washington, D.C. 2018.
Business Week, “A Hurricane Heads for Puerto Rico,” in “Eden (1994),” Vol. 54 1993, p. 52.
Bustos, Sebastián, Dina Pomeranz, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, José Vila-Belda,
and Gabriel Zucman, “Monitoring Tax Compliance by Multinational Firms: Evidence from
a Natural Experiment in Chile,” December 2019. Working Paper.
Capital IQ, “Compustat Segments (Annual Data),” Available: Standard & Poor’s/Compustat
1980-2014. Retrieved from Wharton Research Data Services http://wrds-web.wharton.
upenn.edu/wrds/connect/ (Accessed: March 14, 2016).
Census Bureau, “County Business Patterns,” Web Site (Accessed: July 11, 2018), https:
//www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp.html 2018.
Chari, Anusha, Ryan Leary, and Toan Phan, “The Costs of (sub)Sovereign Default Risk:
Evidence from Puerto Rico,” Working Paper 24108, National Bureau of Economic Research
December 2017.
Chen, Zhao, Xian Jiang, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu,
“Tax Policy and Lumpy Investment Behavior: Evidence from China’s VAT Reform,” Working
Paper 26336, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2019.
Clausing, Kimberly A., “Multinational Firm Tax Avoidance and Tax Policy,” National Tax
Journal, 2009, 62 (4), 703–725.
, “The Effect of Profit Shifting on the Corporate Tax Base in the United States and Beyond,”
National Tax Journal, 2016, 69 (4), 905–934.
CRSP Stocks, “The Center for Research in Security Prices Stock / Security Files,” Available:
The Center for Research in Security Prices 1990-1996. Retrieved from Wharton Research
Data Services http://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/connect/ (Accessed: December
1, 2017).
de Mooij, Ruud A. and Li Liu, “At A Cost: the Real Effect of Transfer Pricing Regulations
on Multinational Investment,” 2018.
and Sjef Ederveen, “Corporate tax elasticities: a reader’s guide to empirical findings,”
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, winter 2008, 24 (4), 680–697.

30

Desai, Mihir A. and Dhammika Dharmapala, “Corporate Tax Avoidance and Firm Value,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2009, 91 (3), 537–546.
and James R. Hines, “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the Causes and Consequences of Corporate Inversions,” National Tax Journal, September 2002, LV (3).
, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines, “The demand for tax haven operations,” Journal
of Public Economics, 2006, 90 (3), 513–531. Special issue published in cooperation with the
National Bureau of Economic Research: Proceedings of the Trans-Atlantic Public Economics
Seminar on Fiscal Federalism 20–22 May 2004.
, , and , “Domestic Effects of the Foreign Activities of US Multinationals,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2009, 1 (1), 181–203.
Devereux, Michael P., Alan Jeffrey Auerbach, Michael Keen, Paul Oosterhuis, Wolfgang Sch on, and John Vella, “Residual Profit Allocation by Income,” Oxford University
Centre for Business Taxation Working Paper WP19/01, 2019.
and Rachel Griffith, “Taxes and the location of production: evidence from a panel of US
multinationals,” Journal of Public Economics, 1998, 68 (3), 335 – 367.
Dharmapala, Dhammika, “What problems and opportunities are created by tax havens?,”
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 2008, 24 (4), 661–679.
, “What Do We Know about Base Erosion and Profit Shifting? A Review of the Empirical
Literature,” Fiscal Studies, 2014, 35 (4), 421–448.
and James R. Hines, “Which countries become tax havens?,” Journal of Public Economics,
2009, 93 (9), 1058 – 1068.
and Nadine Riedel, “Earnings shocks and tax-motivated income-shifting: Evidence from
European multinationals,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 97 (Supplement C), 95 – 107.
, C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes, “Watch What I Do, Not What I Say: The
Unintended Consequences of the Homeland Investment Act,” Journal of Finance, June 2011,
66 (3), 753–787.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions
and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,” Econometrica, 1996,
64 (5), 1001–1044.
Dowd, Tim, Paul Landefeld, and Anne Moore, “Profit shifting of U.S. multinationals,”
Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 148 (Supplement C), 1–13.
Dube, Arindrajit, Ethan Kaplan, and Suresh Naidu, “Coups, Corporations, and Classified
Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1375–1409.
Dyreng, Scott D. and Bradley P. Lindsey, “Using Financial Accounting Data to Examine the Effect of Foreign Operations Located in Tax Havens and Other Countries on U.S.
Multinational Firms’ Tax Rates,” Journal of Accounting Research, 2009, 47 (5), 1283–1316.
and Kevin S. Markle, “The Effect of Financial Constraints on Income Shifting by U.S.
Multinationals,” The Accounting Review, 2016, 91 (6), 1601–1627.
, Michelle Hanlon, Edward L. Maydew, and Jacob R. Thornock, “Changes in corporate effective tax rates over the past 25 years,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 124
(3), 441 – 463.
Eden, Lorraine, “Puerto Rican Transfers and Section 936,” Tax Notes International, 1994, 9,
37–45.
31

, Taxing Multinationals: Transfer Pricing and Corporate Income Taxation in North America,
University of Toronto Press, 1998.
Egger, Peter H. and Georg Wamser, “The impact of controlled foreign company legislation
on real investments abroad. A multi-dimensional regression discontinuity design,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2015, 129 (Supplement C), 77 – 91.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M.
Zidar, “State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation,” Working Paper 21760, National Bureau of
Economic Research November 2015.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1993, 33 (1), 3–56.
FASB, “Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 131: Summary Disclosures about
Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information,” Financial Accounting Standards Board
Financial Accounting Foundation, June 1997.
Feliciano, Zadia M. and Andrew Green, “US Multinationals in Puerto Rico and the Repeal
of Section 936 Tax Exemption for U.S. Corporations,” Working Paper 23681, National Bureau
of Economic Research August 2017.
GAO, “Puerto Rico and the Section 936 Tax Credit,” Technical Report GAO/GGD-93-109,
Government Accountability Office June 1993.
, “Puerto Rico Fiscal Relations with the Federal Government and Economic Trends during
the Phaseout of the Possessions Tax Credit,” Technical Report GAO-06-541, Government
Accountability Office May 2006.
Garrett, Daniel and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, “How Elastic is the Demand for Tax
Havens? Evidence from the US Possessions Corporations Tax Credit,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, 109, 493–99.
, Eric Ohrn, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, “Tax Policy and Local Labor Market
Behavior,” American Economic Review: Insights (forthcoming), July 2019.
Giroud, Xavier and Holger M. Mueller, “Firms’ Internal Networks and Local Economic
Shocks,” American Economic Review, October 2019, 109 (10), 3617–49.
Gordon, Roger H. and James R. Hines, “International Taxation,” in “in,” Vol. 4 of Handbook of Public Economics, Elsevier, 2002, pp. 1935–1995.
Gravelle, Jane, “Policy Options to Address Profit Shifting: Carrots or Sticks,” Tax Notes,
2016, 121, 121–134.
Gruber, Jonathan and Joshua Rauh, “How Elastic is the Corporate Income Tax Base,” in
Alan Auerbach, James R. Hines, and Joel Slemrod, eds., Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st
Century, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Grubert, Harry and Joel Slemrod, “The Effect of Taxes on Investment and Income Shifting
to Puerto Rico,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 80 (3), 365–373.
and John Mutti, “Taxes, Tariffs and Transfer Pricing in Multinational Corporate Decision
Making,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1991, 73 (2), 285–293.
and Rosanne Altshuler, “The Three Parties in the Race to the Bottom: Host Governments,
Home Governments and Multinational Corporations,” Florida Tax Review, 2006, 7 (3), 137–
209.

32

and , “Fixing the System: An Analysis of Alternative Proposals for the Reform of International Tax,” National Tax Journal, September 2013, 66 (3), 671–712.
Gumpert, Anna, James R. Hines, and Monika Schnitzer, “Multinational Firms and Tax
Havens,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (4), 713–727.
Guvenen, Fatih, Jr. Raymond J. Mataloni, Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl,
“Offshore Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement,” Working Paper 23324,
National Bureau of Economic Research April 2017.
Hakobyan, Shushanik and John McLaren, “Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of
NAFTA,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (4), 728–741.
Heckemeyer, Jost H. and Michael Overesch, “Multinationals? Profit Response to Tax
Differentials: Effect Size and Shifting Channels,” 2013.
Hexner, J. Tomas and Glenn P. Jenkins, “Puerto Rico and Section 936: A Costly Dependence,” Tax Notes International, 1995, 10, 235–254.
Hines, James R., “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation,” National
Tax Journal, 1999, 52 (2), 305–322.
and Eric M. Rice, “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American Business,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (1), 149–182.
Hong, Qing and Michael Smart, “In Praise of Tax Havens: International Tax Planning and
Foreign Direct Investment,” European Economic Review, 2010, 54 (1), 82–95.
HR3448, “H.R.3448 - Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996,” Technical Report https:
//www.congress.gov/bill/104th-congress/house-bill/3448/ (Accessed: June, 28, 2018)
1996.
Huber, Kilian, “Disentangling the Effects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German Firms
and Counties,” American Economic Review, March 2018, 108 (3), 868–98.
Huizinga, Harry and Luc Laeven, “International profit shifting within multinationals: A
multi-country perspective,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (5), 1164 – 1182.
IRS, “SOI Tax Stats - Corporation Complete Report,” Web Site https://www.irs.
gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-corporation-complete-report (Accessed: December 1,
2017), U.S. Internal Revenue Service 2017.
, “SOI Tax Stats - County Data,” Web Site https://www.irs.gov/statistics/
soi-tax-stats-county-data (Accessed: December 1, 2017), U.S. Internal Revenue Service
2017.
Johannesen, Niels and Tim B.M. Stolper, “The Deterrence Effect of Whistleblowing –
An Event Study of Leaked Customer Information from Banks in Tax Havens,” Max Planck
Institute for Tax Law and Public Finance, 2017.
Joint Committee on Taxation, “An Overview of the Special Tax Rules Related to Puerto Rico
and an Analysis of the Tax and Economic Policy Implications of Recent Legislative Options,”
June 23, 2006 2006.
Kang, Karam, “Policy Influence and Private Returns from Lobbying in the Energy Sector,”
The Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (1), 269–305.
Kovak, Brian K., Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly, “The Labor Market Effects of
Offshoring by U.S. Multinational Firms: Evidence from Changes in Global Tax Policies,”
Working Paper 23947, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2017.
33

Los Angeles Times, “Hazy Forecast for Puerto Rico: Taxes: Clinton’s Budget Will Phase Out
Most Tax Breaks for U.S. firms. The Commonwealth May Try New Incentives,” Olmos, David
R., 1993.
MacKinlay, A. Craig, “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 1997, 35 (1), 13–39.
Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West, “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics,” Journal of Human Resources, 2016, 51 (2), 500–522.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment?,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2197–2223.
Mintz, Jack and Michael Smart, “Income shifting, investment, and tax competition: theory
and evidence from provincial taxation in Canada,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88,
1149 – 1168.
Moon, Terry, “Capital Gains Taxes and Real Corporate Investment,” Working Paper, 2019.
Mora, Marie T., Alberto Dávila, and Havidán Rodrı́guez, Population, Migration, and
Socioeconomic Outcomes among Island and Mainland Puerto Ricans: La Crisis Boricua, Lexington Books, 2017.
Moretti, Enrico, “Local Multipliers,” American Economic Review, May 2010, 100 (2), 373–77.
Mutti, John and Eric Ohrn, “Taxes and the Location of U.S. Business Activity Abroad,”
National Tax Journal, March 2019, 72 (1), 165–192.
New York Times, “Sara Lee to Cut 1,200 Jobs in Puerto Rico,” 2003.
OECD, “Tax Database,” 2018.
Ohrn, Eric, “The Effect of Tax Incentives on U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from State Accelerated Depreciation Policies,” September 2017. Mimeo.
, “The Effect of Corporate Taxation on Investment and Financial Policy: Evidence from the
DPAD,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2018, 10 (2), 272–301.
OpenSecrets.org, “Bulk Lobbying Data,” Web Site http://www.opensecrets.org/ (Accessed: June, 28, 2018) 2018.
Overesch, Michael, “The Effects of Multinationals’ Profit Shifting Activities on Real Investments,” National Tax Journal, 2009, 62 (1), 5–23.
QCEW, “Bureau of Labor Statistics: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages,” Web Site
(Accessed: December 1, 2017), https://www.bls.gov/cew/ 2017.
Rao, Nirupama, “Corporate Inversions and Economic Performance,” National Tax Journal,
2015, 68 (4), 1073–1097.
Ruggles, Steven et al., “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0,” [Machinereadable database], Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 2010.
Saunders-Scott, Molly J., “Substitution Across Methods of Profit Shifting,” National Tax
Journal, 2015, 68 (4), 1099–1120.
Schwab, Thomas and Maximilian Todtenhaupt, “Thinking Outside the Box: The Crossborder Effect of Tax Cuts on R&D,” Technical Report, WU International Taxation Research
Paper Series No. 2016-07 September 2019.
34

Slemrod, Joel, “Do Taxes Matter? Lessons from the 1980’s,” The American Economic Review,
1992, 82 (2), 250–256.
, “A general model of the behavioral response to taxation,” International Tax andPublic Finance, 2001, 8 (2), 119–128.
and Christian Gillitzer, Tax Systems, MIT Press, 2013.
and John D. Wilson, “Tax competition with parasitic tax havens,” Journal of Public
Economics, 2009, 93 (11), 1261–1270.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax
Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic
Review, 2016.
and , “The Structure of State Corporate Taxation and its Impact on State Tax Revenues
and Economic Activity,” Working Paper, Duke University May 2017.
and Philippe Wingender, “Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending,” December
2014. Mimeo.
and , “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,” Working Paper 22425, National Bureau of
Economic Research July 2016.
Tax Foundation, “What Does Research on Profit Shifting Tell Us?,” Web Site https:
//taxfoundation.org/what-does-research-profit-shifting-tell-us/ (Accessed: July,
5, 2018) 2016.
Tørsløv, Thomas, Ludvig Wier, and Gabriel Zucman, “The Missing Profits of Nations,”
Working Paper 2018.
Valletta, R.G. and R.B. Freeman, “The NBER Public Sector Collective Bargaining Law
Data Set,” in Richard B. Freeman and Casey Ichniowski, eds., When Public Employees Unionize, Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press, 1988, chapter Appendix B.
Walls & Associates, “NETS: National Establishment Time-Series Database,” 2012.
Wilson, Daniel J, “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects
of R&D Tax Credits,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016/02/22 2009, 91 (2), 431–436.
Wright, Thomas and Gabriel Zucman, “The Exorbitant Tax Privilege,” working paper,
2018.
Yagan, Danny, “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend
Tax Cut,” American Economic Review, December 2015, 105 (12), 3531–63.
, “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming., 2017.
Zucman, Gabriel, The Hidden Wealth of Nations, The University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Zwick, Eric and James Mahon, “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior,” American Economic Review, January 2017, 107 (1), 217–48.

35

Figure 1: Fiscal Cost of §936: US Possessions Corporations Tax Credit
B. Share of §936 Credits By Industry

0

50

1

60

Percent of Total
70
80

Billion of 2017 Dollars
2
3
4

90

5

100

A. Total Tax Credits from §936

1995

1997

1999

Chemical Man.
Other Man.
Transport Man.

2001
Year
Equipment Man.
Other Non-Man.
Plastics Man.

2003

2005

1995

Food/Bev Man.
Textile Man.
Paper Man.

1997
Chemical Man.
Other Man.
Transport Man.

1999

2001
Year
Equipment Man.
Other Non-Man.
Plastics Man.

2003

2005
Food/Bev Man.
Textile Man.
Paper Man.

.3
.28
.26
.24
.22
.2
.18
.16

Effective Tax Rate for Exposed Industries

C. Counterfactual Effective Tax Rates for Affected Firms

1995

1997

1999

2001
Year

2003

2005

2007

Observed Effective Tax Rate
Effective Tax Rate without S936 Repeal

Notes: This figure displays the fiscal cost of §936 to the US Treasury. Panel A tabulates claims
of US Corporations’ Possessions Tax Credits from 1995 to 2006 by industry using data from the IRS
(2017a) “Statistics of Income” series. This graph shows that the largest drops in the value of these
credits happen after 1996 and 1998, years that correspond to statutory limits on the tax credits. Panel
B shows the composition of these credits by industry. In 1995, about 55% of these credits are claimed by
corporations in the chemical manufacturing industry. Firms manufacturing equipment, food, beverages,
and tobacco claimed about 26% of the credits, while other industries claimed the remaining 17%. Panel
C plots the effective tax rates for exposed firms as well as a counterfactual assuming that §936 was not
repealed. See Section 2 for more details.

36

Figure 2: Effects of Profit Shifting on Investment and Employment
A. Optimal Profit Shifting Strategy

B. Profit Shifting and Domestic Investment
(1-tj)f'(Kj)
Marginal Product of Capital

~

Reported Profitability: rj=f j+a(t -tj)

rj for high value of a
(low profit shifting cost)

-

rj for low value of a
(high profit shifting cost)
-

True profitability: f j

~

Under-report if t <tj

NPS

ρ

~

ρ

1

ρ

~

Over-report if t >tj

~
0
NPS

1

Kj

Kj
Capital: Kj

~

Tax Differential: (t -tj)

0

Kj

C. Profit Shifting and Domestic Employment
D

~

L (w,ρ 0)

S

L (w)
D

~

L (w,ρ 1)
D

NPS

)

Wage

L (w,ρ

NPS

Ej

1

Ej
Ej
Employment: Ej

0

Notes: This figure displays the predictions of the model in Section 3. Panel A shows that reported
profitabilities rj depend on true profitability f¯j , the tax differential (t̃−tj ), and the parameter governing
the cost of profit shifting, a. Firms over-report profits in countries with low taxes (t̃ > tj ) and underreport in countries with high taxes (t̃ < tj ). The degree of over-reporting depends on the cost of profit
shifting. If a is low (high cost of misreporting), the relationship between rj and the tax differential is
relatively flat (solid line). If a is large (low cost of misreporting), the slope is steeper (dashed line). Panel
B shows the implications of profit shifting for domestic investment. Without profit shifting, the firm sets
capital so that the after-tax marginal product of capital equals the cost of equity ρN P S (dotted line).
When profit shifting is allowed, the income-shifting adjusted user cost of capital ρ̃0 (dashed line) is below
ρN P S and is increasing in Kj . This results in a higher level of investment Kj0 > KjN P S . The dot-dashed
line labeled ρ̃1 shows the effect of a tax increase in a tax haven on the user cost in a high-tax country.
Reducing the tax gains from the tax haven results in lower domestic investment Kj0 > Kj1 > KjN P S .
Panel C shows the effects of these tax changes on domestic employment, assuming that capital and
labor are complements, in country j. This graph shows that the demand for labor depends on the cost
of capital LD (w, ρ). Labor demand shifts out when profit shifting is allowed LD (w, ρ̃1 ) > LD (w, ρN P S )
and shifts in when there is a tax increase in the low-tax country, LD (w, ρ̃1 ) > LD (w, ρ̃0 ). Therefore,
there is more domestic employment when tax havens reduce the income-shifted adjusted cost of capital:
EjN P S < Ej1 < Ej0 .

37

Figure 3: Distribution of Exposure to §936 at the County Level in 1995
A. Raw Exposure to §936

B. Standardized Exposure to §936

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This figure plots the distribution of the percent
of establishments in each county that are part of firms with exposure to §936. Panel A shows that the
fraction of labor market exposure varies from 0% to 5%. Panel B shows a measure of the exposure that
is standardized within states and shows that there is substantial variation across counties within any
given state. See Section 4 and Appendix A for more information about the data and measurement.

38

Figure 4: Exposure to §936, Demographic Characteristics, and Economic Polices

Minimum Wage

Labor Force Participation

Right to Work

Percentage Retail

Personal Income Tax

Percentage Agriculture

Sales Tax

Percentage Manufacturing Durable

Property Tax

Percentage Manufacturing Non-Durable

Corporate Income Tax
Capital Stock

R&D Credit

39

Percentage College

State Revenue/GDP

Percentage Less than HS

Trade Exposure (China)
Share of Routine Labor

Percentage White

Trade Exposure (Nafta)

Percentage Black
-1

-.75

-.5

-.25
0
.25
Standardized Effect

.5

.75

1

-1 -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75
Standardized Effect

1

Notes: This graph shows the correlation of the exposure to §936 at the county level and various policies, economic indicators, and other
shocks. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Author’s calculations using data from NETS and various other sources. See Valletta and
Freeman (1988); Meer and West (2016) for data on minimum wage and right-to-work laws, Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) for data on
state taxes and tax revenues, Wilson (2009) for data on R&D tax credits, Autor et al. (2016) and Hakobyan and McLaren (2016) for data
on exposure to trade, and Autor and Dorn (2013) for data on the share of routine labor. Demographic and industry employment data are
from the US Census, and data on capital stocks are from the BEA. See Appendix A for more details on data sources.

-.3

Effect of S936 on Investment/Physical Capital
-.2
-.1
0
.1

Figure 5: Repealing §936 Reduced the Investment-to-Capital Ratios of Exposed
Firms

1991

1993

1997

1999
Year

2001

2003

2005

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows estimates of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is investment divided by average capital in 1990 to 1995 and
exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level. Investment is defined as capital expenditures, and
capital is defined as plants, property, and equipment. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals decreased investment, we see that exposed firms saw a
decrease in investment following the repeal of §936 relative to non-exposed firms. Point estimates and
additional specifications are shown in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

40

Effect of S936 on Foreign Share Investment
-.1
0
.1
.2

.3

Figure 6: Repealing §936 Increased the Foreign Share of Investment of Exposed
Firms

1991

1993

1997

1999
Year

2001

2003

2005

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT Historical Segments. This figure
shows estimates of Equation 3 where the dependent variable is the share of investment based in foreign
affiliates and exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval.
Consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals shifted investment abroad, we see that exposed firms
saw an increase in the fraction of foreign investment following the repeal of §936. Coefficient estimates
and additional specifications are shown in Table 4. See Section 5 for more discussion. Standard errors
are clustered at the firm level.

41

-1.5

Effect of Exposure to S936 on CAPX
-1
-.5
0

.5

Figure 7: Repealing §936 Reduced CAPX Investment in Exposed Industries

1987 1989 1991 1993 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
Year

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and the Annual Survey of Manufactures. This
figure plots estimates of Equation 4 where exposure to §936 is the proportion of establishments in each
state-industry divided by the interquartile range. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Following
the repeal of §936, we see a persistent decline in the flow of investment in state-industries with more
exposure to §936. Coefficient estimates and additional specifications are shown in Table 5. See Section
5 for more information. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

42

Effect of S936 Exposure
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0

.02 .04

Figure 8: Firm-Level Employment Effects of Repealing of §936

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Empit-Empi1995)/Empi1995=αt+βtS936 Exposurei+εit. SE's clustered by Firm.

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This figure shows the decline in employment
at §936 exposed firms relative to similar control firms without exposure to §936, where exposure to §936
is an indicator at the firm level. See Appendix A.3 for a description of the procedure used to identify the
comparison firms. Point estimates are displayed in Table A.10. See Section 5 for additional discussion.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

43

-10

Percentage Change in Employment
0
10
20

30

Figure 9: Employment Effects of Repealing of §936 by Tercile of Exposure

1990

1995

2000
Year

Low S936 Exposure

2005

High S936 Exposure

2010
Recession

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure plots average employment growth for counties in the top tercile of §936 exposure (High S936 Exposure) relative to the
employment growth in counties in the bottom tercile (Low S936 Exposure). This graph shows that
counties with a greater exposure to §936 experienced a relative decrease in employment growth during
the 10 years that correspond to the phase-out of §936. For a parametric analysis of the effect of exposure to §936 on employment growth, see Figure 10. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and
Section 6 for more discussion. Average employment growth is weighted according to county-by-industry
employment in 1995.

44

Figure 10: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Employment Growth

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

A. Estimated Coefficients for §936 Exposure (IQR Adjusted)

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Empict-Empic1995)/Empic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

Percentage Change in Employment
-10
0
10
20
30

B. Implied Employment Growth at Selected Quantiles

1990

1995

2000
Year

Mean S936 Exposure
25th Percentile Exposure
95th Percentile Exposure

2005

2010

5th Percentile Exposure
75th Percentile Exposure
Recession

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure shows estimates
of β t for t = 1990, · · · , 2012 in Equation 6. Exposure is measured as the percent of establishments
exposed to §936 divided by the interquartile range. This graph shows that, prior to the repeal of
§936, exposure to §936 is not predictive of employment growth, which is consistent with the parallel
trends assumption. The graph shows that counties with greater exposure to §936 experienced a relative
decrease in employment growth during the 10 years that correspond to the phase-out of §936. For 2006,
Panel A shows that increasing the exposure to §936 from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile
decreases employment growth by 7.2%. Moreover, the decline in employment growth stabilizes after
the full phase-out of §936 in 2006. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and Section 6 for a
discussion of the results. Coefficients are displayed in Table 6. Standard errors are clustered at the state
and industry levels. Observations at the industry-county
level are weighted by employment in 1995.
45

Figure 11: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Employment Growth: Alternative Specifications

.05

B. Robustness of Exposure Measure
Percent Employment Growth
-.1
-.05
0

0
-.05

-.15

-.1
-.15

Percent Employment Growth

.05

A. Robustness to Geography and Per Capita

1990

1995

2000
Year
Benchmark
Commuting Zone

2005

2010

1990

Consupuma
Per Capita

1995

2000
Year

Instrument for Employment Link
Uncertain HQ Dropped

2005

2010

Large Retailers Dropped
Non-Compustat Dropped

-.15

Percent Employment Growth
-.1
-.05
0

.05

C. Robustness to Network of Establishment Links Definition

1990

1995

2000
Year

State Time Trends and FE
Establishment Links in 1993

2005

2010

Firms > 50,000 Employees
S936 Firms in 1993

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure shows estimates of β t
for t = 1990, · · · , 2012 from Equation 6. The top panel shows results from regressions using a different
measurement for the geography of interest and for population-adjusted employment growth. Coefficient
estimates and additional specifications are displayed in Tables 6 and 7. Panel B shows alternative
specifications of the sample of firms that are considered as potential links. Exposure is calculated from
the NETS in terms of both employment and establishments, and the establishments’ exposure is used
to instrument for the employment exposure in the first specification. The second specification in the
lower panel manually excludes large retailers from links, the third specification excludes those firms for
which NETS does not report a headquarters, and the fourth excludes firms that are not part of the
Compustat Database from the links. Coefficient estimates for Panel B are displayed in Tables A.12,
A.13, A.14, and A.15, respectively. Panel C shows further alternative specifications for the sample of
firms that are considered as potential links. First, the estimate of equation 6 with state fixed effects
and state time trends is shown. Second, the same regression restricting links to firms with more than
50,000 employees is shown. The final two specifications define links in 1993 using either the full set of
firms in Puerto Rico or the set of firms in Puerto Rico from the original 1995 sample that are also in
Puerto Rico in 1993. Coefficient estimates for Panel C are displayed in Tables A.21, A.16, A.17, and
A.18, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the state and industry levels. Observations at the
industry-county level are weighted by employment in 1995.

46

Figure 12: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Employment Growth: Placebo Tests

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

A. Placebo Test for Matched, Non-exposed Firms

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Empict-Empic1995)/Empic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

B. Placebo Test for Exposure to Pharmaceuticals

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Empict-Empic1995)/Empic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure shows estimates of β t
for t = 1990, · · · , 2012 in Equation 6 using other measures of “exposure” that could be correlated with
exposure to §936. The top panel shows results from regressions using fake §936 exposure from a sample
of unlinked firms that are similar to linked firms. See Appendix A.3 for a description of the procedure
used to identify the set of counterfactual firms for the Panel A shock. The lower panel replaces the
exposure to §936 with exposure to the pharmaceuticals industry, NAICS 3254. See Appendix A for a
discussion of the data and Section 6 for a discussion of the results. Both of these placebo exercises fail to
find any evidence of a negative effect on local employment growth. Coefficient estimates and additional
specifications are displayed in Tables A.22 and A.23, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
47
state and industry levels. Observations at the industry-county
level are weighted by employment in
1995.

Effect of Exposure to S936 on Emp. Growth
-.15
-.12
-.09
-.06
-.03
0

Figure 13: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Employment Growth: Robustness

Robustness of Effect of Exposure to S936 on Employment Growth 2004-2008
Base
Min Wage
Corporate Tax
Trade (China)
All Covariates

Total Incentives
Right to Work
Personal Tax
Tax Revenue
All+Firm Size Dist.

Job Incentives
R&D Cred
Property Tax
Routine Jobs

Training Subsidy
Investment Cred
Sales Tax Rate
Trade (Nafta)

Notes: This figure shows the robustness of the coefficients shown in Table 8 to controlling for
various county- and state-level characteristics. The coefficients represent the effect of increasing §936
exposure from the 25th to the 75th percentile. In 2004–2008 the average change in employment growth
due to an IQR increase in §936 exposure is -7.2%. Controlling for other state and county characteristics
yields estimates between -6.8% and -8.3%. The coefficients and standard errors are displayed in Tables
A.24 and A.25. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and Section 6 for a discussion of the results.
Standard errors are clustered at the state and industry levels. Observations at the industry-county level
are weighted by employment in 1995.

48

-.15

Percent Employment Growth
-.1
-.05
0

.05

Figure 14: Heterogeneous Effects of Exposure to §936 on Employment Growth by
Sector

1990

1995

2000
Year

Sector:
Non-Tradable

2005

All
Construction

2010
Tradable
Other

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW and sector definitions from Mian
and Sufi (2014). This figure shows the average effect and heterogeneous effects by sector. Estimates and
standard errors are displayed in Table A.26 and Figure A.16. This figure highlights that the tradable
sector sees a decline in employment growth before any of the other sectors. See Appendix A for a
discussion of the data and Section 6 for a discussion of the results. Standard errors are clustered at
the state and industry levels. Observations at the industry-county level are weighted by employment in
1995.

49

Figure 15: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Wages and Rental Costs

-3

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

.3
-.3
-3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

E. Low-Skill Wage Growth Before 1990

The slope of the regression line is 0.0053 with standard error 0.0073 and p-value 0.4699

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

F. Rent Growth Before 1990
Residualized Rent Growth
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

.15

-.3

-.15
Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

The slope of the regression line is -0.0191 with standard error 0.0033 and p-value 0.0000

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1
-.15

Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936

.3

D. Wage Growth Before 1990
.15

50

The slope of the regression line is -0.0173 with standard error 0.0025 and p-value 0.0000

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936

-3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is -0.0096 with standard error 0.0022 and p-value 0.0001

-3

C. Rent Growth After 1990
Residualized Rent Growth
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1
-.15

-.15

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1

.15

B. Low-Skill Wage Growth After 1990

.15

A. Wage Growth After 1990

-3

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is 0.0006 with standard error 0.0070 and p-value 0.9271

-3

-1
1
IQR Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is 0.0216 with standard error 0.0098 and p-value 0.0323

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and Census. Exposure to §936 is residualized. This figure shows that exposure to §936
was not correlated with wage and rent growth before the repeal of §936. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and Section 6 for a
discussion of the results.

Table 1: US and Puerto Rico Employment at Large NETS Companies in 1995
Company
US
ABBOTT LABORATORIES
47,357
BAXTER INTERNATIONAL INC
54,373
JOHNSON & JOHNSON
45,526
WESTINGHOUSE (LATER CBS)
144,550
GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY
434,310
PEPSICO INC
225,575
WYETH LLC
41,960
SARA LEE CORPORATION
103,664
H J HEINZ COMPANY
21,259
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB COMPANY
42,080
KMART CORPORATION
401,217
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC
175,799
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION
55,917
MERCK & CO INC
14,476
SEARS ROEBUCK AND CO
365,901
AMR CORPORATION
112,955
Sub Total
2,286,919
Total
10,675,679

PR
Industry
6,786
Chemicals
6,027 Wholesale and Retail
5,115
Other Mfg
4,775
Other Non-Mfg
4,736
Electrical Equipment
4,537
Beverages
4,217
Chemicals
3,706
Food Mfg
3,263
Food Mfg
3,082
Chemicals
2,483 Wholesale and Retail
2,336
Other Non-Mfg
2,305
Other Mfg
2,173
Chemicals
1,606 Wholesale and Retail
1,515
Other Mfg
58,662
170,350

Notes: This table lists US companies with employment in Puerto Rico greater than 1,500
according to the NETS (Walls & Associates, 2012). The first column shows the company name,
the second column shows US employment in 1995, and the third column shows Puerto Rico
employment in 1995. The last column includes an industry category derived from NAICS classification. The sub total row is the sum of the 14 companies displayed here. The total row includes
all 682 firms with establishments in Puerto Rico.

51

Table 2: Effects of Repealing §936 on the Investment-to-Capital Ratio of Exposed
Firms
Change in Investment:

I
K 1990−1995

(1)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post -0.116
(0.053)
0.029
Observations
79393
Sample Average I/K in 2006
1.174
Percent of 2006 Average
9.9%
Change in Effective Tax Rate
5.727
Semi-elasticity of Investment
1.73
Year Fixed Effects
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(2)
-0.130
(0.052)
0.012
79376
1.174
11.1%
5.727
1.93
Y
Y

(3)
-0.119
(0.043)
0.006
79376
1.174
10.1%
5.727
1.77
Y
Y
Y

(4)
-0.155
(0.047)
0.001
42734
0.931
16.6%
4.653
3.57
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
-0.183
(0.057)
0.001
36089
0.981
18.7%
6.010
3.11
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.142
(0.052)
0.007
34821
1.018
14.0%
6.010
2.33
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table shows estimates of
Equation 2 where the dependent variable is the change in investment divided by average capital in
1990–1995 winsorized at the 5% level. The estimates in this table correspond to a pooled version
of the regression displayed in Figure 5 where Exposure to Section 936 X Post is an indicator at
the firm level for exposed firms interacted with an indicator for years after 1995. The coefficient
in column (5) means that firms exposed to §936 decrease investment by 18% after 1995, which
implies a semi-elasticity of 3.11. Additional results are displayed in Tables A.5 and A.6 to show
robustness. See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data
and variables. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values
below.

52

Table 3: Effect of Repealing §936 on Federal Taxes Paid as a Percent of Global
Pretax Income
Change in Federal Taxes Paid as a Percent of Pretax Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post 3.144
3.656
3.507
5.874
(1.600) (1.589) (1.716) (2.465)
0.049
0.021
0.041
0.017
Observations
33097
33074
33074
17314
Change in Effective Tax Rate
5.727
5.727
5.727
4.653
Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Firm Fixed Effects
Y
Y
S936 Exposed Sector
Y
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(5)
4.962
(2.767)
0.073
14065
6.010
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
5.436
(2.538)
0.032
13187
6.010
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table estimates a version
of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is cash federal taxes paid divided by global pretax
income. These estimates reflect the percent change in federal taxes paid as a percent of pretax
income at firms exposed to Section 936 after 1995. The last column shows that federal taxes
paid as a percent of global pretax income increased by 5.44pp at exposed firms after the repeal
of §936. The sample is restricted to those firms with non-trivial pretax income. The estimated
change in the effective tax rate is similar to the tax increase estimates of 4.5–5.9pp discussed in
Appendix B. See Section 5 and Appendix B for additional discussion and Appendix A for more
information about the data and variables. Clustered standard errors at the firm level are shown
in parentheses with p-values below.

53

Table 4: Effects of Repealing §936 on the Foreign Share of Investment of Exposed
Firms
Change in Foreign Share of Investment
(1)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post 0.127
(0.045)
0.005
Observations
15697
Year Fixed Effects
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(2)
0.126
(0.044)
0.004
15695
Y
Y

(3)
0.123
(0.044)
0.005
15671
Y
Y
Y

(4)
0.190
(0.048)
0.000
7416
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
0.178
(0.055)
0.001
6315
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
0.151
(0.057)
0.008
5613
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT Historical Segments. This table shows
estimates of Equation 3 where Exposure to Section 936 X Post is an indicator at the firm level for
exposed firms interacted with an indicator for years after 1995. Consistent with the hypothesis that
multinationals shifted investment abroad, we see that exposed firms saw an increase in the fraction of
foreign investment following the repeal of §936. Yearly coefficients are shown graphically in Figure 6.
See Section 5 for more discussion. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses
with p-values below.

Table 5: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Industry-State-Level Capital Expenditures
Growth in Capital Expenditures
Exposure to Section 936 X Post

Observations
Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
State Fixed Effects
State X Industry Fixed Effects
Year X State Fixed Effects
Year X Industry Fixed Effects

(1)
-0.735
(0.209)
0.001
10694
Yes
Yes

(2)
-0.736
(0.207)
0.001
10694
Yes
Yes
Yes

(3)
-0.726
(0.212)
0.001
10694
Yes

(4)
-0.684
(0.188)
0.001
10694

(5)
-0.659
(0.285)
0.025
10694

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and the Annual Survey of Manufactures. This
table displays the estimates of Equation 4 where exposure to §936 is the proportion of establishments in
each state-industry divided by the interquartile range. Exposure to Section 936 X Post is an indicator
at the firm level for exposed firms interacted with an indicator for years after 1995. Following the repeal
of §936, we see a persistent decline in the flow of investment in state-industries with more exposure
to §936. The yearly estimates are shown graphically in Figure 5. See Section 5 for more information.
Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses with p-values below.

54

Table 6: Event Study on Employment Growth
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Year by Industry Fixed Effects
Location Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)
Conspuma Geography
Commuting Zone Geography

(1)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.019)
Y

(2)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.007)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.019)
Y
Y

(3)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.019)
Y

(4)
0.007
(0.011)
0.004
(0.009)
0.005
(0.006)
0.003
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.008∗
(0.003)
-0.013∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.025∗∗
(0.007)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
Y

(5)
-0.007
(0.019)
-0.008
(0.016)
-0.003
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.015∗
(0.007)
-0.018∗
(0.008)
-0.029∗∗
(0.010)
-0.039∗∗
(0.012)
-0.045∗∗
(0.014)
-0.051∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.087∗∗
(0.026)
-0.087∗∗
(0.026)
-0.085∗∗
(0.025)
-0.078∗∗
(0.023)
-0.076∗∗
(0.023)
-0.080∗∗
(0.024)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.025)
Y

(6)
-0.001
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.008)
0.001
(0.005)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.010∗
(0.005)
-0.012
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗
(0.011)
-0.039∗∗
(0.012)
-0.045∗∗
(0.013)
-0.056∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.022)
Y

(7)
-0.011
(0.016)
-0.009
(0.012)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.012∗
(0.006)
-0.013
(0.008)
-0.023∗
(0.009)
-0.030∗
(0.013)
-0.032∗
(0.015)
-0.036∗
(0.016)
-0.048∗
(0.019)
-0.059∗∗
(0.022)
-0.068∗∗
(0.024)
-0.067∗∗
(0.025)
-0.066∗∗
(0.024)
-0.062∗∗
(0.022)
-0.058∗∗
(0.021)
-0.061∗∗
(0.021)
-0.066∗∗
(0.022)
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: This table displays estimates of Equation 6, which are shown in Figure 11. Observations are county-industries in each year. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS, and
employment growth comes from QCEW (2017). See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A
for more information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels
are shown in parentheses. Observations are weighted by employment in 1995. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
55

Table 7: Event Study on Employment Growth: Additional Specifications
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Year Fixed Effects
Year by Industry Fixed Effects
Employment Instrument
Large Retailers Dropped from Links
No US Headquarter Dropped from Links
Only Compustat Sample Links
Employment Growth Per Capita
Manufacturing Employment Per Capita

(1)
0.000
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.010)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.011∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.020∗∗
(0.008)
-0.031∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.085∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.023)
Y
Y
Y

(2)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
Y
Y

(3)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.002)
-0.010∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.019)
Y
Y

(4)
0.005
(0.013)
0.004
(0.010)
0.006
(0.007)
0.005
(0.004)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.016∗∗
(0.005)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.052∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.016)
Y
Y

(5)
-0.013
(0.012)
-0.010
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.013∗
(0.005)
-0.020∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗
(0.008)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.053∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.051∗∗
(0.015)
-0.051∗∗
(0.015)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.015)
Y

(6)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.009)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.019∗∗
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗
(0.007)
-0.023∗
(0.009)
-0.026∗
(0.010)
-0.029∗∗
(0.009)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.014)
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: This table displays estimates of Equation 6, which are shown in Figure 11. Observations are county-industries in each year. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS, and
employment growth comes from QCEW (2017). See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A
for more information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels
are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted by
56
employment in 1995.

Table 8: Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment and Income Growth
Employment Growth
Geography
Data Source
Years: 2004-2008
Exposure to Section 936

Years: 1990-1995
Exposure to Section 936

Year Fixed Effects

County
IRS
(1)
-0.057
(0.012)
0.000
(1)
0.005
(0.004)
0.197
Yes

BEA QCEW
(2)
(3)
-0.092
-0.072
(0.015) (0.018)
0.000
0.000
(2)
(3)
0.006
0.000
(0.004) (0.007)
0.148
0.952
Yes
Yes

Conspuma
QCEW
(4)
-0.071
(0.019)
0.001
(4)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.932
Yes

Income Growth
C-Zone

County

QCEW
IRS
(5)
(6)
-0.062
-0.133
(0.022) (0.025)
0.007
0.000
(5)
(6)
-0.004
-0.000
(0.007) (0.006)
0.527
0.994
Yes
Yes

BEA QCEW
(7)
(8)
-0.111
-0.125
(0.024) (0.033)
0.000
0.000
(7)
(8)
-0.003
-0.004
(0.004) (0.007)
0.541
0.569
Yes
Yes

Conspuma

C-Zone

QCEW
(9)
-0.121
(0.033)
0.001
(9)
-0.005
(0.007)
0.504
Yes

QCEW
(10)
-0.124
(0.039)
0.002
(10)
-0.009
(0.007)
0.198
Yes

57

Notes: This table shows county, conspuma, and commuting zone level regression estimates of the effect of exposure to Section
936 on employment growth in (1) to (5) and income growth in (6) to (10) before and after the rollback of Section 936 in the upper
and lower panels, respectively. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS, while employment and income growth come from
the IRS SOI, the BEA, and QCEW (2017) for columns (1) and (6), (2) and (7), and (3) to (5) and (8) to (10). See Section 5
for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. The QCEW regressions also include industry fixed effects in
addition to the year fixed effects in all columns. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses
with p-values displayed below. The independent variable of interest is the IQR-adjusted exposure to §936 at the county level, so the
estimates mean that an IQR increase in exposure to §936 is associated with a 7.2% decrease in employment and a 12.5% decrease
in income according to columns (3) and (8). The lower panel fails to find evidence of any pre-trends using conventional levels of
statistical significance.

Table 9: Effects of Repealing §936 on Wages, Rental Costs, and Home Values
(1)
Stacked Differences After 1990

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Wages
All
High Skill
-0.010
-0.006
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.000
0.003
Observations
984
984
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Differences Before 1990
Wages

Low Skill
-0.014
(0.002)
0.000
984
Yes
Yes

Rent Home Value
-0.018
-0.025
(0.004)
(0.008)
0.000
0.002
984
984
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

All
High Skill
0.006
0.005
(0.008)
(0.005)
0.475
0.376
492
492
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Low Skill
0.004
(0.008)
0.660
492
Yes
Yes

Rent Home Value
0.032
0.034
(0.012)
(0.024)
0.012
0.160
492
492
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Exposure to Section 936

Exposure to Section 936

Observations
Year Fixed Effects
State Fixed Effects

Notes: Estimates in this table come from regressions of economic outcomes at the conspuma
level on the exposure to Section 936 scaled by the IQR. Exposure to Section 936 comes from
the NETS, and conspuma-level outcomes are from the Census (Ruggles et al., 2010). These
regressions use the adjusted values of the outcomes. See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix
A for more information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown
in parentheses with p-values displayed below. Additional specifications are shown in Table A.27.
Observations are weighted according to population.

58

Table 10: Effects of Repealing §936 on Government Transfer Payments Per Capita, 2004–2008
UnemIncome
Total
ployment ReplaceTransfers Benefits
ment
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A. Percent change in transfers per capita relative to 1995
Exposure to Section 936
0.025
0.254
0.101
(0.016)
(0.066)
(0.030)
0.128
0.000
0.001
Panel B. Dollar change in transfers per capita relative to 1995
Exposure to Section 936
6.426
15.883
30.214
(41.776)
(3.289)
(5.449)
0.878
0.000
0.000
Sample Proportion of Transfers
97.2%
1.9%
9.6%
Sample Transfers Per Capita
6,040.1
114.1
596.6
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes

Education
Benefits
(4)

Retirement and
Disability
(5)

Medicare
Benefits
(6)

Public
Medical
Benefits
(7)

0.075
(0.062)
0.232

0.005
(0.016)
0.777

-0.007
(0.026)
0.780

0.014
(0.029)
0.638

6.439
(2.995)
0.037
1.7%
103.7
Yes

1.527
(19.083)
0.937
38.5%
2,358.8
Yes

-14.324
(13.078)
0.279
25.1%
1,570.5
Yes

-26.040
(40.346)
0.522
18.6%
1,176.6
Yes

59

Notes: Estimates in this table come from regressions of government transfers in each category at the county level on the exposure
to Section 936. The upper panel shows the results with the dependent variable measured in percent change per capita, while the
lower panel shows results with the dependent variable measured in change in dollars per capita. Exposure to Section 936 comes
from the NETS, and county-level transfers come from the BEA local area personal income accounts (Bureau of Economic Analysis,
2018). Column (1) includes all transfers in columns (2) to (7), which do not include veteran’s benefits, and covers 97.2% of all
personal income transfers reported in Bureau of Economic Analysis (2018). Column (2) shows a positive effect on the dependent
variable of unemployment insurance compensation, while Columns (3) and (4) show positive effects on income maintenance payments,
including SSI and the Earned Income Tax Credit, and education and training assistance programs. Columns (5)–(7) show statistically
insignificant effects on retirement and disability benefits programs, which includes most Social Security Administration payments
except for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Medicare payments, or public assistance medical benefits. See Appendix A for
more information about the data. Clustered standard errors are shown in parentheses with p-values displayed below. Analogous
regressions for the 1990–1995 period in Table A.28 show statistically insignificant pre-trends.

Online Appendix: Not For Publication
This appendix includes supplemental information and additional analyses. Appendix A describes the data sources. Appendix B describes how the repeal of §936 affected the effective tax
rates of US firms. Appendix C shows that exposed firms experienced a decline in firm value
following news of the repeal of §936. Appendix D proves the propositions of the model. Appendix E describes how changes in investment accumulate into changes in capital stocks over
time. Appendix F characterizes heterogeneous effects of the repeal of §936 on local employment
growth.

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Data Sources

The size of the actual tax expenditure incurred by 26 U.S.C. §936 (1976) is provided at the
three-digit NAICS code level by the IRS (IRS, 2017a). The SOI reports for corporations include
the aggregate expenditure for the “US Possessions Tax Credit” up until the end of the phaseout in 2007. These data also include total revenues, net income, tax liabilities before and after
deductions and credits, and several other enumerated federal corporate tax credits.
The primary data on the location of business establishments and employment comes from
the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) database from 1990-2010 (Walls & Associates,
2012). NETS contains the Duns and Bradstreet historical establishment data that is transformed
into a time-series database. Of particular interest for this project, the data include the location of
business establishments, employment at the establishment level, and links to firm headquarters.
Other information includes relocations, estimated firm sales, counts of establishments, credit
scores, active years, industries, and other indicators. The NETS data are supplemented with
information about counties in the US.
This paper uses firm-specific data to measure the response of businesses and equity markets
to the repeal. The firms with establishments in Puerto Rico that are identified in NETS are
merged with information from the Compustat Historical Segments databases (Capital IQ, 19802014). Compustat data comes from public filings for publicly traded firms and includes values
reported in annual 10-Ks regarding segment operation and financial statements. The financial
information is reported on an annual basis. As in Rao (2015), we exploit the fact that the data
allow investment to be separated into domestic and foreign segments. Stock returns surrounding
the repeal of Section 936 come from CRSP Stocks (1990-1996) and other market indicators
for use in an event study methodology come from Fama and French (1993). The CRSP data

60

include daily returns for every publicly traded stock in the US for each active trading day. The
Fama-French data includes weighted portfolios of returns to capture different types of market
risk.
Data on manufacturing investment come from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM)
through the Census Bureau. Data for 1997-2010 come from Ohrn (2017) while data for 19871995 come from Annual Survey of Manufacturers (1997). We combine data from the 1987-2006
surveys at the NAICS three digit level. We use the Census crosswalk between SIC codes and
NAICS codes for years 1987-1995.
This paper uses data gathered by Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016) from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Internal Revenue Service. For
each county, data on personal income and employment come from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis’ Regional Economic Information System (REIS) (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2010).
Employment and earnings at the industry and county level come from the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW) produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The QCEW
is made up of the universe of jobs covered by state unemployment insurance systems (QCEW,
2017). It accounts for more than 94% of total wages reported by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. Income by source comes from the IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) publications from
1989-2009 (IRS, 2017b). The SOI data include a breakdown of income at the county level into
gross incomes, salaries, dividends, and interest, which allows changes in county income to be
connected to the source of the income. This project also uses data from the Census Bureau.
Skill specific outcomes including wages and rents come from calculations done by Suárez Serrato
and Wingender (2014) using IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2010). This includes skill specific values of
log-wages, log-rents, and log-housing values. Other information from IPUMS includes aggregate
values of population, employment, income, and earnings.
In order to calculate capital stock at the county level, we use the local QCEW earnings data
at the industry level in conjunction with aggregate capital stock in the US by industry from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2017). We then use two digit
NAICS codes to distribute each industry’s national capital stock across counties to match the
distribution of employment across counties in the QCEW. The total capital stock for each county
is then computed by summing across all of the industries in that county.
Data on the local import exposure from China comes from Autor et al. (2016). The main
variable is import exposure per worker. The share of labor in “routine jobs” was gathered by
Autor and Dorn (2013). An indicator of whether a state is a “right to work” state in 1984 is
collected from Valletta and Freeman (1988). Data regarding income transfers from governments
to individuals come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Local Area Personal Income Accounts
61

(Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2018). These data include county level transfers disaggregated by
program. We use the following categories: Retirement and disability insurance benefits, Medicare
benefits, public assistance medical care benefits, Income maintenance benefits, Unemployment
insurance compensation, and Education and training assistance, which amount to over 95% of
total transfers in the data.

A.2

Validity of the Firm-Level Exposure Measure

Our measure of firm-level exposure is close to estimates of take-up of §936 based on tax data.
There are 682 firms that could have taken advantage of §936 in our data.67
The GAO (2006) found that a total of 656 firms ever claimed §936 credits, while Grubert and
Slemrod (1998) find that 419 manufacturing firms claimed §936 credits in 1987. Similarly, GAO
(1993) shows that §936 firms had 105,000 workers in Puerto Rico in 1989, which is comparable
to our estimate of 140,000 in 1990. To the extent that our measure of exposure to §936 is a slight
upper bound, our estimates may be considered an intent-to-treat, and would represent a lower
bound on the true effect. As we discuss in the paper, we conduct a number of tests to ensure
that our results are robust to our definition of exposure.
We merge NETS with Compustat by firm name and then confirm and extend the merge
manually. We further crawled the SEC’s EDGAR database and searched for terms related to
Puerto Rico, §936, and US Possessions Corporations Tax Credit in 10-K filings. We also note
that a number of firms with operations in Puerto Rico are private. Overall, there are 219
exposed firms in Compustat, and we find that these firms are responsible for 69.5% of the total
employment in §936 firms. It is also likely that the Compustat firms are responsible for the bulk
of the §936 tax credits. The Joint Committee on Taxation (2006) notes that §936 credits were
highly concentrated within §936 firms, and Grubert and Slemrod (1998) note that, in their data,
96% of the tax credits were claimed by 214 firms.
We use this matched sample from the NETS and Compustat to replicate the results of Grubert
and Slemrod (1998), who study characteristics of §936 firms, and confirm that our measure of
exposure captures the types of firms that actually received §936 credits. Specifically, we estimate
a probit model of the likelihood that a firm is exposed to §936. Table A.29 shows that firms in the
pharmaceutical industry, firms with more assets, more gross profits, and with R&D investment
were more likely to be exposed to §936. Note that, while pharmaceutical firms were more likely
to claim §936 credits, only 4.2% of pharma firms in Compustat were exposed to §936.
Finally, in Appendix C we show that news of the repeal of §936 had negative effects on
67

We conduct additional checks on our measure of exposure to §936 by manually excluding establishments in
the public sector or non-profit sector.

62

the stock prices of exposed firms. This result confirms that our firm-level measure of exposure
correctly identifies firms that took advantage of §936.

A.3

Matching Exposed Firms to Controls in NETS

In order to measure the employment response of firms exposed to Section 936, we match exposed
firms to a set of control firms that capture the counterfactual of how employment in these firms
would have evolved if they were not exposed to the repeal of Section 936. Since the exposed
firms are much larger than the average firm in the NETS, using any random set of companies as
a control group is likely to lead to selection bias. For this reason, we create a matched sample
of firms in NETS that are not exposed to Section 936 but are observably similar to the exposed
firms.
We use the following procedure to find matches. We first identify the census region, industry
defined by three digit NAICS code, employment quintile, and establishment quintile for each
US-headquartered firm with at least one establishment in Puerto Rico in 1995. Since the NETS
contains the universe of all firms, we are not able to run a matching algorithm on the entire
dataset. We therefore restrict the set of potential matches to include every US-headquartered
firm in the NETS from the same census region and industry classification as at least one of the
exposed firms. Of these firms, we restrict the sample further to match the employment and
establishment quintile of the relevant exposed firm. This procedure yields a list of 21,504 firms
that are headquartered in the same census region, have the same 3-digit industry, and are in the
same quintile of employment and number of establishments. This ensures that we match these
characteristics perfectly. For each exposed firm, we select up to 10 control firms that match
these characteristics to create the control data set of 2,000 firms. We use this control sample of
matched firms to identify firm level employment effects in Figure 8 and to run the placebo test
on local employment outcomes in Panel A of Figure 12.

A.4

Construction of DFL Weights

To improve the comparability of firms exposed to §936 and control firms, we follow Yagan (2015)
by weighting regressions according to the methods of DiNardo et al. (1996). To implement this
procedure, we first estimate the probability that a firm is in Puerto Rico in 1995. We estimate
this probability, p̂i , using a logit regression that controls for three digit industry fixed effects and
indicators for 20 bins of firms revenue. We then use the following weights:


p̂i
DF Li = P R + (1 − P R) ∗
.
1 − p̂i

63

These weights are equal to one for all firms in the treated sample and are larger for control firms
that are more similar to the treatment firms. We use these weights as a robustness check in our
regression tables.

B

The Effect of Repealing §936 on Effective Tax Rates

This appendix describes how we compute the effect of repealing §936 on effective tax rates
(ETRs). Gruber and Rauh (2007) and Dyreng et al. (2017) describe the numerous challenges involved in using financial statement data to compute firm-level tax rates. First, financial statement
data is only available for the corporate sector. Second, reported income in financial statements
can differ in important ways from taxable income. Third, firms with losses present a problem
for empirical analyses and are often excluded from empirical analyses to avoid data points with
negative ETRs. To avoid these problems, we follow the recommendation in Gruber and Rauh
(2007) to use aggregate data from IRS (2017a) to calculate the effects on ETRs of exposed firms.
As we discuss in Section 5, we obtain comparable results when analyzing the effects of the repeal
on ETRs using data from financial statements.
The counterfactual question we want to answer is the following: what would the effective
tax rate be for exposed firms if §936 had not been repealed? We need to solve two challenges
to answer this question. First, to compute the effect on ETRs of treated firms, we need to
approximate the fraction of firms that was exposed to §936. We use data on employment from
NETS to calculate the fraction, pi , of employment in a given industry that was eligible for §936
credits in 1995. Using this credit assumes that the fraction of employment is commensurate with
the fraction of credits received by §936. Because larger firms were more likely to claim §936
credits (Grubert and Slemrod, 1998), this assumption likely results in a good approximation of
the fraction of firms that was exposed to §936.
The second challenge to computing counterfactual ETRs is that the path of actual credits
is not observed. We make two assumptions to estimate the counterfactual credits. First, we
assume that the possessions tax credits would have been a constant ratio, si , of taxable income
if §936 had not been repealed.68 Second, one possibility is that firms responded to the repeal of
§936 by claiming other tax credits or deductions more aggressively. We test this hypothesis by
running the following regression:
ET Rit = αt + ξi + βU SPit + γXit + εit .
The subscripts i and t denote industry and year, respectively. αt is a year fixed effect and ξi is an
industry fixed effect. ET Rit is defined as corporate income taxes after credits divided by taxable
68

In 1995, §936 tax credits equalled 0.54% of taxable income, on average.

64

income. U SPit stands for §936 credits divided by taxable income and Xit includes controls for
aggregate net income and sales at the industry level.
Table A.1 displays estimates of β using data from IRS (2017a). The first three columns show
specifications with and without the controls, Xit , and that weight regressions by net income or
taxable income. The latter 3 columns show the same estimates after taking first differences of
the regression equation. The estimates of these regressions range from 0.718 to 0.943, which can
be interpreted as tax payments increasing by 71.8 to 94.3 cents for every dollar of §936 credits
that is taken away.
Using these two assumptions, we then calculate a stream of §936 credits that would have
been given to firms had the law not been repealed. Taking Taxable Incomei,t as observed taxable income, potential credits are credits holding the share of credits as a percent of taxable
income constant are given by ŝi ∗ Taxable Incomei,t . Subtracting the observed §936 credits,
§936 Tax Creditsi,t , and adjusting for accounting responses, the counterfactual difference in tax
credits is: β̂(§936 Creditsi,t − ŝi × Taxable Incomei,t ). β is the share of §936 credits that are not
shifted to other tax credits after the repeal. We assume β̂ = 0.8, which is in the middle of the
range 0.718-0.943 shown in Table A.1. Because these credits accrue to a share of firms given by
p̂i , the effect on the ETR is therefore:

β̂(§936 Creditsi,t −ŝi ×Taxable Incomei,t )
.
p̂i Taxable Incomei,t

These calculations allow

us to compute:
Repeal
ET Ri,t
=

Taxes Paidi,t − §936 Tax Creditsi,t /p̂i
Taxable Incomei,t

and
No Repeal
No Repeal
= ET Ri,t
+ β̂ ×
ET Ri,t

§936 Creditsi,t − ŝi × Taxable Incomei,t
.
p̂i × Taxable Incomei,t

We calculate the change in effective tax rates separately for three groups. We first consider
the effect on all industries. Panel C of Figure 1 displays these counterfactual tax rates. We then
compute the change in effective tax rates for “Major Sectors.” These sectors included in this
category are those with US Possessions Tax Credits making up more than 0.1% of taxable income
(NAICS 22, 31-33, and 48-49). Finally, we also compute this quantity for “Major Industries.”
These industries are a subset of major sectors that omit industries within manufacturing with
US Possessions Tax Credits making up less than 0.1% of taxable income (NAICS 22, 31-33, and
48-49 omitting 321-324, 327, 331, and 336-337). We use IRS (2017a) data to estimate si and
NETS data to estimate pi for each of these subgroups. On average, we find that exposed firms
saw a relative increase in ETRs of 5.727 percentage points. Across major sectors and industries,
we find relatives increases in ETRs ranging from 4.653 to 6.010 percentage points.69
69
Note that it is possible for the effect on ETRs to decrease in more narrow categories of industries since both
si and pi change. When restricting to major sectors, si decreases by a smaller amount than pi so the estimator

65

Effects of Repealing §936 on Firm Value

C

In this section we discuss an additional set of analyses that looks at the effects of news surrounding
the repeal of §936 on market value. If investors believe the repeal of §936 will increase a firm’s
tax obligations, news of the repeal may reduce the stock price of exposed firms.70 We look at
the initial proposal to eliminate §936 as well as the date when the drafting of the legislation was
announced. President Clinton first announced on February 16, 1993 that he wanted to limit the
use of §936. Since this is the first mention of repeal, it is likely to have the largest effect on
expectations. The US House of Representatives started writing the final bill to eliminate §936
on October 12, 1995.
We use an event study methodology (MacKinlay, 1997), where we estimate a regression
explaining the return of firm f at date t, Rf t :
Rf t = Xt βf + γEf t (k) + f t ,
where Xt βf includes market returns minus the risk free rate. γ is the parameter of interest and
is equal to the Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR) of firms exposed to §936.71 Table A.30
reports results of this regression. Figure A.18 plots the results of this estimation where we pool
both event dates. The graph shows that firms exposed to §936 saw CAR of –1.4% between days
(0,12).
While we find a negative CAR on average, it is likely that more intangible intensive firms
experience larger declines in values, as these are the kinds of firms that can benefit from profit
shifting. Grubert and Slemrod (1998) suggest that firms with higher R&D intensity, advertising
expenditures, and gross profits to sales are more likely to benefit from profit shifting. The
intuition for the first two ratios is that firms that rely more on intangible capital will spend more
on R&D and advertising. The intuition for the gross profits ratio is that a firm must first be
profitable in order to shift its profits to low tax locations.
Table A.31 analyzes heterogeneous effects on firm value by regressing the CAR measures
between 0-10 days on firm characteristics. The constant in this regression measures the average
βsi
pi

is relatively smaller for this set of sectors. Removing the industries within manufacturing that are not major
users of US Possessions Tax Credits has the opposite effect on the estimate because pi decreases relatively more
than si .
70
Consistent with this hypothesis, Desai and Hines (2002) find that firms experience an increase in stock prices
in response to the announcement that a firm will perform a corporate inversion. Note that Desai and Dharmapala
(2009) argue that agency problems complicate the relation between tax planning and firm value. In addition,
Johannesen and Stolper (2017) find that announcements that a firm has engaged in facilitating tax evasion have
negative effects on stock prices.
71
Ef t (k) is an adjusted indicator for the event period that is k days long, so that Ef t (k) = k1 for each of the k
days following the event. We follow the event study implementation in Dube et al. (2011) to estimate all relevant
parameters in one step. We use a period of 100 days before each event to establish the relationship between
individual stock returns and the covariates in normal times.

66

effect and the coefficient for each variable corresponds to an interaction term. Column (1) shows
that R&D intensive firms saw a larger decline in firm value following these news events. This
ratio is standardized so that a firm with a R&D intensity that is one standard deviation above
the mean saw a CAR that was lower than the average by -0.47 percentage points, which is close
to one third of the average effect. We do not find evidence that more profitable firms decreased in
value following these news events; indeed we find the opposite. We include an indicator for having
had any advertising expenses and we find that this measure of intangible intensity has a negative
effect on the CAR. We also control for the change in the effective tax rate at the firm level and for
the fraction of employment in Puerto Rico, and we do not find significant interactions. Finally,
the last column of this table shows that, as expected, the initial announcement that §936 would
be repealed had a larger effect on firm values.72
Overall, these estimates suggest that investors viewed the repeal of §936 as an indication that
firms’ US tax obligations would increase, which would reduce stock prices. These results also
speak to the degree to which investors view tax havens as substitutes. In a world where firms
are able to shift profits across multiple tax havens and can substitute between them when one
of them is eliminated, we would not expect to see any effects on firm value. Thus, our results
suggest that firms are not able to switch between tax havens seamlessly.

D

Model Appendix

This appendix proves the results in Propositions 1-4. We then extend the results to allow for
heterogeneous costs of profit shifting across countries.

D.1

Proposition 1

Form the Lagrangean of the profit shifting problem:
(
)


X
X
(rj − f¯j )2
Kj (1 − tj )rj − ρ −
+λ
Kj (f¯j − rj ) .
2a
j
j
The first order condition with respect to rj implies:
rj − f¯j = a((1 − tj ) − λ).
The first order condition with respect to λ implies:
X
X
0=
Kj (f¯j − rj ) =
aKj (λ − (1 − tj )) ⇔ λ = 1 − t̃,
j

(D.1)

(D.2)

j

72

We report additional results that show that these patterns are robust to controlling for the Fama and French
(1993) 3 factors and momentum. Figure A.19 plots a similar graph to Figure A.18 and shows a smaller CAR of
-.8%, and Table A.32 shows that heterogeneous results are robust to controlling for these four factors.

67

where t̃ =

D.2

P
tj Kj
Pj
.
j Kj

Substituting Equation D.2 into D.1 yields the result in Proposition 1.

Proposition 2

Substituting the result of Proposition 1 into the objective function and rearranging we obtain


X
X
(t̃ − tj )2
.
(D.3)
Kj (1 − tj )(t̃ − tj ) −
max
[(1 − tj )fj (Kj ) − ρKj ] +a
{Kj }
2
j
j
|
{z
}
{z
}
|
Net Benefit from Profit Shifting

Economic Incentives

The first summation of Equation D.3 is the firm’s objective in the absence of profit shifting
opportunities. The second summation expresses the net-benefit from profit shifting across all
locations. For country j, the benefit from profit shifting is captured by
Kj (1 − tj )(rj − f¯j ) = aKj (1 − tj )(t̃ − tj ),
where the profit shifting term is substituted by the term in Proposition 1. Similarly, the cost
from profit shifting is captured by:
(rj − f¯j )2
(t̃ − tj )2
C(rj , f¯j , Kj ) = Kj
= aKj
.
2a
2
Firms’ optimal investment plans thus trade-off the economic and tax incentives in Equation D.3.
In addition, firms’ capital allocations also impact their capital-weighted average tax: t̃. Note
that the base-shifting effect

∂ t̃
∂Ki

is given by:
∂ t̃
−(t̃ − ti )
.
= P
∂Ki
k Kk

A similar effect arises in analyses of formulary apportionment, as in Suárez Serrato and Zidar
(2016) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2015).
The first order condition of Equation 1 with respect to Ki is:


(t̃ − ti )2
∂ t̃ X
0
(1 − ti )fi (Ki ) − ρ + a (1 − ti )(t̃ − ti ) −
+ a(1 − t̃)
Kk = 0
2
∂Ki k


(t̃ − ti )2 

(1 − ti )fi0 (Ki ) − ρ + a  (1 − ti )(t̃ − ti ) −
 − a(1 − t̃)(t̃ − ti ) = 0
|
{z
}
2
(1−t̃)(t̃−ti )+(t̃−ti )2

(1 − ti )fi0 (Ki ) − ρ + a

(t̃ − ti )2
= 0,
2

(D.4)

where the second line substituted the base-shifting term and the third simplifies the middle term.
Solving Equation D.4 yields the result in Proposition 2.
68

D.3

Proposition 3

Following Proposition 2, write the effect of changing tax tj in country i as:


∂Ki
a(t̃ − ti )
∂ t̃
=
− I{i = j} .
∂tj
I{i = j}fi0 (Ki ) − (1 − ti )fi00 (Ki ) ∂tj

(D.5)

Taking the derivative of t̃ we obtain:
∂ t̃
∂tj



Kj
1 X
∂Kk
= P
−P
(t̃ − tk )
∂tj
k Kk
k Kk k


∂ t̃
2
a(t̃ − tk ) ∂tj − I{k = j}
Kj
1 X
,
= P
−P
0
00
k Kk
k Kk k I{k = j}fk (Kk ) − (1 − tk )fk (Kk )

(D.6)

where we substitute Equation D.5 for all countries in the second line. Solving Equation D.6 for
∂ t̃
,
∂tj

we obtain:
a(t̃−t )2

∂ t̃
∂tj

Kj + f 0 (Kj )−(1−tjj )f 00 (Kj )
j
j
.
= P
P
a(t̃−tk )2
K
+
0
00
k
k I{k=j}f (Kk )−(1−tk )f (Kk )
k
k

Since fk0 (Kk ) > 0 and −(1 − tk )fk00 (Kk ) > 0, we know 0 <

(D.7)

k

∂ t̃
∂tj

< 1. For i 6= j, Equation D.5 then

implies:

sign

D.4

∂Ki
∂tj




= sign t̃ − ti .

Profit Shifting and Labor Demand

We now explore the implications of Propositions 1-3 for labor demand. The tax planning problem
in the second period is now as follows:
(
)




X
X
Lj
(rj − f¯j )2
Kj (1 − tj ) rj − wj
−ρ−
+λ
Kj (f¯j − rj ) .
K
2a
j
j
j
Since including the tax-deductible cost of labor in this expression does not affect Equation D.1,
the result from Proposition 1 is unaffected.
In the first period, the choice of capital and labor inputs follow from maximizing:


X
X
(t̃ − tj )2
.
max
[(1 − tj )(fj (Kj , Lj ) − wj Lj ) − ρKj ] + a
Kj (1 − tj )(t̃ − tj ) −
Kj ,Lj
2
j
j
The first order condition for capital in this problem is identical to Equation D.4, which implies
that the result from Proposition 2 is also unaffected. The first order condition for labor is:
∂fj
(Kj , Lj ) = wj ,
∂Lj
69

which is not directly affected by tj since labor costs are deductible.
k
To proceed, we introduce some convenient notation. First, we write f12
=

second derivatives with respect to inputs 1, Kk , and 2, Lk . We also write

∂ 2 fk
∂Kj ∂Lj
∂wk
=
∂tj

to denote
k
κkj ∂L
to
∂tj

denote the equilibrium relation between labor demand and a country’s wage rate. Since changes
in labor demand will trace the country’s labor supply curve, we assume κkj > 0. We now totally
differentiate this equation as well as Equation D.4:

#
# " ∂K # "
"
k
a(t̃−tk )
f1k
∂ t̃
k
k
− (1−tk ) × ∂tj + I(j = k)
f12
f11 − I(j = k) (1−tk )
∂tj
=
.
∂Lk
k
k
f22 − κkj
f21
0
∂tj

(D.8)

The determinant of the first matrix is given by:


f1k
k k
k
k
f12 > 0.
− κkj ) − f21
Ωkj = f11 − I(j = k)
× (f22
(1 − tk )
Inverting Equation D.8 yields:

#
" ∂K #
"
#"
k
k
k
a(t̃−tk )
∂ t̃
−
κ
−f
f
1
kj
−
×
+
I(j
=
k)
12
22
∂tj
(1−tk )
∂tj
=
×
.
f1k
∂Lk
k
k
−
I(j
=
k)
f
−f
Ω
kj
0
11
21
∂tj
(1−tk )

(D.9)

Consider now the effect of tj on t̃. Generalizing Equation D.6, we now have:


Kj
1 X
∂Kk
∂ t̃
= P
−P
(t̃ − tk )
∂tj
∂tj
k Kk
k Kk k


k
Kj
1 X a(t̃ − tk )2 (κkj − f22
)
∂ t̃
= P
−P
×
− I(j = k) .
(1 − tk )Ωkj
∂tj
k Kk
k Kk k
Solving for

∂ t̃
∂tj

we now have:
∂ t̃
∂tj

= P

Kj +

k Kk +

k
Since κkj − f22
> 0 and Ωkj > 0, we know 1 >

j
a(t̃−tj )2 (κjj −f22
)
(1−tj )Ωjj

P

∂ t̃
∂tj

k )
a(t̃−tk )2 (κkj −f22
k
(1−tk )Ωkj

.

k
k
> 0. Note that if f12
= f21
= 0, this equation

reduces to Equation D.7.
From this equation and Equation D.9, we now have that, for j 6= k,
k
a(t̃ − tk )(κkj − f22
∂Kk
) ∂ t̃
=
,
∂tj
(1 − tk )Ωkj
∂tj

which confirms that the result of Proposition 3 holds in this setting. In addition, we now have
the following implication of profit shifting for labor demand:
k
∂Lk
a(t̃ − tk )f21
∂ t̃
=
,
∂tj
(1 − tk )Ωkj ∂tj

70

where j 6= k. Since Ωkj > 0, we have



∂Lk
k
sign
= sign (t̃ − tk )f21
.
∂tj
This implies labor in a high-tax country is a tax complement with the corporate rate in a tax
k
> 0.
haven if capital is a complement to labor in the high-tax country, i.e., f21

Finally, notice the following relation between the effects on capital and labor:
k
∂Lk
∂Kk
f21
=
.
k
∂tj
κkj − f22 ∂tj

That is, we would expect to see a larger passthrough of capital to labor whenever capital and
k
), whevener capital has weak decreasing returns (small
labor are highly complementary (large f21
k
f22
), and whenever changes in labor demand have small wage effects (small κkj ).

D.5

Heterogeneous Profit Shifting Costs

The model so far assumes that the cost of evasion is symmetric in all countries. As discussed
in Section 2, lax regulations related to profit shifting and §936 meant that Puerto Rico was an
especially desirable tax haven for US multinationals. Our model can incorporate this feature by
allowing for heterogeneous costs of profit shifting across locations. This section shows that the
results of Propositions 1-3 are robust to allowing for the parameter a to vary by country.
Let aj be the value of a for country j. The optimal profit shifting strategy is now:
rj = f¯j + aj (t̂ − tj ),
where t̂ =

P
t K a
Pk k k k .
k Kk ak

This result is very similar to the one in Proposition 1 but notice that the

“mean tax term” t̂ also weights country’s taxes by the parameters ak . Intuitively, countries where
profit shifting is more costly (lower values of aj ) will have smaller differences between reported
and actual profitability. In addition, these countries will have a smaller contribution to the mean
tax.
We also obtain a similar result to Proposition 2. Equation D.4 now becomes:
(1 −

tj )fj0 (Kj )

(t̂ − tj )2
− ρ + aj
= 0.
2

This implies that countries where profit shifting is more costly (lower values of aj ) will see smaller
effects on their user cost of capital.
With heterogeneous costs, the term

∂ t̂
∂tj

now includes the ak ’s as well:
a2 (t̂−tj )2

∂ t̂
∂tj

j
aj Kj + f 0 (Kj )−(1−t
00
j )fj (Kj )
j
= P
.
P
a2k (t̂−tk )2
a
K
+
0
00
k
k
k
k I{k=j}f (Kk )−(1−tk )f (Kk )
k

71

k

It is it still the case that 0 <

∂ t̂
∂tj

< 1 and the result of Proposition 3 still holds. We can further

state that:

∂Ki
∝ ai t̂ − ti ,
∂tj
so that countries where profit shifting is more costly (lower values of ai ) will be subject to smaller
tax complementarities. Similar arguments generalize the result of Proposition 4.
These results show that, all else equal, when a country j has a low cost of profit shifting
(higher aj ), tax complementarities on capital and employment will be stronger. This implies
that the setting of §936 makes it likely that we can detect effects on domestic investment and
employment.

D.6

Discussion of Empirical Implications

Consider now two examples that summarize the insights of Propositions 1-4 as applied to the
elimination of §936.
Example 1 (US as a Low-Tax Country: t̃ ≥ tU S ). §936 would have the following effects:
• Profit shifting toward Puerto Rico (rP > f¯P ) and the US (rU S > f¯U S ).
• Profit shifting increases investment and employment globally.
• Profit shifting redirects investment and employment to the US.
Repealing §936 would have the following effects:
• Decrease profit shifting toward Puerto Rico, and increase shifting toward the US.
• Decrease investment and employment globally.
• Shift investment and employment away from Puerto Rico, and toward the US.
Notice that if t̃ = tU S ,73 and US is the country with the average tax, it would be the case that
§936 or its repeal had no effect on US investment. Nonetheless, profit shifting toward Puerto Rico
would mean that the US treasury would be reducing tax obligations of firms in other countries
by paying for the US Corporations Possessions Tax Credit.
Example 2 (US as a High-Tax Country: t̃ < tU S ).

74

• Profit shifting toward Puerto Rico (rP > f¯P ) and away from the US (rU S < f¯U S ).
73
74

A convenient numerical example is the case when KU S = KC = KP R and tC = 2tU S
A convenient numerical example is the case when KU S = KC = KP R and tC = tU S /2. In this case t̃ = tU S /2.

72

• Profit shifting increases investment and employment globally.
• Profit shifting redirects investment and employment to the US.
Repealing §936 would have the following effects:
• Decrease profit shifting toward Puerto Rico, and increase shifting away from the US.
• Decrease investment and employment globally.
• Shift investment and employment away from Puerto Rico and the US.
Note that in this example profits are shifted away from other countries as well, such that
the profits shifted to Puerto Rico may not represent a reduction in US tax obligations, but may
represent obligations owed to other countries. However, as in the previous example, the US
treasury would still be affected by the tax expenditure on the US Possessions Corporations tax
credit.
These examples show that tax climates in other countries are an important consideration
for whether tax changes, such as the repeal of §936, have positive or negative effects on the US
economy. In particular, the view of the US as a high-tax country is consistent with our empirical
results showing negative domestic effects of repealing §936 on the US economy.

D.7

Additional Extensions

The model abstracted away from dynamic considerations of investment. The model can be
extended in this direction by adopting a framework such as in Auerbach (1989) or Auerbach and
Hines (1987). If firms faced a dynamic investment decision and they viewed the repeal of §936
as permanent, they would respond by lowering investment and letting existing capital depreciate
during the phase-out of the tax credits. Since labor is seen as a static input, the corresponding
labor demand would match the dynamics of the capital stock.
Similarly, the model does not take into account the location of firms within the US. The
empirical analysis on the effects on local labor markets uses the exposure of a given labor market
to §936 to estimate the effects of the repeal of §936 at the local level. We can specialize the model
by adding a location component to firms and couching the analysis of the reform in a model of
local labor markets, as in Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016). We may further estimate aggregate
effects from regional variation using approaches such as those in Fajgelbaum et al. (2015) or
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). Since these extensions would not change the main conclusions
from the model in Section 3 or the empirical implications described in the previous section, we
avoid needlessly complicating the presentation of the main model in the paper.
73

E

Changes in Investment Flows and Capital Stocks

The empirical results of Section 5 show that firms respond to the repeal of §936 by lowering
the flow of capital investment. We present a stylized model of the capital stock to show how
the domestic capital stock updates given the observed changes in investment. Capital stock is
determined by a law of motion where capital in time t is equal to the sum of non-depreciated
capital from the previous period and investment from period t:
Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + It .
δ is the exogenous depreciation rate of capital. Investment is taken to be a multiple of the steady
state capital stock, denoted by the zero subscript.
It = αK0
Assuming that the firm is in a steady state before the repeal of §936, capital is the same every
period, and the investment rate α is equal to the depreciation rate δ:
K0 = (1 − δ)K0 + αK0 =⇒ α = δ.
The empirical estimates presented in Tables 2 and 4 show that domestic investment decreases
after the repeal of §963 through decreased total investment and decreased share of investment
that is domestic. As discussed in Section 5, firms decrease domestic investment by 19.3-25.7%.
Assuming the upper range of our results, the new investment rate as (1 − 0.26)α, the law of
motion for capital becomes:
Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + (1 − 0.26)αK0 .
Figure A.9 plots the trajectory for the capital stock of three different types of general industrial capital. Note that the figure assumes K0 = 1 as a normalization, and uses BEA (2018) estimates of depreciation values for different types of capital. The figure showcases short, medium,
and long duration assets for the general industry category. Buildings, which depreciate relatively
slowly with a depreciation rate of 0.025, lose 5.8% of their value after 10 years. Machinery
and Electronics (including computers) depreciate relatively faster — rates of 0.069 and 0.122,
respectively — and lose 13.2% and 18.96% of their stock within 10 years.
These results show that, while §936 has large and almost immediate effects on investment,
the effects on the capital stock adjust slowly and lag the effects on investment depending on the
depreciation rate.

74

F

Heterogeneous Effects of Repealing §936 on Local Employment Growth

In this section we explore the potential for the repeal of §936 to have heterogeneous effects on
employment growth across local labor markets. We build on the specification of Table 8, and we
allow for interactions of the exposure variable with other policies or shocks. We present detailed
results in Tables A.33 and A.34 where we include interactions with each of these variables.
Panel A of Figure A.20 shows the interaction terms between each variable and the exposure
variable. The two variables with the largest positive interaction terms are the corporate income
tax rate and job creation incentives from Bartik (2017). The intuition for a positive interaction
with job incentives is that these incentives may help unemployed workers find jobs sooner, which
may limit the effects of a negative shock. The intuition for a positive interaction term with the
corporate tax rate follows from understanding that in the equilibrium of a tax competition game,
states with lower taxes attract more mobile firms which would also be more responsive to the
repeal of §936. The two largest negative interaction terms are for trade exposure to NAFTA and
for the share of routine workers. The intuition for these effects is that it is harder for local labor
markets to recover when they are hit with multiple economic shocks.75
Panel B of Figure A.20 shows how each of these interactions influence the marginal effect of
exposure to §936 when these interaction terms take values above or below one standard deviation
of the mean. The mean of the effects is about 8.0%, which is slightly larger than the effect without
interactions. However, when we examine the distribution of marginal effects, we find a median
effect that is very close to when we do not include these controls or interactions.
We summarize the heterogeneity across all of these interactions by computing the marginal
effect for all counties in the specification that includes all of the interactions. Panel C of Figure
A.20 plots the distribution of marginal effects across counties and shows that some states had
much larger sensitivity to the repeal of §936. In particular, states with zero corporate income
taxes, such as Texas and Nevada, are more affected by the repeal of §936. However, this figure
also shows considerable heterogeneity.
Finally, Panel D of Figure A.20 takes a different approach to characterizing the heterogeneity
in effects and plots estimates of quantile regressions. These estimates show that the repeal of
§936 had larger effects on counties that were growing faster. This implies that, while the repeal of
§936 saw declines in growth across all counties, it also a led to a compression in the distribution
of growth rates.
75

Note that these interaction terms are not a form of bias for our main estimate. This specification controls for
each variable and, as shown in Figure 13, controlling for both of these variables does not bias the main estimate.

75

Figure A.1: Employment in Puerto Rico by Industry

550000

Employment in Puerto Rico
600000
650000
700000

750000

A. Total Employment in Puerto Rico

1990

1995

2000
year

2005

2010

8000 10000
0

0

2000

10000

Employment
4000 6000

Employment
20000
30000

40000

B. Employment in Puerto Rico by Industry

1990

1995

2000
year
Food Mfg
Apparel
Pharmaceuticals

2005

2010

1990

Textile
Chemicals

1995

2000
year
Rubber and Plastic
Fabricated Metal
Electrical Equip

2005

2010
Leather
Machinery

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This figure shows the total employment by
all firms in Puerto Rico by industry from 1990 to 20012. Employment in Puerto Rico peaks in 2006
around 750,000 workers relative to 575,000 workers in 1990.

76

Figure A.2: Exposure to §936 in 1995 by Establishments and Employment
A. Exposure to §936 at the County Level, Establishments

B. Exposure to §936 at the County Level, Employment

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This table shows the exposure variable calculated using employment instead of establishments. Panel A mirrors Figure 3 while panels B uses NETS
employment data to generate links. For more information about the data and the exposure variable,
see Section 4. This figure shows that the variation in exposure to Section 936 is robust to measurement,
although we use the establishment definition in the main specifications because employment data in the
NETS is likely subject to some mis-measurement (Barnatchez et al., 2017), the estimates of a regression
using establishments links as an instrument for employment links are shown in Table A.12.

77

Figure A.3: Distribution of Exposure to §936 in 1995

78

A. Exposure to §936 at the County Level

B. Exposure to §936 at the State Level

C. Exposure to §936 at the Conspuma Level

D. Exposure to §936 at the Commuting Zone Level

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This panel shows the establishment exposure to Section 936 aggregated to different
geographic levels. Panel A mirrors Figure 3 while panels B, C, and D show the exposure at the state, conspuma, and commuting zone levels,
respectively. For more information about the data and the exposure variable, see Section 4. This figure shows that there is still variation in
exposure to §936 even with higher levels of aggregation beyond counties, which are used as the main level of analysis.

Figure A.4: Change in Investment after §936 Repeal in Levels
B. Percent Investment

3
2
0

1

% Change in Investment/Physical Capital

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

Investment/Physical Capital

1

4

A. Investment

1991

1994

1998

Year

2001

Puerto Rico Presence

2004

16

1991

1994

Other Firms

1998

Year

Puerto Rico Presence

2001

2004
Other Firms

1.5
1
.5
0

Investment/Physical Capital

2

C. Investment Winsorized at 1%

1991

1994

1998

Year

Puerto Rico Presence

2001

2004

16

Other Firms

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows level estimates of
Equation 2 with three variations of the dependent variable. Exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm
level in all panels. In Panel A the dependent variable is investment divided by average plants, property,
and equipment in 1990 to 1995 winsorized at the 5% level. Panel B changes the dependent variable to
be measured in percentage changes. Panel C uses the same dependent variable as Panel A with the
investment winsorized at the 1% level. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.

79

16

Effect of S936 on % Change in Investment/Physical Capital
-1.5
-1
-.5
0

Figure A.5: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Firm-Level Investment Rate: Percentage
Change

1991

1993

1997

1999
Year

2001

2003

2005

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows estimates of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is the percent change in investment relative to the pre-period, and
where exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level. Investment is defined as capital expenditures.
Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals decreased
investment, we see that exposed firms saw a decrease in investment following the repeal of §936 relative
to non-exposed firms. Point estimates and additional specifications are shown in Table A.5. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.

80

-1

Effect of S936 on Investment/Physical Capital
-.8
-.6
-.4
-.2
0

Figure A.6: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Firm-Level Investment Rate: Winsorized
at 1%

1991

1993

1997

1999
Year

2001

2003

2005

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows estimates of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is investment divided by average capital in 1990 to 1995 and
exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level. Investment is defined as capital expenditures and
capital is defined as plants property and equipment. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals decreased investment, we see that exposed firms saw
a decrease in investment following the repeal of §936 relative to non-exposed firms. Point estimates
and additional specifications are shown in Table A.6. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
Investment divided by capital is winsorized at the 1% level.

81

1

4

7

10

Year

Puerto Rico Presence

13

16

-1

-.5

0

.5

B. Percent Investment

-1.5

.1
0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-.4

Effect of S936 on Investment/Physical Capital

A. Investment

Effect of S936 on % Change in Investment/Physical Capital

Figure A.7: Change in Investment after §936 Repeal with All Controls

1

90% Confidence Interval

4

7

Puerto Rico Presence

Year

10

13

90% Confidence Interval

0
-.5
-1

Effect of S936 on Investment/Physical Capital

C. Investment Winsorized at 1%

1

4

7

Puerto Rico Presence

Year

10

13

16

90% Confidence Interval

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows level estimates of
Equation 2 with three variations of the dependent variable and including all controls in specification (5)
of Table 2. Exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level in all panels. In Panel A the dependent
variable is investment divided by average plants, property, and equipment in 1990 to 1995 winsorized
at the 5% level. Panel B changes the dependent variable to be measured in percentage changes. Panel
C uses the same dependent variable as Panel A with the investment winsorized at the 1% level. Blue
lines span a 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

82

16

10
5
0
-5

Effect of S936 on Effective Federal Tax Rate

Figure A.8: Change in Effective Federal Tax Rates after §936 Repeal

1991

1994

1998

Puerto Rico Presence

Year

2001

2004

16

90% Confidence Interval

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This figure shows estimates of Equation
2 where the dependent variable is federal cash taxes paid divided by global pretax income and where
exposure to §936 is an indicator at the firm level. This specification uses the sample from specification (5)
in Table 3. Blue lines span a 95% confidence interval. Consistent with the hypothesis that multinationals
increased federal tax liabilities, we see that exposed firms saw an increase in effective tax rates following
the repeal of §936 relative to non-exposed firms. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

83

0

Capital Stock Relative to Steady State
.25
.5
.75
1

Figure A.9: Effect of a 26% Decrease in Investment on Capital Stock by Type of
Capital

-5

0
5
Years from 26% Investment Decrease
Buildings, δ = 0.025
Electronics, δ = 0.123

10

Machinery, δ = 0.069

Notes: Author’s calculations of the derivation shown in Appendix E calibrated using data from
BEA (2018). This figure shows the trajectory of the capital stock for different types of capital at a
general industrial firm. We assume the capital stock is in a steady state before year 0 and that investment
decreases to 26% of its steady state value after the reform. Buildings, which depreciate relatively slowly
with a depreciation rate of 0.025, lose 5.8% of their value after 10 years. Machinery and electronics
(including computers) depreciate relatively faster—rates of 0.069 and 0.122, respectively—and lose
13.2% and 18.96% of their stock after 10 years.

84

.05
0
-.05
-.1
-.15

Effect of S936 on Firm Employment

Figure A.10: NETS Employment Event Study, DFL Weights

1990

1995

2000
Year

All Firms
All firms with FE
Major Sectors with FE
Major Industries with FE
Major Industries + DFL with FE

2005
95% CI
95% CI
95% CI
95% CI
95% CI

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This figure shows the decline in employment
at §936 exposed firms relative to similar control firms without exposure to §936. See Appendix A.3 for
a description of the DFL weights used to create the control sample. Point estimates are displayed in
Column (3) of Table A.10. See Section 5 for more discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level.

85

-.08

-.06

Effect of S936 Exposure
-.04 -.02
0
.02

.04

Figure A.11: Effects of Repealing of §936 on Number of Establishments in Affected
Firms

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Estit-Esti1995)/Esti1995=αt+βtS936 Exposurei+εit. SE's clustered by Firm.

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This figure shows the decline in establishments
at §936 exposed firms relative to similar control firms without exposure to §936. See Appendix A.3 for
a description of the procedure used to identify the comparison firms. By 2006, firms exposed to §936
had 2.7% less establishment growth than firms that were otherwise similar in 1995. See Section 5 for
more discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

86

-2

Log US Employment
-1
0

1

Figure A.12: Relation Between Log Employment and Log Capital Expenditures

-4

-2

0
Log Capital Expenditures

2

4

Note: β=0.39***(0.027)

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT and NETS. This figure plots the
results of a regression of log US employment at the firm level on log capital expenditures. It shows that
an increase in 1% of capital expenditures is associated with an increase in 0.39% in US employment.
We use this estimated relation to benchmark the magnitudes of the employment and investment effects
in Section 5.

87

Figure A.13: Robustness Using Variable Definitions from Autor et al. (2013)

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

A. Effect of §936 Exposure on Employment-to-Pop Ratio in Manufacturing (% change)

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Epopict-Epopic1995)/Epopic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

-.5
-1.5
-2.5
-3.5

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)

.5

B. Effect of §936 Exposure on Employment-to-Pop Ratio in Manufacturing (level change)

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: Epopict-Epopic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS, QCEW, and the Census. See Tables A.19 and
A.20 for regression coefficients and more specifications. These figures estimate the effect that exposure
to §936 has on the proportion of working age adults who work in the manufacturing sector. Autor et al.
(2013) introduce this variable as a potential avenue for assigning dollar values to shocks that influence
local labor markets. The top panel show that increasing §936 exposure from the 25th percentile to the
75th percentile will decrease the percent of working age adults with manufacturing jobs by about 6%
and the lower panel shows that proportion decreases by more than 2.5 percentage points. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level.

88

Effect S936 Exposure (IQR)
-.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

Figure A.14: Effect of Exposure to Section 936 on Employment at the County Level,
State Time Trend

1990

1995

2000
Year
Estimate

2005

2010

95% CI

Notes: (Empict-Empic1995)/Empic1995=αc+γit+βtS936 Exposurec+εict. SE's clustered by State and Industry.

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure shows the coefficients
for an event study of employment on exposure to §936 firms. This figure corresponds to Figure 10 with
the inclusion of state-specific linear time trends. Standard errors are clustered at the state and industry
levels.

89

-.15

Percent Employment Growth
-.1
-.05
0

.05

Figure A.15: Employment Effects of §936 Exposure, Robustness to Focusing Exposure on Largest Firms

1990

1995

2000
Year

Baseline
>40,000

>20,000
>50,000

2005

2010
>30,000

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. This figure shows the coefficients
for an event study of employment on exposure to §936 firms where the set of connected firms are
restricted to have a large number of employees–20,000, 30,000, 40,000, and 50,000, respectively. This
figure corresponds to Figure 10 with the inclusion of shocks that are constructed of firms with a certain
size. Standard errors are clustered at the state and industry levels. Standard errors and more details
are shown in Table A.16.

90

-.2

Percent Employment Growth
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

.05

Figure A.16: Heterogeneous Effects of Repealing of §936 on Employment by Sector,
with Confidence Intervals

1990

1995

2000
Year

Sector:
Non-Tradable

2005

All
Construction

2010
Tradable
Other

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW and sector definitions from Mian
and Sufi (2014). This figure shows the average effect and the heterogeneous effects by sector with
confidence intervals corresponding to Figure 14. Estimates and standard errors are displayed in Table
A.26. This figure highlights that the tradable sector sees a decline in employment before any of the
other sectors. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and Section 6 for a discussion of the results.
Standard errors are clustered at the state and industry levels. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.
County observations are weighted according to employment in 1995.

91

Figure A.17: Effects of Exposure to §936 on Adjusted Wages and Rental Costs

-3

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

.3
-.3
-3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

-3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is -0.0144 with standard error 0.0022 and p-value 0.0000

D. Wage Growth Before 1990

E. Low Skill Wage Growth Before 1990

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is -0.0181 with standard error 0.0036 and p-value 0.0000

-.15

Residualized Rent Growth
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

-.15

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05 0
.05
.1
.15

.3

F. Rent Growth Before 1990

-3

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is 0.0058 with standard error 0.0074 and p-value 0.4392

-.3

92

The slope of the regression line is -0.0101 with standard error 0.0017 and p-value 0.0000

.15

C. Rent Growth After 1990
Residualized Rent Growth
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1
-.15

-.15

Residualized Wage Growth
-.1 -.05
0
.05
.1

.15

B. Low Skill Wage Growth After 1990

.15

A. Wage Growth After 1990

-3

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is 0.0038 with standard error 0.0076 and p-value 0.6216

-3

-1
1
IQR Adjusted Exposure to Section 936
Data (weighted by population)
Linear Fit

3

Binned Data by Ventiles
90% CI

The slope of the regression line is 0.0323 with standard error 0.0116 and p-value 0.0076

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and Census. Exposure to §936 is residualized. This figure shows that exposure to §936
was not correlated with wage and rent growth before the repeal of §936. See Appendix A for a discussion of the data and Section 6 for a
discussion of the results.

-3

-2

CAR (Percent)
-1

0

1

Figure A.18: Repealing §936 Reduced Firm Value of Exposed Firms

-6

-3

0

3
6
Days from Event

9

Cumulative Abnormal Return with Leads
Cumulative Abnormal Return without Leads

12

15
90% CI
90% CI

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT and CRSP. The event study takes
place on two dates regarding the repeal of the Possessions Tax Credit: February 16, 1993 and October
12, 1995. Cumulative abnormal returns are calculated for firms with exposure to the Possessions Tax
Credit. For more information about the events see Appendix C. This plots the results of Table A.30 for
all intermediate dates in [-6,15]. It shows that between days (0,12) firms exposed to §936 experienced
a CAR of -1.4%. The event study results are shown with additional specifications in Table A.31 that
include interactions with firm characteristics. As a robustness check, Figure A.19 shows a specification
that adjusts for the Fama and French (1993) 3 factors and momentum and finds a similar result.
Standard errors are robust.

93

Figure A.19: Repealing §936 Reduced Firm Value of Exposed Firms: Robustness

-2

CAR (Percent)
-1
0

1

CAPM Plus Fama-French Factors and Momentum

-6

-3

0

3
6
Days from Event

9

Cumulative Abnormal Return with Leads
Cumulative Abnormal Return without Leads

12

15
90% CI
90% CI

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT and CRSP. This plots the results of
Table A.30 for a wider range of dates. It shows that between days (0,12) firms exposed to §936 adjusting
for the Fama and French (1993) 3 factors and momentum experienced a CAR of -.8%. The primary
specification without Fama-French Factors or Momentum is shown in Figure A.18. Standard errors are
robust.

94

Figure A.20: Heterogeneous Employment Effects of Repealing of §936
A. Interaction Terms

B. Effects of Interactions on Marginal Effect

Total Incentives (Bartik)

ME at Average

Job Creation Incentive

+1σ Job Incentive

Job Training Subsidy

-1σ Corp Tax Rate

Real Minimum Wage

+1σ China Exposure

Right to Work

+1σ Routine Workers

RD Tax Credit

+1σ Nafta Exposure

Investment Tax Credit

+1σ Invest Incentive
+1σ R&D Credit

Corporate Income Tax

+1σ Right to Work

Personal Income Tax

+1σ Minimum Wage

Property Tax

+1σ Job Training

Sales Tax

+1σ State Tax Revenue

Trade Exposure (China)

+1σ Sales Tax Rate

State Revenue Per Capita

+1σ Prop Tax Rate

Share Routine Workers

+1σ Personal Tax Rate

Trade Exposure (Nafta)
-.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

0

.02

.04

.06

.08

-.2
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
Marginal Effect of Exposure to S936 on Emp Growth, 2004-08

.1

C. Geographic Distribution of Marginal Effects

D. Quantile Regression Estimates

-.12

-.1

βq: Quantile Regression
-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

0

95
15

25

50
Quantile
Estimate

75

85

95% CI

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS and QCEW. Panel A plots the individual interaction terms. Panel B plots the
marginal effects evaluated at a one standard deviation change from the average. The marginal effect evaluated at the mean is about 8%. The
median effect across counties is close to the effect we find when we do not include these controls or interactions. Panel C plots the distribution
of marginal effects across counties and shows that some states had much larger sensitivity to the repeal of §936. Panel D takes a different
approach to characterizing the heterogeneity in effects and plots estimates of quantile regressions. These estimates show that the repeal of
§936 had larger effects on counties that were growing faster. This implies that, while the repeal of §936 saw declines in growth across all
counties, it also a led to a compression in the distribution of growth rates. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table A.1: Regressions of ETR on §936 Credits/Taxable Income

Possession Credits

(1)
-0.816
(0.252)
0.004

(2)
-0.943
(0.283)
0.003

(3)
-0.816
(0.314)
0.016

Change in Possession Credits

Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
Net Income and Sales Controls
Regression in First Differences
Taxable Income Weights
Net Income Weights

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.771
(0.175)
0.000
Yes

-0.718
(0.225)
0.004
Yes

-0.767
(0.258)
0.007
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Author’s calculations and data from SOI. This table shows regressions of effective tax
rate on the US Possessions Tax credit in levels and in first differences. For each additional dollar
of §926 credits, the effective tax rate goes down by 0.7 to 0.95 dollars in response. Standard
errors clustered at the industry level are shown in parantheses with p-values below. Industries
are weighted according to income before and after tax. For more information and discussion, see
Appendix B.

96

Table A.2: Firm Characteristics of the Firms with Compustat Data
S936 Firms
General Characteristics
Cash ETR
Federal Taxes Paid
Multinational
Net Operating Loss
Natural Log of Assets
Spending
Research and Development
Advertising
Capital Expenditures
Capital and Financing
Plants, Property, and Equipment
Leverage Ratio
Book to Debt Ratio
Intangibles

All Control Firms

Mean

SD

Count

Mean

SD

Count

0.351
133.272
0.973
0.529
7.631

0.302
269.024
0.161
0.500
2.011

263
219
263
263
262

0.482
13.055
0.970
0.684
4.475

0.427
69.057
0.170
0.465
2.477

11177
7654
11177
11177
9907

0.027
0.012
0.225

0.059
0.036
0.127

262
262
247

0.068
0.008
0.365

0.199
0.052
2.808

9629
9629
8339

0.286
0.262
-0.001
0.101

0.187
0.210
0.021
0.121

260
262
139
211

0.270
0.592
0.020
0.061

0.258
16.998
0.370
0.129

9666
9907
1492
8617

Notes: This table reports the mean characteristics and firm counts with non-missing data
from Compustat separately for §936 and control firms.

97

Table A.3: Counties with Notable Section 936 Exposure in 1995

98

County
Rank
Livingston County, Michigan
1
2
Sussex County, New Jersey
3
Hernando County, Florida
4
Kings County, New York
5
El Dorado County, California
6
San Luis Obispo County, California
7
Bronx County, New York
8
Tolland County, Connecticut
9
Marin County, California
10
Yavapai County, Arizona
448
Mecklenburg County, North Carolina
449
Vanderburgh County, Indiana
450
DuPage County, Illinois
451
Hampton city, Virginia
452
Shelby County, Tennessee
453
St. Louis city, Missouri
454
Bibb County, Georgia
455
New Castle County, Delaware
456
Henrico County, Virginia
457
Bergen County, New Jersey

S936 Est Exposure
County
0.003
El Dorado County, California
0.004
Sussex County, New Jersey
0.004
San Luis Obispo County, California
0.004
Bronx County, New York
0.004
Hernando County, Florida
0.004
Livingston County, Michigan
0.005
Yakima County, Washington
0.005
Whatcom County, Washington
0.005
Jackson County, Oregon
0.005
Barnstable County, Massachusetts
0.028
Mercer County, New Jersey
0.029
Durham County, North Carolina
0.029
Trumbull County, Ohio
0.030
Forsyth County, North Carolina
0.030
Lake County, Illinois
0.030
Brazoria County, Texas
0.031
Hartford County, Connecticut
0.032
Somerset County, New Jersey
0.036
Aiken County, South Carolina
0.037
Genesee County, Michigan

S936 Emp Exposure
0.007
0.008
0.014
0.015
0.016
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.019
0.020
0.257
0.258
0.262
0.267
0.274
0.280
0.296
0.312
0.322
0.342

Notes: This table lists the top and bottom 10 counties in terms of exposure to Section 936 through percent of linked establishments (S936 Est Exposure) and percent of linked employment (S936 Emp Exposure). The sample of counties for inclusion in this
table is restricted to those with more than 100,000 population in 1995. Data come from NETS (Walls & Associates, 2012).

Table A.4: Puerto Rico Link, Demographic Characteristics, and Economic Polices

Exposure to Section 936

Exposure to Section 936

Exposure to Section 936
99
Exposure to Section 936

(2)
(3)
(1)
Min Wage
Right to Work
Pers. Income Tax
-0.174
-0.050
-0.009
(0.093)
(0.084)
(0.126)
0.070
0.560
0.943
(1)
(2)
(3)
Corporate Tax R&D Credit State Revenue/GDP
-0.033
-0.103
-0.123
(0.098)
(0.078)
(0.092)
0.741
0.200
0.190
(1)
(2)
(3)
LFPR
% Retail
% Agriuclture
-0.007
0.090
-0.049
(0.111)
(0.093)
(0.061)
0.950
0.340
0.430
(1)
(2)
(3)
Capital Stock
% College
% Less HS
-0.141
0.282
0.029
(0.143)
(0.124)
(0.105)
0.329
0.027
0.783

(4)
(5)
Sales Tax
Prop. Tax
-0.081
-0.008
(0.115)
(0.061)
0.485
0.902
(4)
(5)
Trade Exposure (China) Share of Routine Labor
-0.042
-0.003
(0.032)
(0.098)
0.199
0.975
(4)
(5)
% Manuf. Durable
% Manuf. Non-Durable
-0.052
-0.011
(0.070)
(0.044)
0.467
0.813
(4)
(5)
% White
% Black
-0.110
0.080
(0.308)
(0.257)
0.723
0.756

Notes: This table shows correlations between the Exposure to Section 936 and other policy variables at the county level. Robust
standard errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are displayed below standard errors. Exposure to Section 936 is calculated
using data from NETS. Economic policies and other local characteristics come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the
Bureau of Labor Statistics as gathered by Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016), import exposure and routine labor shares come
from Autor et al. (2016), and industry proportions are calculated from QCEW (2017). For more information on the calculation see
Section 4 and for more information about the data see Appendix A.

Table A.5: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Percent Change in Investment of Exposed
Firms
I
I 1990−1995

−1
(1)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post
-0.469
(0.173)
0.007
Observations
78698
Sample Average I/K in 2006 Relative to 1995 4.197
Percent of 2006 Average
11.2%
Change in Effective Tax Rate
5.727
Semi-elasticity of Investment
1.95
Year Fixed Effects
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights
Percent Change in Investment:

(2)
-0.485
(0.173)
0.005
78681
4.197
11.6%
5.727
2.02
Y
Y

(3)
-0.415
(0.144)
0.004
78681
4.197
9.9%
5.727
1.73
Y
Y
Y

(4)
-0.532
(0.168)
0.002
42615
3.560
14.9%
4.653
3.21
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
-0.565
(0.199)
0.005
35980
3.587
15.7%
6.010
2.62
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table estimates Equation
2 where the dependent variable is the percent change in investment relative to investment in 19901995 winsorized at the 5% level. The estimates in this table correspond to a pooled version of
the regression displayed in Figure A.5. These estimates reflect the percent change in investment
at firms exposed to Section 936 after 1996 and show robustness to the variable measurement in
the preferred specifications displayed in Table 2. See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A
for more information about the data and variables. Standard errors clustered at the firm level
are shown in parentheses with p-values below.

100

(6)
-0.450
(0.178)
0.012
34725
3.664
12.3%
6.010
2.04
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Table A.6: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Investment Relative to Capital of Exposed
Firms, Winsorized at 1%
Change in Investment:

I
K 1990−1995

(1)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post -0.400
(0.132)
0.002
Observations
79393
Sample Average I/K in 2006
2.066
Percent of 2006 Average
19.3%
Change in Effective Tax Rate
5.727
Semi-elasticity of Investment
3.38
Year Fixed Effects
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(2)
-0.383
(0.130)
0.003
79376
2.066
18.5%
5.727
3.23
Y
Y

(3)
-0.377
(0.093)
0.000
79376
2.066
18.2%
5.727
3.19
Y
Y
Y

(4)
-0.375
(0.095)
0.000
42734
1.472
25.5%
4.653
5.47
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
-0.478
(0.117)
0.000
36089
1.591
30.0%
6.010
5.00
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
-0.410
(0.086)
0.000
34821
1.636
25.1%
6.010
4.17
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table estimates Equation
2 where the dependent variable is investment divided by average capital in 1990-1995 winsorized
at the 1% level. The estimates in this table correspond to a pooled version of the regression
displayed in Figure A.6. These estimates reflect the percent change in investment at firms
exposed to Section 936 after 1996. See Section 5 for more discussion and Appendix A for more
information about the data and variables. The same regressions with the dependent variable
winsorized at the 5% level are shown in Table 2. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are
shown in parentheses with p-values below.

101

Table A.7: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Investment Relative to Capital of Exposed Firms:
Robustness to Controls
Change in Investment:

I
K 1990−1995

Exposure to Section 936 X Post

102

Observations
Sample Average I/K in 2006
Percent of 2006 Average
Change in Effective Tax Rate
Semi-elasticity of Investment
2 digit NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
3 digit NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Size Control (Employment)
Size Control (Cubic in Revenue)
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(1)
-0.119
(0.043)
0.006
79376
1.174
10.1%
5.727
1.77
Y
Y
Y

(2)
-0.118
(0.043)
0.006
79376
1.174
10.1%
5.727
1.76
Y
Y

(3)
-0.132
(0.044)
0.002
79393
1.174
11.3%
5.727
1.97

(4)
-0.105
(0.043)
0.015
79393
1.174
9.0%
5.727
1.57

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
-0.142
(0.052)
0.007
34821
1.018
14.0%
6.010
2.33
Y

(6)
-0.144
(0.052)
0.006
34821
1.018
14.1%
6.010
2.35
Y

(7)
-0.150
(0.051)
0.003
34821
1.018
14.8%
6.010
2.46

(8)
-0.181
(0.048)
0.000
34821
1.018
17.8%
6.010
2.96
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table estimates Equation 2. This table shows that the results
in Table 2 are robust to using different controls for industry and firm size. All columns control for firm fixed effects and firm size
measured as the inverse hyperbolic sine of revenue. Columns (1) and (5) of this table correspond to columns (3) and (6) of Table
2. Columns (2) and (6) show we obtain similar results when we do not control for log-employment. Columns (3) and (7) show we
obtain similar results when we control for 3-digit NAICS-by-year fixed effects instead of 2-digit NAICS-by-year fixed effects. Finally,
columns (4) and (8) show we obtain similar results when we additionally control for a cubic polynomial in our revenue measure.
See Section 5 for more discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data and variables. Standard errors clustered at
the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values below.

Table A.8: Effect of Repealing §936 on the Federal Taxes Paid as a Percent of Pretax
Income

Exposure to Section 936 X Post

Observations
Year Fixed Effects
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(1)
4.190
(2.132)
0.049
33097
Y

(2)
4.873
(2.119)
0.021
33074
Y
Y

(3)
4.675
(2.288)
0.041
33074
Y
Y
Y

(4)
7.830
(3.286)
0.017
17314
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
6.614
(3.689)
0.073
14065
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
7.246
(3.383)
0.032
13187
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from COMPUSTAT. This table estimates a version
of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is cash federal taxes paid divided by US pretax
income. These estimates reflect the percent change in federal taxes paid as a percent of pretax
income at firms exposed to Section 936 after 1995. The last column shows that federal taxes paid
as a percent of US pretax income increased by 7.2pp at exposed firms after the repeal of §936.
We use the share of revenue originating in the US as a proxy for the share of pretax income
originating in the domestic market, which is 75% on average, and the sample is restricted to
those firms with non-trivial pretax income. The estimated change in effective tax rate is similar
to the tax increase estimates of 4.5-5.9pp discussed in Appendix B. See Section 5 and Appendix
B for additional discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data and variables.
Clustered standard errors at the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values below.

103

Table A.9: Change in Total Effective Tax Rate in Treated Firms
Change in Global Taxes Paid as a Percent of Pretax Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Exposure to Section 936 X Post 2.446
2.681
3.262
4.264
(1.652) (1.689) (1.993) (2.907)
0.139
0.112
0.102
0.143
Observations
42235
42199
42199
21939
Change in Effective Tax Rate
5.727
5.727
5.727
4.653
Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Firm Fixed Effects
Y
Y
S936 Exposed Sector
Y
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(5)
5.642
(2.948)
0.056
17604
6.010
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(6)
5.156
(2.527)
0.041
16565
6.010
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS, SOI, and Compustat. This table shows
the change in total (global) taxes paid as a percent of pretax income at exposed firms after the
repeal of §936. This table estimates a version of Equation 2 where the dependent variable is
global cash taxes paid divided by global pretax income. The last column shows that taxes paid
as a percent of global pretax income increased by 5.1pp at exposed firms after the repeal of §936.
The sample is restricted to those firms with non-trivial pretax income. The estimated change in
effective tax rate is similar to the tax increase estimates of 4.5-5.9pp discussed in Appendix B.
See Appendix B for additional discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data
and variables. Clustered standard errors at the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values
below.

104

Table A.10: Change in Employment at Exposed Firms Relative to Controls:
Robustness
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Observations
Year Fixed Effects
NAICS-by-Year Fixed Effects
S936 Exposed Sector
S936 Exposed Industry
DFL Weights

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.006
(0.010)
-0.008
(0.009)
-0.011
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.021
(0.011)
-0.022
(0.012)
-0.022
(0.013)
-0.029∗
(0.014)
-0.037∗
(0.016)
-0.046∗∗
(0.016)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.088∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.015)
383893
Y

0.005
(0.012)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.007
(0.009)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.019
(0.012)
-0.016
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.014)
-0.017
(0.015)
-0.024
(0.017)
-0.028
(0.020)
-0.041∗
(0.020)
-0.043∗
(0.020)
-0.047∗
(0.019)
-0.047∗
(0.019)
-0.055∗∗
(0.019)
-0.060∗∗
(0.019)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.019)
383893
Y
Y

-0.011
(0.018)
-0.010
(0.018)
-0.014
(0.016)
-0.006
(0.009)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.019∗
(0.009)
-0.020
(0.017)
-0.017
(0.017)
-0.014
(0.017)
-0.009
(0.018)
-0.017
(0.021)
-0.020
(0.021)
-0.022
(0.020)
-0.038
(0.021)
-0.047∗
(0.022)
-0.048∗
(0.022)
-0.048∗
(0.021)
-0.054∗
(0.022)
-0.055∗
(0.023)
-0.055∗
(0.022)
-0.054∗
(0.022)
-0.045
(0.023)
75026
Y
Y
Y

-0.020
(0.019)
-0.021
(0.016)
-0.020
(0.014)
-0.008
(0.009)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.026∗
(0.011)
-0.037
(0.020)
-0.036
(0.020)
-0.032
(0.019)
-0.025
(0.020)
-0.037
(0.021)
-0.050∗
(0.021)
-0.057∗
(0.022)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.094∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.094∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.094∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.020)
66378
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.005
(0.021)
-0.016
(0.019)
-0.014
(0.017)
-0.003
(0.012)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.017
(0.011)
-0.030
(0.019)
-0.032
(0.019)
-0.029
(0.019)
-0.023
(0.020)
-0.026
(0.022)
-0.031
(0.022)
-0.037
(0.023)
-0.053∗
(0.024)
-0.053∗
(0.024)
-0.039
(0.024)
-0.036
(0.024)
-0.043
(0.024)
-0.049∗
(0.022)
-0.054∗
(0.022)
-0.056∗∗
(0.021)
-0.055∗
(0.022)
49910
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This table shows the decline in employment at §936 exposed firms relative to similar control firms without exposure to §936 in the
105
NETS. See Appendix A.4 for a description of the procedure used to generate DFL weights. See
Section 5 for more discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

Table A.11: Change in Employment at Exposed Firms Relative to Controls, 20042008

Exposure to Section 936

Observations
Year Fixed Effects

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All
Chemicals Food Electronics
-0.071
-0.141
-0.000
-0.134
(0.017)
(0.036)
(0.052)
(0.040)
0.000
0.000
0.995
0.001
83455
83455
83455
83455
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)
Other
-0.064
(0.018)
0.000
83455
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations using data from NETS. This table shows the decline in employment by 2004-2008 at §936 exposed firms relative to similar control firms without exposure
to §936. See Appendix A.4 for a description of the procedure used to generate DFL weights. See
Section 5 for more discussion. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

106

Table A.12: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Establishment Links
Instrumenting for Employment Links
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.000
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.010)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.011∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.020∗∗
(0.008)
-0.031∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.085∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.023)
Yes

(2)
0.000
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.009)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.010∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.020∗∗
(0.008)
-0.031∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.085∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.023)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.000
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.009)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.010∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.020∗∗
(0.008)
-0.031∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.085∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.023)
Yes

(4)
0.010
(0.012)
0.007
(0.010)
0.006
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.010∗∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.019∗∗
(0.006)
-0.028∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.082∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.008
(0.023)
-0.009
(0.019)
-0.003
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.008)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.006)
-0.018∗
(0.008)
-0.022∗
(0.010)
-0.036∗∗
(0.012)
-0.047∗∗
(0.015)
-0.054∗∗
(0.017)
-0.061∗∗
(0.019)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.095∗∗∗
(0.027)
-0.106∗∗
(0.031)
-0.105∗∗
(0.031)
-0.103∗∗
(0.030)
-0.095∗∗
(0.027)
-0.092∗∗
(0.027)
-0.097∗∗
(0.028)
-0.106∗∗∗
(0.029)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Section
936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Observations are county-industries
in each year. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment comes from
QCEW (2017). See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the
data. Estimates are shown graphically in panel A of Figure 11. Standard errors clustered at
the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
107 in 1995.
Observations are weighted according to employment

Table A.13: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Large Retailers
Removed from Links
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
Yes

(2)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.002
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.002
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
Yes

(4)
0.008
(0.011)
0.005
(0.009)
0.005
(0.006)
0.004
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.056∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.006
(0.019)
-0.007
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.011)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.016∗
(0.007)
-0.019∗
(0.008)
-0.030∗∗
(0.010)
-0.040∗∗
(0.013)
-0.046∗∗
(0.014)
-0.052∗∗
(0.016)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.089∗∗
(0.026)
-0.089∗∗
(0.027)
-0.087∗∗
(0.026)
-0.080∗∗
(0.023)
-0.078∗∗
(0.023)
-0.082∗∗
(0.024)
-0.090∗∗∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Section
936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Observations are counties in each
year.Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW (2017).
See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. Estimates are
shown graphically in panel B of Figure 11. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry
levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted
108
according to employment in 1995.

Table A.14: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Firms without US
Headquarters Removed from Links
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.002)
-0.010∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes

(2)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.002
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.002)
-0.010∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.001
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.002
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.002)
-0.010∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.018∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes

(4)
0.009
(0.011)
0.006
(0.009)
0.006
(0.006)
0.004
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.018∗∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.016)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.006
(0.020)
-0.007
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.011)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.010
(0.005)
-0.016∗
(0.007)
-0.020∗
(0.009)
-0.031∗∗
(0.010)
-0.041∗∗
(0.013)
-0.047∗∗
(0.015)
-0.053∗∗
(0.016)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.091∗∗
(0.026)
-0.090∗∗
(0.027)
-0.088∗∗
(0.026)
-0.081∗∗
(0.023)
-0.079∗∗
(0.023)
-0.083∗∗
(0.024)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Section
936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Exposure to Section 936 comes
from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW (2017). See Section 5 for discussion and
Appendix A for more information about the data. Estimates are shown graphically in panel B of
Figure 11. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses.
∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted according to employment in
109
1995.

Table A.15: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Links Only Counting
Compustat Firms
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.005
(0.013)
0.004
(0.010)
0.006
(0.007)
0.005
(0.004)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.016∗∗
(0.005)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.052∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.016)
Yes

(2)
0.005
(0.013)
0.004
(0.010)
0.006
(0.007)
0.005
(0.004)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.016∗∗
(0.006)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.052∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.016)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.005
(0.013)
0.004
(0.010)
0.006
(0.007)
0.005
(0.004)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.016∗∗
(0.005)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.052∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.016)
Yes

(4)
0.011
(0.009)
0.010
(0.007)
0.010
(0.005)
0.007∗
(0.003)
0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.009∗∗
(0.003)
-0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.017∗∗
(0.005)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.029∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.036∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.051∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.015)
Yes
Yes

(5)
0.001
(0.018)
0.001
(0.014)
0.005
(0.010)
0.004
(0.006)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.014∗
(0.006)
-0.016∗
(0.007)
-0.026∗∗
(0.009)
-0.034∗∗
(0.011)
-0.041∗∗
(0.013)
-0.047∗∗
(0.015)
-0.059∗∗
(0.017)
-0.071∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗
(0.024)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.072∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.084∗∗∗
(0.022)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Section
936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Exposure to Section 936 comes
from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW (2017). See Section 5 for discussion and
Appendix A for more information about the data. Estimates are shown graphically in panel B of
Figure 11. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses.
∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted according to employment in
110
1995.

Table A.16: Local Labor Market Impact Robustness to Focusing Exposure on
Largest Firms
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects

(1)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(2)
-0.005
(0.014)
-0.005
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.025∗∗
(0.007)
-0.032∗∗
(0.009)
-0.038∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.075∗∗∗
(0.018)
Yes
Yes

(3)
-0.003
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.010)
0.001
(0.007)
0.002
(0.004)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.007∗
(0.003)
-0.013∗∗
(0.005)
-0.016∗
(0.006)
-0.023∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗
(0.009)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.048∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.057∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
Yes
Yes

(4)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.009)
0.001
(0.006)
0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.008∗∗
(0.003)
-0.014∗∗
(0.004)
-0.018∗∗
(0.005)
-0.023∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.057∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.062∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.017)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.003
(0.008)
0.001
(0.005)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.003∗
(0.001)
-0.007∗∗
(0.002)
-0.013∗∗
(0.004)
-0.016∗∗
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.027∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.036∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.052∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.017)
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the estimates from a regression of local employment growth on
exposure to §936 firms of varying size restrictions. The estimates shown in this table correspond
to Equation 6 and the baseline estimates in Table 6. Column (1) in this table matches Column
(2) in Table 6. Columns (2) to (5) run the same regression where the set of firms that are allowed
to have connections with Puerto Rico are restricted to larger firms. The §936 exposure shocks
are all normalized to share the same standard deviation. Column (2) restricts the shock to only
include firms with more than 20,000 workers. The restriction is increased to 30,000 workers in
Column (3), 40,000 workers in Column (4) and 50,000 workers in Column (5). Results are shown
111 in parentheses are clustered at the state and
graphically in Figure A.15. Standard errors shown
industry levels.

Table A.17: Event Study on Employment Growth, Exposure to §936 Defined using
1993 Firm Networks
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.002
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗
(0.006)
-0.018∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗
(0.010)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.057∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
Yes

(2)
0.002
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗
(0.006)
-0.018∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗
(0.010)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.057∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.002
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗
(0.006)
-0.018∗
(0.007)
-0.027∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗
(0.010)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.057∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.077∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.021)
Yes

(4)
0.008
(0.012)
0.004
(0.010)
0.004
(0.006)
0.003
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.008∗
(0.004)
-0.013∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.007)
-0.025∗∗
(0.008)
-0.032∗∗
(0.010)
-0.038∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.005
(0.019)
-0.007
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.011)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.016∗
(0.007)
-0.020∗
(0.009)
-0.031∗∗
(0.011)
-0.039∗∗
(0.013)
-0.045∗∗
(0.014)
-0.050∗∗
(0.016)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.076∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.086∗∗
(0.025)
-0.085∗∗
(0.026)
-0.084∗∗
(0.026)
-0.079∗∗
(0.024)
-0.077∗∗
(0.024)
-0.081∗∗
(0.025)
-0.089∗∗
(0.027)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates of Equation 5, which are shown in Figure 11. Observations are county-industries in each year. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and
employment growth comes from QCEW (2017). In this table, exposure to §936 is defined using
the set of firms with establishments in Puerto Rico in 1993 as a robustness check to Table 6. See
Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. Standard errors
clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. Observations are weighted
112∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
by employment in 1995. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01,

Table A.18: Event Study on Employment Growth, Exposure to §936 Defined using
1993 Firm Networks with Firms also Present in 1995
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.006)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes

(2)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.007)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.007)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes

(4)
0.007
(0.011)
0.004
(0.009)
0.005
(0.006)
0.004
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.008∗
(0.003)
-0.013∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗∗
(0.006)
-0.025∗∗
(0.007)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.044∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.056∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.074∗∗∗
(0.018)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.007
(0.019)
-0.008
(0.016)
-0.003
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.015∗
(0.007)
-0.018∗
(0.008)
-0.029∗∗
(0.010)
-0.039∗∗
(0.012)
-0.045∗∗
(0.014)
-0.051∗∗
(0.016)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.088∗∗
(0.026)
-0.087∗∗
(0.026)
-0.085∗∗
(0.025)
-0.078∗∗
(0.023)
-0.076∗∗
(0.023)
-0.080∗∗
(0.024)
-0.087∗∗∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates of Equation 5, which are shown in Figure 11. Observations are county-industries in each year. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and
employment growth comes from QCEW (2017). In this table, exposure to §936 is defined using
the set of firms with establishments in Puerto Rico in 1993 and in 1995 as a robustness check
to Table 6. See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data.
Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. Observations
113 ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
are weighted by employment in 1995. ∗ p < 0.05,

Table A.19: Event Study on the Ratio of Manufacturing Employment to Working
Age Population at the County Level, Percentage Change
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Year-by-State Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.009)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.019∗∗
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗
(0.007)
-0.023∗
(0.009)
-0.026∗
(0.010)
-0.029∗∗
(0.009)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.014)
Yes

(2)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.009)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.019∗∗
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗
(0.007)
-0.023∗
(0.009)
-0.026∗
(0.010)
-0.029∗∗
(0.009)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.014)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.015
(0.010)
0.018∗
(0.008)
0.010
(0.006)
0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.005)
-0.015∗∗
(0.006)
-0.016∗
(0.007)
-0.016
(0.009)
-0.022∗
(0.008)
-0.029∗∗
(0.009)
-0.037∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.050∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.050∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.050∗∗∗
(0.011)
Yes

(4)
-0.005
(0.012)
0.004
(0.008)
0.004
(0.006)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.009∗∗
(0.003)
-0.016∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.022∗∗
(0.006)
-0.025∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.029∗∗
(0.008)
-0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.035∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.051∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.061∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.009)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗
(0.005)
-0.019∗∗
(0.006)
-0.021∗∗
(0.007)
-0.023∗
(0.009)
-0.026∗
(0.010)
-0.029∗∗
(0.009)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.060∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.014)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of percentage change in percent of
working age population working in manufacturing on exposure to Section 936 interacted with
year dummies corresponding to Table 6. This regression is designed after the analysis of Autor et
al. (2013). Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW
(2017). See Section 5 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data.
Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗
114
p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted
by employment in 1995.

Table A.20: Event Study on the Ratio of Manufacturing Employment to Working
Age Population at the County Level, Percentage Points
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Year-by-State Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.266∗
(0.101)
0.041
(0.100)
-0.019
(0.066)
-0.044
(0.054)
-0.024
(0.037)
-0.161∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.257∗∗∗
(0.056)
-0.336∗∗∗
(0.075)
-0.441∗∗∗
(0.093)
-0.536∗∗∗
(0.107)
-0.921∗∗∗
(0.123)
-1.247∗∗∗
(0.151)
-1.484∗∗∗
(0.171)
-1.628∗∗∗
(0.185)
-1.720∗∗∗
(0.194)
-1.921∗∗∗
(0.205)
-2.073∗∗∗
(0.217)
-2.216∗∗∗
(0.231)
-2.592∗∗∗
(0.261)
-2.674∗∗∗
(0.263)
-2.637∗∗∗
(0.256)
-2.623∗∗∗
(0.246)
Yes

(2)
0.266∗
(0.101)
0.041
(0.100)
-0.019
(0.066)
-0.044
(0.054)
-0.024
(0.037)
-0.161∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.257∗∗∗
(0.056)
-0.336∗∗∗
(0.075)
-0.441∗∗∗
(0.093)
-0.536∗∗∗
(0.107)
-0.921∗∗∗
(0.123)
-1.247∗∗∗
(0.151)
-1.484∗∗∗
(0.171)
-1.628∗∗∗
(0.185)
-1.720∗∗∗
(0.194)
-1.921∗∗∗
(0.205)
-2.073∗∗∗
(0.217)
-2.216∗∗∗
(0.231)
-2.592∗∗∗
(0.261)
-2.674∗∗∗
(0.263)
-2.637∗∗∗
(0.256)
-2.623∗∗∗
(0.246)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.456∗∗∗
(0.129)
0.224
(0.113)
0.102
(0.078)
0.008
(0.050)
-0.009
(0.030)
-0.061
(0.032)
-0.113∗
(0.047)
-0.172∗∗
(0.051)
-0.287∗∗∗
(0.050)
-0.346∗∗∗
(0.067)
-0.609∗∗∗
(0.076)
-0.894∗∗∗
(0.096)
-1.122∗∗∗
(0.116)
-1.231∗∗∗
(0.130)
-1.291∗∗∗
(0.134)
-1.411∗∗∗
(0.141)
-1.528∗∗∗
(0.148)
-1.613∗∗∗
(0.158)
-1.862∗∗∗
(0.179)
-1.967∗∗∗
(0.181)
-1.958∗∗∗
(0.176)
-1.981∗∗∗
(0.168)
Yes

(4)
0.302∗∗
(0.097)
0.071
(0.096)
0.009
(0.064)
-0.031
(0.054)
-0.021
(0.038)
-0.160∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.256∗∗∗
(0.056)
-0.335∗∗∗
(0.075)
-0.436∗∗∗
(0.095)
-0.545∗∗∗
(0.108)
-0.912∗∗∗
(0.124)
-1.223∗∗∗
(0.152)
-1.455∗∗∗
(0.171)
-1.602∗∗∗
(0.186)
-1.698∗∗∗
(0.196)
-1.902∗∗∗
(0.209)
-2.055∗∗∗
(0.223)
-2.194∗∗∗
(0.236)
-2.559∗∗∗
(0.265)
-2.643∗∗∗
(0.267)
-2.613∗∗∗
(0.260)
-2.602∗∗∗
(0.249)
Yes
Yes

(5)
0.266∗
(0.102)
0.041
(0.100)
-0.019
(0.066)
-0.044
(0.054)
-0.024
(0.037)
-0.161∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.257∗∗∗
(0.056)
-0.337∗∗∗
(0.075)
-0.441∗∗∗
(0.093)
-0.537∗∗∗
(0.108)
-0.923∗∗∗
(0.123)
-1.249∗∗∗
(0.151)
-1.486∗∗∗
(0.171)
-1.631∗∗∗
(0.186)
-1.723∗∗∗
(0.194)
-1.924∗∗∗
(0.205)
-2.076∗∗∗
(0.218)
-2.220∗∗∗
(0.231)
-2.596∗∗∗
(0.262)
-2.678∗∗∗
(0.264)
-2.641∗∗∗
(0.257)
-2.627∗∗∗
(0.246)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of change in percent of working age
population working in manufacturing on exposure to Section 936 interacted with year dummies
corresponding to Table 6. This regression is designed after the analysis of Autor et al. (2013).
Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW (2017). See
Section 5 for further discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. Standard
errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗
115
p < 0.01. Observations are weighted by employment
in 1995.

Table A.21: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, State Fixed Effects
and Time Trends
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
State Fixed Effects
State Time Trends
County Fixed Effects
County-by-Industry Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.005
(0.012)
0.004
(0.008)
0.007
(0.005)
0.009∗
(0.003)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.005
(0.005)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.008)
-0.020
(0.010)
-0.026∗
(0.012)
-0.031∗
(0.014)
-0.042∗
(0.017)
-0.052∗
(0.020)
-0.060∗
(0.023)
-0.060∗
(0.023)
-0.058∗∗
(0.022)
-0.052∗
(0.021)
-0.049∗
(0.022)
-0.052∗
(0.023)
-0.056∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes
Yes

(2)
-0.004
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.000
(0.004)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.012∗
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.007)
-0.022∗
(0.009)
-0.029∗
(0.011)
-0.035∗
(0.013)
-0.040∗
(0.015)
-0.051∗∗
(0.018)
-0.061∗∗
(0.021)
-0.069∗∗
(0.024)
-0.069∗∗
(0.024)
-0.067∗∗
(0.022)
-0.060∗∗
(0.021)
-0.058∗∗
(0.022)
-0.061∗
(0.023)
-0.065∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(3)
-0.004
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.007)
0.000
(0.004)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.012∗
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.008)
-0.022∗
(0.009)
-0.029∗
(0.012)
-0.035∗
(0.014)
-0.040∗
(0.016)
-0.051∗∗
(0.018)
-0.061∗∗
(0.022)
-0.069∗∗
(0.025)
-0.069∗∗
(0.024)
-0.067∗∗
(0.023)
-0.060∗∗
(0.021)
-0.058∗
(0.022)
-0.060∗
(0.023)
-0.065∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(4)
0.003
(0.016)
0.001
(0.009)
0.002
(0.006)
0.002
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.014
(0.008)
-0.021∗
(0.010)
-0.027∗
(0.012)
-0.034∗
(0.016)
-0.038∗
(0.017)
-0.049∗
(0.020)
-0.058∗∗
(0.021)
-0.065∗∗
(0.022)
-0.064∗∗
(0.022)
-0.063∗∗
(0.022)
-0.056∗
(0.022)
-0.054∗
(0.024)
-0.057∗
(0.026)
-0.060∗
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.013
(0.021)
-0.012
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.012)
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.024∗
(0.010)
-0.032∗
(0.013)
-0.037∗
(0.015)
-0.042∗
(0.018)
-0.055∗∗
(0.020)
-0.067∗∗
(0.024)
-0.075∗
(0.031)
-0.074∗
(0.030)
-0.070∗
(0.030)
-0.063∗
(0.029)
-0.059
(0.030)
-0.062
(0.033)
-0.068
(0.036)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Section
936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Observations are counties in each
year.Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment comes from QCEW (2017).
See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. Estimates are
shown graphically in panel C of Figure 11. Standard
errors clustered at the state and industry
116
∗
∗∗
levels are shown in parentheses. p < 0.05, p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted
according to employment in 1995.

Table A.22: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Fake Shock
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
-0.017∗
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.011)
0.002
(0.011)
0.005
(0.011)
0.010
(0.011)
0.013
(0.012)
Yes

(2)
-0.017∗
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.011)
0.002
(0.011)
0.005
(0.011)
0.010
(0.011)
0.013
(0.012)
Yes
Yes

(3)
-0.018∗
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.004)
0.004
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.011)
0.002
(0.011)
0.005
(0.011)
0.010
(0.011)
0.013
(0.012)
Yes

(4)
-0.017∗
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.011)
0.002
(0.011)
0.005
(0.011)
0.010
(0.011)
0.013
(0.012)
Yes
Yes

(5)
-0.031∗
(0.015)
-0.018
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.005
(0.006)
0.009
(0.009)
0.012
(0.010)
0.015
(0.011)
0.009
(0.014)
0.009
(0.015)
0.005
(0.016)
0.005
(0.017)
0.001
(0.019)
0.007
(0.022)
0.014
(0.022)
0.018
(0.022)
0.022
(0.022)
0.025
(0.022)
0.034
(0.024)
0.038
(0.026)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on a placebo for exposure to Section 936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Observations are
counties in each year. The placebo for exposure to Section 936 comes from a matched sample
of firms in the NETS that do not have establishments in Puerto Rico and employment comes
from QCEW (2017). See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about
the data. Estimates are shown graphically in panel A of Figure 12. Standard errors clustered at
the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
117 in 1995.
Observations are weighted according to employment

Table A.23: Event Study on Employment at the County Level, Pharmaceuticals
Exposure
Exposure to Pharmaceuticals
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects
Industry-by-County Fixed Effects
Winsorized Weights
Drops Small County-Industries (<1000)

(1)
0.011∗
(0.004)
0.007
(0.004)
0.005
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.007
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.006
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
Yes

(2)
0.011∗
(0.004)
0.007
(0.004)
0.005
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.007
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.006
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
Yes
Yes

(3)
0.012∗∗
(0.004)
0.007
(0.003)
0.005∗
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.007
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.007
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.007
(0.006)
Yes

(4)
0.012∗∗
(0.004)
0.007∗
(0.003)
0.005∗
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.008∗
(0.004)
0.005
(0.004)
0.006∗
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.004
(0.004)
0.004
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
0.005
(0.006)
0.006
(0.006)
Yes
Yes

(5)
0.010∗
(0.004)
0.005
(0.004)
0.004
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
0.007
(0.004)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.007
(0.004)
0.009∗∗
(0.003)
0.009∗
(0.004)
0.008
(0.004)
0.009
(0.005)
0.010∗
(0.005)
0.011
(0.005)
0.011
(0.005)
0.010
(0.005)
0.009
(0.005)
0.010
(0.006)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment on exposure to Pharmaceuticals interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. Observations are counties in
each year. Data regarding the exposure to Pharmaceuticals and data on employment both come
from QCEW (2017). See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about
the data. Estimates are shown graphically in panel B of Figure 12. Standard errors clustered at
the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
118 in 1995.
Observations are weighted according to employment

Table A.24: Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment Growth at the County Level:
Robustness Part 1

Exposure to Section 936

(1)
-0.072
(0.018)
0.000

Total Incentives (Bartik)

(2)
-0.083
(0.018)
0.000
-0.045
(0.011)
0.000

Job Creation Incentive

(3)
-0.080
(0.021)
0.000

(4)
-0.079
(0.021)
0.001

(5)
-0.074
(0.021)
0.001

(6)
-0.068
(0.018)
0.000

(7)
-0.079
(0.022)
0.001

(8)
-0.078
(0.018)
0.000

-0.003
(0.003)
0.357

Job Training Subsidy

0.005
(0.017)
0.775

Real Minimum Wage

0.001
(0.011)
0.907

Right to Work

0.045
(0.014)
0.002

RD Tax Credit

0.003
(0.010)
0.752

Investment Tax Credit

-0.032
(0.014)
0.027

Corporate Income Tax

Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects

(9)
-0.074
(0.019)
0.000

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.022
(0.016)
0.174
Yes
Yes

Notes: Estimates in this table build on results shown in Table 6. The estimates in each
column come from a regression of employment growth from QCEW on exposure to Section 936
and other local characteristics. State level policy data come from BEA and BLS data gathered
by Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016). All specifications include year, industry, and state
fixed effects. See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data.
Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses. Observations
are weighted according to employment in 1995.

119

Table A.25: Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment Growth at the County Level:
Robustness Part 2
Exposure to Section 936

(1)
-0.072
(0.018)
0.000

Personal Income Tax

(2)
-0.069
(0.017)
0.000
-0.033
(0.012)
0.010

Property Tax

(3)
-0.073
(0.021)
0.001

(4)
-0.077
(0.021)
0.001

(5)
-0.073
(0.018)
0.000

(6)
-0.076
(0.019)
0.000

(7)
-0.071
(0.019)
0.001

(8)
-0.069
(0.017)
0.000

-0.026
(0.012)
0.038

Sales Tax

0.008
(0.011)
0.463

Trade Exposure (China)

-0.008
(0.013)
0.551

State Revenue Per Capita

-0.026
(0.014)
0.061

Share Routine Workers

-0.013
(0.014)
0.344

Trade Exposure (Nafta)

0.008
(0.019)
0.674

Total Incentives (Bartik)

Job Creation Incentive

Job Training Subsidy

Real Minimum Wage

Right to Work

RD Tax Credit

Investment Tax Credit

Corporate Income Tax

Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
Firm Size Dist. Cont.

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

(9)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000
-0.008
(0.017)
0.640
-0.023
(0.014)
0.115
0.009
(0.022)
0.698
0.007
(0.012)
0.569
-0.002
(0.017)
0.898
0.014
(0.011)
0.218
-0.001
(0.015)
0.970
-0.043
(0.012)
0.001
0.006
(0.014)
0.670
-0.010
(0.020)
0.610
-0.006
(0.009)
0.522
0.047
(0.024)
0.061
0.011
(0.010)
0.293
0.003
(0.018)
0.864
-0.013
(0.017)
0.459
Yes
Yes

(10)
-0.068
(0.016)
0.000
-0.008
(0.016)
0.641
-0.023
(0.015)
0.127
0.006
(0.022)
0.794
0.019
(0.013)
0.135
0.004
(0.018)
0.825
0.033
(0.013)
0.017
-0.012
(0.014)
0.381
-0.044
(0.012)
0.001
0.010
(0.014)
0.456
-0.011
(0.020)
0.568
-0.008
(0.009)
0.382
0.041
(0.022)
0.075
0.008
(0.011)
0.462
0.002
(0.018)
0.903
-0.012
(0.016)
0.458
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Section 6 for discussion of regressions and Appendix A for more information about
the data. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown in parentheses.
Observations are weighted according to employment in 1995.
120

Table A.26: Event Study on Employment Growth at the County Level, Heterogeneous Effects by Sector
Exposure to Section 936
X 1990
X 1991
X 1992
X 1993
X 1994
X 1996
X 1997
X 1998
X 1999
X 2000
X 2001
X 2002
X 2003
X 2004
X 2005
X 2006
X 2007
X 2008
X 2009
X 2010
X 2011
X 2012
Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects
County Fixed Effects

(1)
Average Effect
0.000
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.014∗∗
(0.005)
-0.017∗
(0.007)
-0.026∗∗
(0.008)
-0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.046∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.058∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.069∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.071∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.070∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.073∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes

(2)
Tradable
-0.002
(0.024)
0.001
(0.018)
0.003
(0.011)
0.003
(0.008)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.010∗
(0.004)
-0.021∗∗
(0.007)
-0.028∗∗
(0.010)
-0.028∗∗
(0.009)
-0.032∗∗
(0.009)
-0.038∗∗
(0.010)
-0.036∗∗
(0.011)
-0.036∗∗
(0.012)
-0.039∗∗
(0.014)
-0.045∗∗
(0.013)
-0.054∗∗
(0.015)
-0.059∗∗
(0.017)
-0.061∗∗
(0.018)
-0.054∗∗
(0.017)
-0.050∗∗
(0.016)
-0.054∗∗
(0.018)
-0.059∗∗
(0.020)
Yes
Yes

(3)
Non-Tradable
0.002
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.008)
0.002
(0.006)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.008∗
(0.003)
-0.013∗∗
(0.004)
-0.017∗∗
(0.005)
-0.025∗∗
(0.006)
-0.032∗∗
(0.007)
-0.038∗∗
(0.009)
-0.044∗∗
(0.011)
-0.054∗∗
(0.012)
-0.062∗∗
(0.015)
-0.071∗∗
(0.019)
-0.076∗∗
(0.021)
-0.081∗∗
(0.020)
-0.078∗∗
(0.020)
-0.081∗∗
(0.021)
-0.088∗∗
(0.021)
-0.092∗∗
(0.023)
Yes
Yes

(4)
Other
0.001
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.013)
-0.000
(0.008)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.013
(0.009)
-0.024∗
(0.011)
-0.030∗
(0.013)
-0.040∗
(0.015)
-0.043∗
(0.016)
-0.053∗∗
(0.017)
-0.063∗∗
(0.020)
-0.069∗∗
(0.022)
-0.069∗∗
(0.023)
-0.069∗∗
(0.024)
-0.067∗∗
(0.023)
-0.067∗∗
(0.024)
-0.069∗∗
(0.024)
-0.075∗∗
(0.025)
Yes
Yes

(5)
Construction
-0.016
(0.023)
-0.005
(0.016)
0.002
(0.011)
0.003
(0.005)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.015∗
(0.007)
-0.015
(0.011)
-0.034∗∗
(0.009)
-0.051∗∗
(0.013)
-0.068∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.086∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.106∗∗
(0.026)
-0.130∗∗
(0.035)
-0.149∗∗
(0.041)
-0.145∗∗
(0.036)
-0.132∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.112∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.108∗∗
(0.025)
-0.107∗∗
(0.025)
-0.116∗∗∗
(0.026)
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates from regressions of employment growth on exposure
to Section 936 interacted with year dummies corresponding to Table 6. The second to fifth
columns show the heterogeneous effects by industry using definitions from Mian and Sufi (2014).
Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and employment growth comes from QCEW
(2017). See Section 6 for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data. The
estimates are shown graphically in Figure 14. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry
levels are shown in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Observations are weighted
according to employment in 1995.
121

Table A.27: Effects of Repealing §936 on Wages, Rental Costs, and Home Values:
Robustness to Not Adjusting for Changes in Observable Characteristics
(1)
Stacked Differences After 1990

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Wages
All
High Skill
Exposure to Section 936 -0.010
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.000
0.375
Observations
984
984
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Differences Before 1990
Wages

Low Skill
-0.017
(0.003)
0.000
984
Yes
Yes

Rent Home Value
-0.019
-0.035
(0.003)
(0.007)
0.000
0.000
984
984
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

All
High Skill
0.005
-0.004
(0.008)
(0.004)
0.505
0.387
492
492
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Low Skill
0.000
(0.007)
0.958
492
Yes
Yes

Rent Home Value
0.021
0.029
(0.010)
(0.023)
0.045
0.212
492
492
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Exposure to Section 936

Observations
Year Fixed Effects
State Fixed Effects

Notes: This table shows additional estimates associated with Table 9. Estimates in this
table come from regressions of economic outcomes at the conspuma level on the exposure to
Section 936. Exposure to Section 936 comes from the NETS and conspuma level outcomes come
from the Census (Ruggles et al., 2010). The outcome data in this table are not adjusted for
differences in observable characteristics. See Section 6 for more discussion and Appendix A for
more information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in
parentheses. Observations are weighted according to population.

122

Table A.28: Effects of Repealing §936 on Government Transfer Payments Per Capita, 1990-1995
UnemIncome
Total
ployment ReplaceTransfers Benefits
ment
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A. Percent change in transfers per capita relative to 1995
Exposure to Section 936
-0.002
0.023
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.017)
(0.005)
0.356
0.196
0.914
Panel B. Dollar change in transfers per capita relative to 1995
Exposure to Section 936
14.982
0.893
5.815
(18.979)
(1.883)
(5.050)
0.434
0.637
0.255
Sample Proportion of Transfers
96.9%
3.1%
10.7%
Sample Transfers Per Capita
2,793.9
88.8
307.4
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes

Education
Benefits
(4)

Retirement and
Disability
(5)

Medicare
Benefits
(6)

Public
Medical
Benefits
(7)

0.001
(0.009)
0.886

-0.003
(0.002)
0.214

-0.003
(0.003)
0.330

-0.004
(0.006)
0.488

-0.404
(0.714)
0.574
1.6%
47.6
Yes

-1.808
(4.126)
0.663
46.2%
1,330.4
Yes

2.957
(4.940)
0.552
19.4%
559.7
Yes

8.633
(14.574)
0.556
15.4%
443.2
Yes

123

Notes: Estimates in this table come from regressions of government transfers in each category at the county level on the exposure
to Section 936. The upper panel shows the results with the dependent variable measured in percent change of category transfers
per capita while the lower panel shows results with the dependent variable measured in change in dollars per capita. Exposure to
Section 936 comes from the NETS and county level transfers comes from the BEA local area personal income accounts (Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 2018). Column (1) includes all transfers in columns (2) to (7), which does not include veteran’s benefits. None
of the specifications for this period find significant differences in transfer payments before the repeal of §936. See Appendix A for
more information about the data. Clustered standard errors are shown in parentheses with p-values displayed below. Analogous
regressions for the 2004-2008 period are shown in Table 10.

Table A.29: Probit Regressions of Probability of Being in Puerto Rico at Firm Level
(1)
PR
ln(Assets)

NAICS 3254 (Pharma)

ETR

Any Research & Development

Gross Profit / Operating Assets

Long-term Debt / Assets

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.935
0.941
0.888
0.901
(0.063) (0.067) (0.061) (0.066)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.098
0.123
0.225
0.223
(0.033) (0.042) (0.042) (0.031)
0.003
0.003
0.000
0.000
-0.067 -0.055 -0.058
(0.041) (0.041) (0.046)
0.102
0.176
0.204
0.148
0.135
(0.060) (0.066)
0.013
0.042
0.140
(0.040)
0.000
-0.015
(0.067)
0.824

Any Advertising

Observations
3 Digit NAICS Industry Fixed Effects

8945
Yes

8945
Yes

8945
Yes

8945
Yes

(5)
0.919
(0.063)
0.000
0.225
(0.033)
0.000
-0.063
(0.045)
0.164
0.137
(0.067)
0.040
0.142
(0.038)
0.000
-0.014
(0.067)
0.835
-0.084
(0.144)
0.559
8945
Yes

Notes: Author’s calculations and data from COMPUSTAT. This table displays probit estimates of the probability of having any establishments in Puerto Rico in 1995 on firm characteristics. Continuous covariates ln(Assets), ETR, Gross Profit / Operating Assets, and Long-term
Debt / Assets are normalized to z-scores so the estimated coefficients can be interpreted as the
marginal effect of a standard deviation change.

124

Table A.30: Event Study Results on Firm Value
(0,0)
(0,3)
(0,6)
(0,9)
(0,12) (0,15) (-5,15)
Pooled CAPM
Event
-0.141 -0.447 -0.970 -1.191 -1.431 -1.078 -1.250
(0.130) (0.252) (0.330) (0.399) (0.450) (0.501) (0.593)
0.280
0.076
0.003
0.003
0.001
0.031
0.035
Pooled Fama-French 3 Factors Plus Momentum
Event
0.061
-0.207 -0.478 -0.774 -0.825 -0.342 -0.255
(0.128) (0.250) (0.320) (0.399) (0.458) (0.505) (0.597)
0.634
0.408
0.135
0.052
0.072
0.499
0.669
February 16, 1993 Event CAPM
Event
-0.440 -1.302 -1.851 -2.027 -2.292 -1.882 -2.433
(0.207) (0.413) (0.535) (0.647) (0.712) (0.780) (0.919)
0.034
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.016
0.008
February 16, 1993 Event Fama-French 3 Factors Plus Momentum
Event
0.056
-0.757 -0.662 -1.090 -1.220 -0.616 -1.108
(0.200) (0.407) (0.511) (0.623) (0.693) (0.762) (0.900)
0.780
0.063
0.195
0.080
0.078
0.419
0.218
October 12, 1995 CAPM
Event
0.074
0.306
-0.150 -0.406 -0.616 -0.315 -0.130
(0.167) (0.301) (0.396) (0.478) (0.560) (0.636) (0.758)
0.656
0.311
0.704
0.396
0.271
0.621
0.864
October 12, 1995 Fama-French 3 Factors Plus Momentum
Event
0.064
0.252
-0.319 -0.464 -0.419 -0.072
0.589
(0.167) (0.308) (0.402) (0.501) (0.595) (0.665) (0.784)
0.700
0.414
0.427
0.354
0.482
0.914
0.453
Observations 21,105 21,732 22,359 22,986 23,613 24,240 24,240
Notes: Estimates in this table are average Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR) for an
equally weighted portfolio of publicly traded US firms with establishments in Puerto Rico between
1990 and 1996. Each column corresponds to an event study where the range of dates in the event
period are equal to the title of the column where the event is defined to be day 0. The first panel
uses CAPM to estimate expected returns while the second panel uses Fama-French 3 factors
plus momentum (Fama and French, 1993). Robust standard errors are more conservative than
standard errors clustered at the firm or date level. The included firms come from manually
matching firms in NETS and COMPUSTAT. Stock return data come from CRSP Stocks (19901996). See Appendix C for discussion and Appendix A for more information about the data.
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are displayed below standard
errors.

125

Table A.31: Event Study Results on Firm Value with Heterogeneous Effects

Exposure to Section 936

(1)
-1.523
(0.362)
0.000

(2)
-1.521
(0.361)
0.000

(3)
-1.515
(0.360)
0.000

(4)
-1.513
(0.355)
0.000

(5)
-1.527
(0.356)
0.000

February 16, 1993

October 12, 1995

Research & Development

-0.467
(0.075)
0.000

Gross Profit / Operating Assets

Any Advertising

Change in ETR

Relative PR Employment

Observations
Industry Fixed Effects

406
Yes

-0.390 -0.387 -0.387 -0.379
(0.090) (0.094) (0.094) (0.097)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.709
1.019
1.018
1.033
(0.421) (0.432) (0.432) (0.434)
0.093
0.019
0.019
0.018
-0.806 -0.801 -0.647
(0.470) (0.462) (0.440)
0.087
0.084
0.142
-0.053
0.026
(0.485) (0.449)
0.914
0.955
-0.967
(0.755)
0.201
406
406
406
406
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(6)

-2.577
(0.520)
0.000
-0.559
(0.467)
0.232
-0.372
(0.083)
0.000
0.749
(0.379)
0.049
-0.603
(0.400)
0.133
-0.062
(0.398)
0.876
-0.762
(0.628)
0.225
406
Yes

Notes: This table estimates the heterogeneous effects of the event study using a two step
process. Counterfactual returns for the event period are predicted using a regression on the 100
days of trading before the event. The dependent variable for regressions in this table is the [0,10]
day cumulative abnormal return for stocks of firms with exposure to Section 936. Independent
variables other than exposure to Section 936 and its interactions with dates are normalized to
be mean zero and scaled to standard deviations for interpretation. Two digit industry NAICS
controls are included in all specifications. Data for firm financial characteristics come from
Compustat (Capital IQ, 1980-2014) and daily stock return data are obtained from CRSP (CRSP
Stocks, 1990-1996). The corresponding regressions controlling for the Fama-French factors plus
momentum are shown in Table A.32. See Appendix C for discussion and Appendix A for more
information about the data. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are
displayed below standard errors.

126

Table A.32: Event Study Results on Firm Value with Heterogeneous Effects and
Fama-French Controls

Exposure to Section 936

(1)
-0.867
(0.331)
0.009

(2)
-0.867
(0.331)
0.009

(3)
-0.858
(0.328)
0.009

(4)
-0.857
(0.323)
0.008

(5)
-0.866
(0.326)
0.008

February 16, 1993

October 12, 1995

Research & Development

-0.313
(0.051)
0.000

Gross Profit / Operating Assets

Any Advertising

Change in ETR

Relative PR Employment

Observations
Industry Fixed Effects

406
Yes

-0.276 -0.273 -0.273 -0.268
(0.073) (0.077) (0.077) (0.078)
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.339
0.767
0.766
0.776
(0.360) (0.381) (0.382) (0.382)
0.347
0.045
0.046
0.043
-1.112 -1.109 -1.008
(0.417) (0.410) (0.393)
0.008
0.007
0.011
-0.043
0.008
(0.447) (0.424)
0.924
0.984
-0.631
(0.729)
0.387
406
406
406
406
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(6)

-1.344
(0.470)
0.004
-0.479
(0.439)
0.275
-0.260
(0.067)
0.000
0.644
(0.351)
0.067
-0.898
(0.374)
0.017
-0.062
(0.376)
0.868
-0.508
(0.604)
0.401
406
Yes

Notes : This table estimates the heterogeneous effects of the event study using a two step
process. Counterfactual returns for the event period are predicted using a regression on the
100 days of trading before the event. The dependent variable for regressions in this table is
the [0,10] day cumulative abnormal return for stocks of firms with exposure to Section 936.
Independent variables other than exposure to Section 936 and its interactions with dates are
normalized to be mean zero and scaled to standard deviations for interpretation. Two digit
industry NAICS controls are included in all specifications. Data for firm financial characteristics
come from Compustat (Capital IQ, 1980-2014) and daily stock return data are obtained from
CRSP (CRSP Stocks, 1990-1996). The corresponding regressions without controlling for the
Fama-French factors plus momentum are shown in Table A.31. See Section 5 for more discussion
and Appendix A for more information about the data. Robust standard errors are shown in
parentheses and p-values are displayed below standard errors.

127

Table A.33: Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment Growth at the County Level:
Interactions Part 1
(1)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000
Interaction of Exposure with:
Total Incentives (Bartik)
Exposure to Section 936

(2)
-0.075
(0.016)
0.000

(3)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000

(4)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000

(5)
-0.068
(0.017)
0.000

(6)
-0.073
(0.016)
0.000

(7)
-0.073
(0.017)
0.000

(8)
-0.073
(0.017)
0.000

-0.011
(0.010)
0.284

Job Creation Incentive

0.002
(0.003)
0.394

Job Training Subsidy

0.009
(0.007)
0.180

Real Minimum Wage

0.020
(0.016)
0.206

Right to Work

-0.012
(0.009)
0.188

RD Tax Credit

-0.004
(0.010)
0.678

Investment Tax Credit

-0.002
(0.004)
0.593

Corporate Income Tax

Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
Includes all Controls

(9)
-0.074
(0.015)
0.000

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.040
(0.017)
0.021
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Estimates in this table build on results shown in Tables 8 and A.24. The estimates in
each column come from a regression of employment growth from QCEW on exposure to Section
936 and other local characteristics. All specifications include year, industry, and state fixed
effects in addition to all listed controls. Displayed estimates are for the interaction of the listed
control and exposure to Section 936. See Appendix F for discussion and Appendix A for more
information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels are shown
in parentheses. Observations are weighted according to employment in 1995.

128

Table A.34: Effects of Repealing §936 on Employment Growth at the County Level:
Interactions Part 2
(1)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000
Interaction of Exposure with:
Personal Income Tax
Exposure to Section 936

(2)
-0.075
(0.018)
0.000

(3)
-0.072
(0.017)
0.000

(4)
-0.069
(0.017)
0.000

(5)
-0.075
(0.018)
0.000

(6)
-0.073
(0.017)
0.000

(7)
-0.075
(0.019)
0.000

(8)
-0.077
(0.018)
0.000

0.015
(0.013)
0.277

Property Tax

0.001
(0.014)
0.971

Sales Tax

0.020
(0.014)
0.152

Trade Exposure (China)

0.013
(0.007)
0.077

State Revenue Per Capita

0.012
(0.009)
0.186

Share Routine Workers

-0.014
(0.009)
0.151

Trade Exposure (Nafta)

-0.014
(0.008)
0.106

Total Incentives (Bartik)

Job Creation Incentive

Job Training Subsidy

Real Minimum Wage

Right to Work

RD Tax Credit

Investment Tax Credit

Corporate Income Tax

Year Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
Includes all Controls

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

(9)
-0.085
(0.018)
0.000
-0.000
(0.019)
0.996
0.013
(0.017)
0.438
0.019
(0.018)
0.292
0.007
(0.010)
0.467
0.003
(0.020)
0.893
-0.023
(0.011)
0.046
-0.020
(0.011)
0.081
0.005
(0.017)
0.763
0.015
(0.009)
0.099
-0.012
(0.016)
0.485
0.014
(0.018)
0.446
-0.004
(0.023)
0.881
-0.011
(0.015)
0.467
-0.018
(0.017)
0.291
0.044
(0.027)
0.116
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Apendix F for discussion of regressions and Appendix A for more information
about the data. These estimates of interaction terms between §936 exposure and other county
characteristics build on the regressions shown in Table A.33. Standard errors clustered at the
state and industry levels are shown in parentheses
129with p-values below. Observations are weighted
according to employment in 1995.

Table A.35: Quantile Regression Estimates of the Effects of Repealing §936 on
Employment Growth at the County Level

Exposure to Section 936

Year Fixed Effects
State Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects

(1)
q15
-0.011
(0.011)
0.327
Y
Y
Y

q25
-0.017
(0.012)
0.159
Y
Y
Y

q50
-0.033
(0.013)
0.009
Y
Y
Y

q75
-0.062
(0.013)
0.000
Y
Y
Y

q85
-0.083
(0.014)
0.000
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Author’s calculations and data from NETS and QCEW. This table shows quantile
regression estimates of Equation 5. See Appendix F for discussion of regressions and Appendix A
for more information about the data. Standard errors clustered at the state and industry levels
are shown in parentheses with p-values below.

130

