NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEANINGFUL INFORMATION FOR DOMESTIC ECONOMIES IN THE LIGHT
OF GLOBALIZATION – WILL ADDITIONAL MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS
AND DIFFERENT PRESENTATIONS SHED LIGHT?
Silke Stapel-Weber
Paul Konijn
John Verrinder
Henk Nijmeijer
Working Paper 24859
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24859

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, not necessarily those of Eurostat, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, or the European Commission. The authors would like to
thank Eurostat colleagues, and notably August Götzfried, Karin Isaksson, Merja Rantala and
Veijo Ritola for their helpful comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Silke Stapel-Weber, Paul Konijn, John Verrinder, and Henk Nijmeijer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Meaningful Information for Domestic Economies in the Light of Globalization – Will Additional
Macroeconomic Indicators and Different Presentations Shed Light?
Silke Stapel-Weber, Paul Konijn, John Verrinder, and Henk Nijmeijer
NBER Working Paper No. 24859
July 2018
JEL No. E01
ABSTRACT
Globalisation presents significant statistical challenges, particularly for small and open economies
in terms of measuring macroeconomic level and growth indicators and communicating the results
in a meaningful way. In the aftermath of the so-called “Irish case”, Eurostat with its partners in
the European Statistical System is looking into how, within the existing accounting frameworks,
additional indicators and presentations of the accounts that allow users to follow domestic and
global developments could be conceived. The work takes account of recommendations which
have been developed by a high level group in Ireland for improving insight into the Irish
economy2. However it goes beyond that, as any new indicator or breakdown, particularly in a
European context, should be comparable across countries and not be seen as a GDP or GNI "a la
carte" for each country to choose from under specific circumstances.
The paper presents the findings of the respective European work streams to date in terms of
methodology, indicators, building new statistical infrastructural elements and new cooperation
models between statistical compilers. It invites a critical review of the suggestions put forward.

Silke Stapel-Weber
Eurostat
Silke.stapel@ec.europa.eu

John Verrinder
Eurostat
John.Verrinder@ec.europa.eu

Paul Konijn
Eurostat
Paulus.Konijn@ec.europa.eu

Henk Nijmeijer
Eurostat
henk.nijmeijer@ec.europa.eu

CRIW 2018
Meaningful Information for Domestic Economies in the Light of Globalization – Will
Additional Macroeconomic Indicators and Different Presentations Shed Light?
Silke Stapel-Weber, Paul Konijn, John Verrinder, Henk Nijmeijer (Eurostat)1

Executive summary
Globalisation presents significant statistical challenges, particularly for small and open
economies in terms of measuring macroeconomic level and growth indicators and
communicating the results in a meaningful way. In the aftermath of the so-called “Irish case”,
Eurostat with its partners in the European Statistical System is looking into how, within the
existing accounting frameworks, additional indicators and presentations of the accounts that
allow users to follow domestic and global developments could be conceived. The work takes
account of recommendations which have been developed by a high level group in Ireland for
improving insight into the Irish economy2. However it goes beyond that, as any new indicator
or breakdown, particularly in a European context, should be comparable across countries and
not be seen as a GDP or GNI "a la carte" for each country to choose from under specific
circumstances.
The paper presents the findings of the respective European work streams to date in terms of
methodology, indicators, building new statistical infrastructural elements and new
cooperation models between statistical compilers. It invites a critical review of the
suggestions put forward.

1. Introduction
Globalisation is a historic process of increasing interaction between national economies on a
world-wide scale. While not new, interconnectedness has accelerated in recent years as it is
closely related to activities by Multi-National Enterprises (MNEs). Fragmented production
processes span the world, exploiting comparative production advantages and tax competition
between nations. This is also helped by the fact that increasingly a main component of many
(particularly high tech) products is intellectual property. These intangible assets of an MNE,
however, are extremely mobile and often huge.
In methodological terms, in the most recent releases of the international standards for
National Accounts and BOP (2008 SNA, ESA 2010, BPM6), globalisation phenomena such
as “goods sent abroad for processing” and “merchanting”, “special purpose entities” or “other
captive institutions” have been given more attention and subsequently more detailed
guidance has been developed. Various tools have already been developed by statisticians and
initiatives have been taken to go "beyond GDP".
1

2

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, not necessarily those of Eurostat. The authors
would like to thank Eurostat colleagues, and notably August Götzfried, Karin Isaksson, Merja Rantala
and Veijo Ritola for their helpful comments.
See the presentation of John Fitzgerald at this Conference for further details, and also a summary in
section 4 of this paper.

1

We have, however, to admit that we are only at the very beginning of getting a grip on
properly measuring globalisation in a systematic cross-country way in practice. Which parts
of the production activities of MNEs are actually 'taking place' on the domestic territory of
any given country? Or, in other words, how can we distinguish between movements in GDP
or its components which are relevant for the domestic economy and those which are driven
by the worldwide activities of multinational companies?
Efforts to single out globalisation activities and present them alongside purely domestic
developments are very challenging, given that they require statisticians to isolate in balance
sheets and flow accounts those positions and flows relating to the re-routing of revenues and
profits. This may require infra-MNE information and raises sensitive questions concerning
enhanced cross border cooperation amongst statistical authorities.
Nevertheless, the price for not addressing them would be increasing irrelevance of our
statistical products and persistent/growing bias and asymmetries between countries. Users of
statistics need to understand clearly how (and how much) globalisation phenomena impact on
those statistics, and which statistics are useful for which analytical purpose. This is
particularly important for users, who focus on one or a few aggregates for their needs, and
where statistics are used for direct administrative purposes3.

2. Current and future policy developments impacting on macroeconomic data
The impacts of globalisation can be seen in longer term trends driven by economic
fundamentals4 but also – and particularly for smaller countries – in discrete MNE business
model restructuring events, often triggered by policy developments that change the "rules of
the game".
Over recent years, as a response to popular concerns about the impacts of globalisation (and
apparent impunity with which MNEs can "offshore"), we have seen an acceleration in
coordinated policy developments which are designed to further regulate MNEs and, at least,
improve the transparency of their financial affairs.
The best known of these initiatives at international level is the "Base Erosion and Profit
Sharing" (BEPS) project led by the OECD. The recommendations of the project, agreed and
published in 2015, have led to implementation of new requirements for MNE financial
reporting across many jurisdictions worldwide, and in particular for "country-by-country"
reporting requirements by 20205. This improves the transparency of MNE operations, which
would have previously been brought together only in high level consolidated company
accounts and tax returns.
In Europe, one of the major impacts of the initiative has been the end of certain tax structures
which were widely used by non-European (and often US-owned) MNEs, such as the "Double
Irish" and the "Dutch sandwich", to be replaced by a focus on the tax treatment of intellectual
property ("Patent boxes", accelerated depreciation) and the need for MNEs to demonstrate
3

For example in Europe in setting contributions to the EU budget (GNI) or for fiscal policy (government
deficit and debt / GDP).
4
For example, see the article "The retreat of the global company" in the Economist magazine, January 28 th
2017.
5
For more details see http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps.

2

"substance" in an economy in order to benefit from local tax rules. This has already been
observed to have impacts on some MNEs' business structures, with movements of intellectual
property and increased specification of decision-making functions.
It is also evident in Europe that other policy initiatives are closely accompanying the taxation
agenda. For example, successive state aid cases (for example for Apple in Ireland, Amazon in
Luxembourg, Starbucks in the Netherlands) have shown the willingness of the European
Commission to challenge the selective tax treatment of some MNEs.
Looking forward, one can see that recently agreed reforms, or those under discussion, could
bring further triggers for changes to MNE business models.
There is a widespread anticipation that the latest round of corporate tax reforms in the US
will provide an incentive for US-owned MNEs to repatriate (at least some of) their
accumulated profits so far held abroad6, and to relocate some of their physical operations to
the US (or at least favour the US in future developments).
There are also ongoing developments in Europe. In 2017 the European Commission released
a communication on the taxation of the digital economy7. This underlined the principle that
taxation should take place 'where profits and value are generated', and has been interpreted as
a push to tax the operations of digital enterprises based on the location of the source of
revenues that they generate (whether from consumers or businesses)8.
Broader political developments may also bring pressures for MNE restructuring. Depending
on the eventual way in which "Brexit" is implemented, one might also expect a significant
reorganisation of MNEs with substantial UK operations. This might range from the
establishment of (small or even token) branches in "EU27" countries, through to the physical
relocation of operations and staff.
Thus, aside from the longer term trends in the impacts globalisation arising from
developments in economic fundamentals, we have seen a rise in MNE restructuring and can
anticipate that this may even accelerate in future. Given the potential impacts on
macroeconomic statistics across countries, and the adverse reaction of users to 'surprises' in
data, this presents a major challenge to official statisticians. Addressing that challenge will
need coordinated development of the "statistical infrastructure" (broadly defined, see section
3 below) and improved communication to users, including extended data availability (see
sections 4 and 5 below).

6

Exactly how this might be done is still unclear, though one might expect the use of (one off) dividends or
flows relating to intellectual property (royalties). One of the tax reform's major, but less reported,
features is that MNEs would be taxed on use of intellectual property wherever it is located (thereby
removing some of the incentive to locate intellectual property 'offshore' or in low-tax jurisdictions),
though the reform does not provide a low-cost way to relocate existing intellectual property to the US.
7
See https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/company-tax/fair-taxation-digital-economy_en
8
It is interesting to see that Facebook is somehow anticipating these developments by moving to a model of
declaring its advertising revenues in the countries where they are generated (though no doubt to be
offset by attributed costs from intellectual property and other 'central' costs).

3

3. Improving EU statistical infrastructure to capture globalisation
To ensure high quality, consistent and complete micro- and macroeconomic statistics it will
be necessary to upgrade our statistical infrastructure, in particular as regards the data
production on MNE groups (MNEs). Countries' statistical offices will have to cooperate
much more closely than is the case today to make sure that the recording of flows and stocks
belonging to MNEs are consistent across countries. Whereas "balancing the national
accounts" used to mean integrating data sources on the three approaches to GDP (whether or
not in a supply/use framework) at national level, in the future the balancing should also take
place at the international level. Asymmetries in balance of payments data could, for example,
be indicators of inconsistent treatment of MNEs.
At national level, a trend is observed in several EU countries for the balancing of data sources
to be undertaken "upstream", i.e. at the national data collection point. Several countries have
established, and others are in the process of establishing, so-called "Large cases units"
(LCUs) to ensure a consistent treatment of MNEs in national statistics. Depending on the
business model chosen, these units collect centrally all data from the largest MNEs in a
country, coordinate national data collections and/or ensure their consistency, before being
processed for the various statistical outputs. They often provide a single point of contact
between the statistical office and the MNE.
While these LCUs are very important tools for the NSIs, they still focus on consistency at
national level only. As said above, to tackle globalisation challenges, NSIs will also have to
work more closely together than in the past.
A lot of groundwork for this is already being undertaken in Europe. For example, the
EuroGroups Register (EGR) is the statistical register of the EU on MNEs. For 2016, the EGR
covers around 110 000 multinational enterprise groups active in the EU (i.e. having at least
one legal unit in the EU)9. The EGR requires a close cooperation between the EU countries
and Eurostat; the exchange of data is regulated with legal acts. 10 EU statistical institutes and
Eurostat are continuously working on the EGR to improve its quality. This has been achieved
from year to year with the best coverage so far for the 2016 reference year.
The EGR contains information on the following units and characteristics:




legal units: identification, demographic, control and ownership characteristics;
enterprises: identification and demographic characteristics, main activity code
(NACE), number of persons employed, turnover, institutional sector;
enterprise groups: identification characteristics, the structure of the group, the group
head, the country of global decision centre, main activity code (NACE), consolidated
employment and turnover of the group.

Hence, the EGR compiles all above units within multi-national enterprise groups (including
the ownership structures and relationships). It is important to underline: the MNE structures
are obtained by collecting and combining national business register information from all
countries in which the MNE has a legal unit.

9

10

For some experimental statistics based on the EGR, see http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php?title=Structure_of_multinational_enterprise_groups_in_the_EU
E.g. Regulation 177/2008

4

This information is a crucial input for the next stage: European profiling of MNEs. Profiling
is defined as "a method to analyse the legal, operational and accounting structure of an
enterprise group at national and world level, in order to establish the statistical units within
that group, their links, and the most efficient structures for the collection of statistical data".
Thus, the focus is shifted from legal units in the business register to statistical units from
which data can be collected. The statistical units can be groups of legal units (forming an
enterprise). Profiling is an activity that is carried out by business statisticians, often within the
LCUs mentioned above, at national level. European profiling brings the countries concerned
by one enterprise group together with the aim to agree on the structure, the perimeter and the
global decision centre of the group and to describe its activities – across countries – in an
economically meaningful way. Profiling of the largest groups is done in consultation with the
MNE itself and is a crucial step in getting an up-to-date understanding of MNE structures and
ensuring their consistent recording across countries. So far, about 300 MNEs (most of them
with European headquarters) have been profiled at European level. The benefits from
profiling are integrated into the national statistical business registers and thus improve their
quality. There is also the intention to integrate the profiling results into the EGR in a more
automated way in the future.
Learning from the 2016 “Irish case”, and in parallel to the above projects, Eurostat and the
NSIs have also set-up an “Early Warning System”, which aims at the early detection of
important restructuring of MNEs; as described above, these restructuring events often impact
macroeconomic or business statistics. The early reception of such information allows
discussion and agreement on the statistical treatment of these events before they have to be
included in published statistics, and thereby ensure consistency, and, if needed, a timely and
coordinated communication to users.
The above listed developments will require a change of approach from NSIs: it will no longer
suffice to focus on what happens within national borders. For the quality and relevance of
national statistics, cooperation and exchange of information at international level will be
essential to correctly reflect the activities of MNEs.

4. Presenting and/or extending national accounts data11 in times of globalisation?
Alternative existing indicators
GDP is a measure of (net) output of an economy. The income side of GDP reflects the
income generated in production processes resident in the economy, which is not the same as
the income accruing to its citizens. National accountants know very well that there are a
multitude of alternative indicators produced within the national accounts that are better
measures of income, such as:


Gross National Income (GNI): a measure of the gross primary income earned by
residents of a country. The difference with GDP consists of the net flows of primary
income with the rest of the world. Hence, it is less sensitive to globalisation as any
profits earned by foreign companies are not included. However, it is still a gross

11

Of course one can also consider alternative presentation for other macroeconomic indicators, notably
Balance of Payments. This paper does not do so in this and following sections, concentrating on
national accounts, however an important issue to consider is if alternative indicators across different
macroeconomic datasets should also be consistent with each other.

5

measure, i.e. including consumption of fixed capital, and thus not a measure of
income as finally received by residents.


Net National Income (NNI): derived from GNI by taking out consumption of fixed
capital. It is thereby a step closer to a pure income measure for the economy as a
whole.



Gross or Net National Disposable Income (NDI): derived from GNI or NNI,
respectively, by adjusting for net flows of current transfers with the rest of the world.
This is finally what is available to the economy for consumption or saving.



Disposable income however is more commonly used for households only. Gross or
net household disposable income is the share of NDI that accrues to households.
Adjusting for social transfers in kind finally gives Adjusted (gross or net) Disposable
Income of Households.

All of these indicators are income measures and thus potentially useful as indicators for
increased or decreased material welfare of residents of the economy.
Another indicator that is closely related to Adjusted Disposable Income of Households is
Actual Individual Consumption, which aggregates the final consumption expenditure of
households and NPISHs with the final individual consumption expenditure of general
government. This is conceptually a very comparable measure across countries. It is, on
average in the EU, about 70% of GDP and is not affected by globalisation as it excludes
GFCF and net exports. This indicator may deserve more attention in national publications
than it currently gets.
Figure 1 shows a comparison of GDP and AIC per capita (in PPP terms). It shows they are
mostly highly correlated except for two countries strongly affected by globalisation:
Luxembourg and Ireland. The high GDP per capita in Luxembourg is partly due to the
country's large share of cross-border workers in total employment. While contributing to
GDP, these workers are not taken into consideration as part of the resident population which
is used to calculate GDP per capita. Luxembourg still has the EU's most affluent residents as
measured by AIC per capita. Eurostat has since long caveated the GDP level of Luxembourg
in its news releases; in that sense, it is not "news" that GDP can be distorted by globalisation
(albeit globalisation on a more regional scale).
Since 2016, Eurostat has also provided footnotes on the level of Irish GDP for years after
2015 in these cross-country comparisons, describing it as being "substantially affected by the
relocation from outside the EU to Ireland of balance sheets of large multi-national
enterprises". Indeed, where Ireland's GDP per capita stands at more than 80% above EU
average, its AIC per capita is just below the corresponding EU average. It is clear that AIC
gives a more realistic picture of the material living standards of Irish residents than GDP.
For some years now, Eurostat's news releases with cross-country comparisons in PPP terms
no longer use GDP per capita in its headline but AIC per capita12.

12

See e.g. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/8536114/2-14122017-BP-EN.pdf/0c8f87ee42e8-4474-b7c6-724515917ea5. It should be noted that media attention has waned somewhat since
Eurostat dropped GDP from the headline.

6

Figure 1: Volume of GDP and AIC per capita in PPS, EU28=100, 2015
300
250
200
150
GDP

100

AIC
50

Bulgaria
Romania
Croatia
Hungary
Latvia
Estonia
Poland
Slovenia
Slovakia
Czech Republic
Greece
Malta
Portugal
Lithuania
Spain
Cyprus
Ireland
Italy
France
Netherlands
Sweden
Belgium
Finland
Denmark
United Kingdom
Austria
Germany
Luxembourg

0

Follow the money
With respect to a common underlying question - what actually arrives at the domestic
population in terms of improved material conditions as result of globalisation - it is also
interesting to have a look at the tax income of the government. Fig. 2 below shows by means
of example the income from corporate tax in Ireland from 2007 to 2016. There is a noticible
increase between 2014 and 2015, which coincides with the relocation of the balance sheets of
a small number of large MNEs to Ireland in 2015. If this will contribute to better material
welfare of the domestic Irish population depends on what use this increased tax income will
be made of now and in the years to come. One can, however, not say that the increased GNI
in Ireland is a pure statistical fantasy and nothing happens in the “real economy”. Follow the
money….
Fig. 2: Taxes on the income or profits of corporations, mln, euro
8 000
7 000
6 000
5 000
4 000

Ireland

3 000
2 000
1 000
0
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

7

But what about growth rates?
The most high profile national accounts indicator is not the level of GDP but the volume
growth of GDP. What alternatives exist for that?
The national and disposable income measures mentioned above do not have a natural volume
component. Deflation of income is about finding an appropriate measure of price change that
reflects changes in the purchasing power of that income. OECD publishes income measures
at constant prices using the implicit deflator for domestic demand (total consumption plus
total capital formation)13.
Eurostat publishes – for EU members and European aggregates - the real growth of adjusted
GDI of households per capita, together with real AIC per capita, using the price index of AIC
as a deflator for both.
For communication purposes, the international statistical community could agree on an
(existing) measure of income growth to promote instead of, or in addition to, GDP growth.
This would also include agreement on deflators to use to measure real income.
Nevertheless, GDP is also seen by users as a measure of "economic power". For that purpose,
it is hard to replace.
Additional breakdowns
Additional detailed data on globalisation will help users to better understand economic
developments. In the wake of the large revision to Ireland's GDP in 2016, the Economic
Statistics Review Group (ESRG) produced recommendations to the Irish CSO on how to
meet user needs for greater insight into Irish economic activity. Even if written for the
specific Irish situation, their report14 provides a useful starting point for a discussion on
additional data and breakdowns.
The main recommendation is to split the accounts for the non-financial sector in a part related
to the largest MNEs and the rest. One could also consider breakdowns according to other
dimensions, such as foreign control (see below) or size, or of other parts of the accounts, such
as the supply and use tables. Each dimension will tell a different story, but essentially
provides information on the phenomenon of globalisation as such.
A breakdown of sector S11 Non-financial enterprises by ownership is already foreseen in
ESA 2010, although Eurostat collects no data for this from the EU Member States.
Work in this direction is also being undertaken in the context of Extended Supply and Use
Tables that are being promoted by OECD as part of the Trade in Value Added project.
Several EU Member States are already working on this.
Another recommendation from the ESRG is to provide users with information on the impact
of globalisation on the economic data, for example to provide the transition from
international trade in goods data to national accounts and balance of payments data on
13

OECD also includes measures in PPP terms using the PPPs for GDP.
http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/newsevents/documents/reportoftheeconomicstatisticsreviewgroup/Econ
omic_Statistics_Review_%28ESRG%29_Report_Dec_2016.pdf

14

8

exports and imports, i.e. by showing explicitly the adjustments made for goods for processing
and merchanting (at product level).
One could also imagine data that show how much production abroad is allocated to the
domestic economy following the principle of economic ownership. Such a "building blocks"
approach was proposed in the article of Silke Stapel-Weber and John Verrinder in EURONA
2/201615.
New indicators?
The above-mentioned report of the ESRG also recommended producing and disseminating an
adjusted level indicator. To meet the analytical needs identified by national users, the ESRG
recommended the development of a modified version of GNI (named GNI*) with the effects
of certain globalisation activities excluded.
For many purposes it is important to generate reliable measures of the aggregate size of the
economy. The ESRG states that it has long been recognised that GDP is an inadequate
indicator for Ireland, given the size of measured factor income accruing to the foreign owners
of multinational enterprises (MNEs) operating in Ireland. For this reason, GNI has been
widely employed as an alternative indicator, since GNI strips out net international factor
income flows.
Already prior to the 2016 'events' it was suggested by users that even GNI is no longer a
sufficiently useful alternative indicator. The impacts of entities moving their global
headquarters into or out of Ireland have always caused difficulties for users of Irish statistics.
The ESRG proposes to compile an adjusted measure of GNI, named GNI*, excluding the
retained earnings of companies that are predominantly owned by foreign portfolio investors.
By extension, an equally adjusted measure of the current account should be published.
In addition, due to the strong increase of the foreign-owned domestic capital stock, due to the
relocation of foreign-owned IPP assets into Ireland, an adjustment of the capital stock and
thus of the associated consumption of fixed capital is proposed. The ESRG recommends that
GNI* should exclude the depreciation of foreign-owned domestic capital.
There are pros and cons to developing alternative, special-purpose, indicators like the
proposed GNI*. Clearly, at a national level, they may serve an important purpose or satisfy
certain users. But it is not clear whether the same indicator would be relevant for other
countries too, or even be useful in one country over time (when different forms of
restructuring may have different impacts). It would also be confusing to users (and a step
back in time) if different countries would start using different, incomparable, headline
indicators for their economies.

15

http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cros/system/files/euronaissue2-2016-art2.pdf

9

5. Some experimental data
In this section, we present experimental data, which demonstrate that it is possible to describe
effects of globalisation on the national economies within the existing indicator framework, by
combining available information.
What remains is to develop these experimental indicators into parts of future standard
releases on NA and work with users to enable them to make use of the additional information
provided.
Combining FATS and NA – value added in the EU generated by foreign controlled
enterprises
As a first example, figure 2 combines data from the inward Foreign Affiliates statistics
(FATS) and national accounts16 to show the share of total economy value added created by
foreign controlled enterprises in 2014, broken down into control by intra-EU and by extra-EU
units.
Figure 2: Share of total economy value added created by foreign controlled enterprises,
by region of foreign control, 2014
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%

extra-EU
intra-EU

15%
10%
5%

CY
EL
IT
FR
MT
ES
DK
FI
PT
EU28
DE
HR
SI
BE
NL
SE
UK
AT
LT
LV
BG
LU
PL
EE
RO
SK
CZ
HU
IE

0%

Not surprisingly, Ireland is the country with the highest share of foreign controlled value
added created in the EU (36%)17. More than 80% of this value added is produced by
enterprises with mother companies outside the EU. Slightly more surprising is the high
position of five central and eastern European countries (Hungary (35%), Czech Republic
16

FATS data provide the share of foreign affiliates' value added in the total business economy. This share
has been multiplied by the share of the business economy in the total economy according to the
national accounts, thereby (for example) assuming that the government is not foreign controlled.
17
In 2015, the corresponding share was 44%.

10

(30%), Slovakia (30%), Romania (29%) and Estonia (29%), for which intra-EU relations play
the dominant role.
On the lower end of the scale, we find mostly southern European countries, but also France,
Denmark and Finland. The EU28 average is 14%, nearly half of which controlled by
countries outside the EU.
Figure 3 breaks down the intra-EU shares given above into the shares of the most relevant
countries in this context. German companies play an important role in the central and eastern
European countries. Estonia has high shares of control by Finland and Sweden.
Figure 3: Share of total economy value added created by intra-EU controlled
enterprises, by country of foreign control, 2014
25%

20%

other

15%

UK
NL
10%

FR
DE

5%

CY
EL
IT
FR
IE
UK
EU28
MT
DE
DK
FI
NL
ES
BE
PT
SE
SI
AT
HR
LT
BG
LV
LU
PL
CZ
HU
EE
SK
RO

0%

Figure 4 breaks down the extra-EU shares given in figure 2 into the shares of the US and
other countries. In Ireland, nearly 90% of extra-EU controlled value added is created by UScontrolled companies. In the EU as a whole, US units generate around 50% of all value added
of extra-EU-controlled enterprises.

11

Figure 4: Share of total economy value added created by extra-EU28 controlled
enterprises, by country of foreign control, 2014
30%
25%
20%
15%

other
US

10%
5%

HR
EL
CY
PT
ES
IT
FR
MT
FI
DK
SI
RO
LV
LT
EU28
EE
SK
AT
PL
DE
BG
BE
SE
CZ
NL
LU
UK
HU
IE

0%

Whereas the share of US-controlled production in Ireland is very high compared to other
countries, the level of value added (in euro) in this country is modest compared to some of
the bigger countries of the EU. Figure 5 shows in which countries non-EU controlled
enterprises create the most value added. It shows that 26% of the total value added creation in
the EU by extra-EU controlled enterprises takes place in the UK and 21% in Germany.
Figure 5: Share of total EU28 value added created by extra-EU28 controlled enterprises
in EU countries, 2014

Other
20%

UK
26%

ES
4%
NL
6%
IE
6%

IT
7%

FR
10%

12

DE
21%

Combining FATS and NA – employment controlled by EU enterprises in the rest of the world
As a second example, we have asked the question the opposite way around - how about EU
enterprises having affiliates outside the EU and what do they control? Unfortunately, outward
FATS statistics do not provide data on value added. Instead, we will use employment data.
According to the FATS statistics, in 2014, foreign affiliates of EU enterprises employed
around 14.4 million persons outside the EU (for comparison: the total number of employees
in the EU was about 135.5 million). Figure 6 shows that France has the highest share (25%)
in that number. France, the UK and Germany together are responsible for nearly two thirds.
Figure 6: Share of total employment in extra-EU affiliates of EU enterprises, by
country, 2014

DK other
5% 12%

SE
5%

FR
25%

NL
5%
IT
7%

UK
21%

DE
20%

Figure 7 shows in which continents the employees of these affiliates of EU enterprises were
working. The largest share of employees is in (North, Central and South) America, half of
which is in the US.
Figure 7: Share of total employment in extra-EU affiliates of EU enterprises, by
continent, 2014
Europe
(ext-EU)
12%
Oceania
2%
Asia
33%

Africa
9%

America
44%

13

Exposure to globalisation of the EU Member States
The inward FATS statistics also provide insight in foreign controlled employment in the EU.
The shares of foreign controlled employment can be quite different in some cases from the
shares of foreign controlled value added that were presented above. Figure 8 plots these
shares against each other, in relation to the EU28 averages for each indicator18. It gives a
picture of the different exposure to globalisation experienced in different countries.
Figure 8: Foreign controlled value added shares versus foreign controlled employment
shares, 2014

While there is an (expected) correlation between the two indicators, there are some
interesting outliers. For example Ireland and Hungary score much less high on employment
than on value added, while the opposite is true for Estonia and Luxembourg. Romania,
Slovakia and Czech Republic are also more exposed to foreign control of value added than of
employment. It should, therefore, not come as a surprise if future globalisation events
involving relocations out of the countries would affect those countries mentioned much more
than others in terms of shocks to local production and employment.
Greece and Cyprus are the countries that are currently least exposed to foreign control, on
both dimensions. This is interesting in the case of Cyprus, since it is well known that many
non-Cypriot enterprises maintain special purpose entities there, however these do not
generate significant additions to either employment or value added.
18

For the employment data, we used the same grossing-up technique to national accounts as outlined in
footnote 16 for value added.

14

6. A new initiative in European national accounts
Building on the profiling work described in section 3 above, a new EU pilot project has
started in 2018 to assess the treatment of a small number of (profiled) MNEs in the national
accounts of the countries concerned. The initial focus will be on the allocation of value added
for these companies across countries. The selection of companies is based, among other
criteria, on significance for GNI at national level.
The primary reason behind this is the administrative use of GNI as base of the biggest socalled “own resources” of the EU budget. However, it has also utmost importance for piloting
how the exhaustiveness and consistency of the National Accounts and Balance of payments
aggregates across Europe can be ensured in the future under conditions of globalisation. The
allocation of R&D by country will play an important role in this exercise.
The time horizon of this piloting exercise is until 2019, which coincides with the next NA
benchmark revision in most EU Member States. If the pilot is successful, it may provide a
blueprint for a systematic, consistent and exhaustive approach to the recording of MNEs in
national accounts and balance of payments in the future.
The full fruits of a possible new approach involving systematic cross-country collaboration of
statistical compilers will, however, most likely stretch until the following common
benchmark revision in all EU Member States, agreed for 2024.

15

