                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BEHAVIORAL HOUSEHOLD FINANCE

                                         John Beshears
                                          James J. Choi
                                         David Laibson
                                       Brigitte C. Madrian

                                       Working Paper 24854
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24854


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2018




Forthcoming in the 1st Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Vol. 1, edited by Douglas Bernheim,
Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, Elsevier. We thank Doug Bernheim, Stefano
DellaVigna, and audience participants at the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics for
helpful comments. Ross Chu, Sarah Holmes, Justin Katz, Omeed Maghzian, and Charlie Rafkin
provided excellent research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the National
Institute on Aging (grant R01AG021650). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24854.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioral Household Finance
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 24854
July 2018
JEL No. D14,D15,G02,G11

                                         ABSTRACT

This chapter provides an overview of household finance. The first part summarizes key facts
regarding household financial behavior, emphasizing empirical regularities that are inconsistent
with the standard classical economic model and discussing extensions of the classical model and
explanations grounded in behavioral economics that can account for the observed patterns. This
part covers five topics: consumption and savings, borrowing, payments, asset allocation, and
insurance. The second part addresses interventions that firms, governments, and other parties
deploy to shape household financial outcomes: education and information, peer effects and social
influence, product design, advice and disclosure, choice architecture, and interventions that
directly target prices or quantities.

John Beshears                                  David Laibson
Harvard Business School                        Department of Economics
Baker Library 439                              Littauer M-12
Soldiers Field                                 Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163                               Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                       and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu                              dlaibson@gmail.com

James J. Choi                                  Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management                      Harvard Kennedy School
165 Whitney Avenue                             79 JFK Street
P.O. Box 208200                                Cambridge, MA 02138
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                       and NBER
and NBER                                       Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
james.choi@yale.edu
Household finance encompasses the analysis of several fundamental questions in economics.
How do households allocate resources across time and across states of the world? Which
financial products and strategies do households use to pursue their objectives? How can firms
and governments design products, interventions, and regulations to influence household financial
outcomes? How do all of these factors affect household welfare?

This chapter is divided into two parts, each of which is further divided into several sections. The
first part summarizes key facts regarding household financial behavior, emphasizing empirical
regularities that are inconsistent with the standard classical economic model and discussing both
extensions of the classical model and explanations grounded in behavioral economics that can
account for the observed patterns. This part covers five topics: (I) consumption and savings, (II)
borrowing, (III) payments, (IV) asset allocation, and (V) insurance. The second part addresses
interventions that firms, governments, and other parties deploy to shape household financial
outcomes: (VI) education and information, (VII) peer effects and social influence, (VIII) product
design, (IX) advice and disclosure, (X) choice architecture, and (XI) interventions that directly
target prices or quantities. The final section of the paper (XII) concludes.

We offer broad coverage of the household finance literature, but we limit the scope of our
discussion along some dimensions. We focus on the U.S. institutional context and on empirical
work based on U.S. data, although we do bring evidence from other wealthy countries to bear
when germane and occasionally reference evidence from developing countries. We address
household asset allocation but do not draw out its implications for asset pricing, which are
covered by the asset pricing chapter in this handbook. Although household decisions regarding
health care are relevant to household finance, we largely omit this literature from our chapter
because it is covered in depth in the chapter on behavioral health economics. Finally, there is
some overlap between our section on financial product design and the chapter on behavioral
industrial organization; we refer readers to that chapter for related material on that topic.


Part 1: Facts

I. Consumption and Savings

Beginning with the seminal work of Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Friedman (1957),
economists have embraced the view that households choose to save and borrow to smooth
consumption over the lifecycle. Intuitively, if agents have concave utility functions over
consumption, then they should spread consumption across time to optimally exploit that
curvature.




                                                 1
The theory of optimal consumption is summarized by the Euler Equation, which is a first-order
condition for optimal consumption dynamics:

                                      𝑢" (𝑐% ) = 𝐸% [𝑅%+, 𝛿𝑢" (𝑐%+, )].

Here, 𝑢 is the utility function, 𝑐% is consumption at date t, 𝑅%+, is the gross after-tax real rate of
return between dates t and t + 1, and 𝛿 is the time discount factor from an exponential discount
function.

In the special case where 𝑅%+, 𝛿 = 1, marginal utility is a random walk:

                                       𝑢" (𝑐% ) = 𝐸% [𝑢" (𝑐%+, )].

If the utility function is quadratic, then consumption itself is a random walk:

                                              𝑐% = 𝐸% [𝑐%+, ].

Since Hall (1978), economists have empirically tested whether consumption dynamics follow the
Euler Equation and, by implication, whether households smooth consumption. Many papers,
including Hall’s original work, have found support for the Euler Equation, estimating that
consumption does not respond to large predictable payments (Browning and Collado, 2001;
Hsieh, 2003) or predictable changes in wages (Adamopoulou and Zizza, 2015). Households
implement some consumption-smoothing behavior by cutting consumption before job losses
(Stephens Jr., 2001), anticipating the job loss and thereby avoiding an even greater reduction in
consumption when they separate from their employer.

However, a large body of evidence challenges the notion that households smooth consumption.
Myriad papers have found that consumption responds strongly to both unexpected changes in
income (Johnson et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2013 and predictable changes in income Campbell
and Mankiw, 1989; Shea, 1995; Stephens Jr. and Unayama, 2011; Kueng, 2018. Moreover, the
size of these responses is anomalously large relative to the classical benchmarks. For example,
Broda and Parker (2014) use Nielsen data to study the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and
find a within-year marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of 50-75%. Ganong and Noel (2017)
find that household consumption falls by 13% when households receiving unemployment
benefits reach the predictable end of their eligibility for these benefits. Food stamp and Social
Security beneficiaries’ consumption exhibits monthly cycles, rising upon receipt of their monthly
payment and then declining until the receipt of their next payment (Stephens Jr., 2003; Shapiro,
2005; Mastrobuoni and Weinberg, 2009; Hastings and Washington, 2010).




                                                   2
Consumption behavior around retirement is actively examined.1 Many studies have shown that
consumption expenditure falls at retirement (e.g., Bernheim et al., 2001b; Angeletos et al., 2001;
Haider and Stephens Jr., 2007; Olafsson and Pagel, 2018). Bernheim et al. (2001b) show that the
drop is larger for households with a lower income replacement rate from Social Security and
defined benefit pensions. They also show that there is no relationship between accumulated
wealth and the household’s consumption growth rate, which is striking given the strong
implication of the lifecycle hypothesis that such a correlation should exist—greater patience
should lead to steeper consumption growth and more wealth. Moreover, those with less wealth or
lower income replacement rates at retirement do not have larger declines in work-related
expenses or leisure-substitute consumption. Consequently, there is no indication that the decline
in consumption at retirement is greater for those with greater predictable reductions in needs.

The extent and meaning of the decline in consumption at retirement is debated. Using a structural
model of optimal lifecycle savings, Scholz et al. (2006) conclude that 80% of households over
age 50 in the 1992 Health and Retirement Study have accumulated at least as much wealth as a
lifecycle model prescribes for their life stage, and the wealth deficit of the remaining 20% is
generally small. Aguiar and Hurst (2005) argue that despite a fall in expenditure on food, caloric
and nutritional consumption is smoothed across the retirement threshold due to more intensive
home production. Retirees shop more intensely for bargains and spend more time preparing
meals themselves (see related analysis in Aguiar and Hurst, 2007; Hurd and Rohwedder, 2013;
Agarwal et al., 2015c). However, the finding that calories/nutrition are smoothed across the
transition into retirement has recently been challenged by Stephens Jr. and Toohey (2017), who
find an approximately 20% drop in average caloric intake at retirement in data not used by
Aguiar and Hurst (2005).

Before turning to explanations of consumption-income co-movement, we introduce one
additional set of stylized facts. Table 1 reports the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of three
different measures of net worth calculated from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF).2
The three definitions of net worth—NW1, NW2, and NW3—are constructed by using liquidity
as the organizing principle. NW1 incorporates only the most liquid assets and the most liquid
liabilities. NW3 incorporates all assets and all liabilities. NW2 is an intermediate construct.
Specifically, NW1 is all financial assets excluding retirement accounts and whole life insurance
minus all debt excluding collateralized debts and student loans. NW2 is all financial assets
excluding whole life insurance minus all debt excluding collateralized debts. NW3 is all assets
(including whole life insurance and durables) minus all debt. Note that all three measures of net
worth exclude future labor earnings, defined benefit pension claims, and Social Security (none of


1
 This literature begins with work by Hamermesh (1984) and Mariger (1987).
2
 Appendix A provides analogous tables for the asset and the liability sides of the household balance sheet. See
Appendix B for a detailed description of how these tables were constructed, including the standard errors. The Stata
program used to compute estimates and confidence intervals, titled scfses, is available on GitHub.

                                                         3
which are reported in the SCF). The percentiles are reported separately by the age of the
household head.

Table 1 illustrates two intriguing regularities: households do not accumulate liquid assets over
the life-cycle, but they do accumulate illiquid assets. The median value of net liquid assets
(NW1) starts at $1,000 for households in the 21-30 age bucket and then barely rises to $6,719 for
households in the 61-70 age bucket. NW2 also shows only moderate progress over the life
course, starting at $40 at ages 21-30 and monotonically rising to $36,942 at ages 61-70. On the
other hand, NW3 does show robust growth over the life course. The median value of NW3 starts
at $7,611 for households in the 21-30 age bucket and rises to $209,227 in the 61-70 age bucket.
This shows that the typical U.S. household is doing almost all of its voluntary wealth
accumulation in illiquid assets.

Successful theories of consumption and savings behavior need to explain three sets of stylized
facts: a high degree of consumption-income co-movement, low levels of liquid wealth (including
a high incidence of credit card borrowing3), and high levels of illiquid wealth. Moreover, these
behaviors often co-exist within the same household, so theories of household heterogeneity
cannot explain these phenomena on their own. It is the joint nature of these phenomena that has
motivated the work of Kaplan & Violante (2014); Laibson, Maxted, Repetto, Tobacman (2017);
Laibson, Repetto, & Tobacman (2003).

There are numerous proposed rational explanations for deviations from the benchmark of
consumption smoothing over the lifecycle.

Liquidity constraints. Households are limited in their ability to sell claims to their future labor
income. Young households in particular have access to far less liquidity than the net present
value of their lifetime earnings. When households cannot borrow and are at least modestly
impatient, they will adopt an optimal consumption rule (sometimes referred to as a buffer stock
savings rule) that features consumption growth that is positively correlated with income growth
(e.g., Deaton, 1991; Carroll, 1992; Hubbard et al., 1994; Gourinchas and Parker, 2001, 2002;
Aydin, 2016). However, the degree of consumption-income co-movement that such buffer-stock
models predict is relatively small compared to the actual magnitude of co-movement observed in
empirical data. A calibrated model of buffer stock consumers generates an annual average
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of predictable changes in income of 5%, whereas the
observed empirical MPC is approximately 30% (see Angeletos et al., 2001). To generate an
empirically realistic MPC, households with exponential discount functions would need to be
highly impatient (an annual discount rate of 15%; see Laibson et al., 2017). But such impatience
generates counterfactually low predicted total asset accumulation.

3
 As measured in the 2016 SCF, 57.6% of households with a credit, charge, or store card report that they had a
positive balance after their last payment.

                                                        4
Support for dependents. Childcare expenses tend to be high when parents are in midlife, which is
when their real earnings tend to peak as well (Attanasio and Weber, 1995). It may only be a
coincidence that income is highest when consumption expenditures are highest because of
support of dependents. If low frequency lifecycle income dynamics coincide with low frequency
dependent-driven variation in consumption needs, then marginal utility smoothing predicts
relatively low levels of voluntary household savings (e.g., Scholz et al., 2006). However, Rottke
and Klos (2016) and Dushi et al. (2016) have argued that household consumption changes little
when children leave the house, implying an increase in per capita consumption after these
departures. It is not yet well understood how the number of dependents should optimally affect
consumption dynamics.

Purchases of durables. Durable purchases may be timed to coincide with income payments, even
though actual consumption flows co-move only weakly with income. However, studies that show
excess consumption co-movement with income generally do so using non-durable consumption.
Gelman et al. (2014) show that a related channel—payments of recurring expenses such as rent
that coincide with income receipt—explains part of the high frequency co-movement between
income and expenditure.

High levels of impatience. Consider a population divided between highly impatient (myopic)
households living hand-to-mouth and patient households with large stocks of retirement wealth
that smooth consumption over the lifecycle. An economy with both subpopulations would
generate high levels of aggregate consumption-income co-movement and high levels of wealth
formation (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989; Parker, 2017).

Illiquid assets. Kaplan and Violante (2014) argue that illiquid assets such as homes have
extremely high rates of return (a 7.8 percentage point unlevered after-tax, risk-adjusted premium
above the return on risk-free liquid assets once illiquid assets’ use/rental value is included). If
illiquid assets do offer such high rates of return, then a large portion of the household balance
sheet should optimally be invested in illiquid assets. If it is costly to extract cash from illiquid
assets, households will tend to be highly liquidity constrained. Consequently consumption will
track income shocks and consumers will frequently borrow on credit cards to smooth
consumption (see also Kaplan et al., 2014). However, such models rely on very high rates of
return on illiquid assets and explain credit card borrowing by assuming counterfactually low
interest rates on credit cards and no mortgage market.

Near-rationality. The concept of near-rationality can be used to explain modest deviations from
the rational model in any context, including consumption smoothing. In this case, the welfare
costs of modest consumption-income tracking are second-order, and the mental costs of rigidly
smoothing consumption are first-order, making it rational to only crudely smooth consumption


                                                 5
over the lifecycle (e.g., Cochrane, 1989; Hsieh, 2003; Gabaix, 2015; Kueng, 2018). A modest
degree of consumption-income co-movement is probably constrained-optimal.

The following psychological mechanisms have also been used to explain these empirical
regularities.

Present bias. Present bias (Strotz, 1955; Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Akerlof, 1991; Laibson, 1997;
O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999) is the most widely analyzed psychological mechanism that
generates income-consumption co-movement. See the chapter on Intertemporal Choice for a
more extensive discussion of present bias and the broader category of models that feature
present-focused preferences. Present bias replaces the standard exponential discount function (δt)
with a two-part discount function: current utils get weight 1 and future utils get weight βδt, where
0 ≤ 𝛽 ≪ 1 and 𝛿 is close to one. With such preferences, agents will be willing to hold illiquid
assets with modest rates of return because 𝛿 is close to one and it is costly or impossible to tap
these assets for immediate consumption. On the other hand, present-biased agents are also unable
to persistently hold large stocks of liquid wealth because 𝛽 ≪ 1. The inability to hold much
liquid wealth implies that these agents are perpetually close to their liquidity constraints despite
their large holdings of illiquid assets, leading them to have a quantitatively realistic marginal
propensity to consume. Angeletos et al. (2001) study a calibrated life-cycle model with present
bias which matches the balance sheet properties of U.S. households and generates a high MPC.
Present bias can also help explain paternalistic policies like Social Security, retirement savings
systems, and the Earned Income Tax Credit (Feldstein, 1985; Laibson et al., 1998; Beshears et
al., 2017a; Lockwood, 2017). When agents naïvely fail to anticipate that their future selves will
be present-biased, they will not be willing to constrain their own future choice sets (Strotz, 1955;
O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). In such cases, the social planner can have an important role to
play. When agents are naïve and have heterogeneous levels of present bias4 that are not observed
by the government, the socially optimal savings regime includes a forced savings mechanism
like Social Security (Beshears et al., 2017a).5

Mental accounting. The study of mental accounts goes back to Keynes (1936), who described a
consumption function that is closely tied to disposable income. Since then, Thaler and Shefrin
(1981), Thaler (1985), and Shefrin and Thaler (1988) have argued that households use mental
accounts to make consumption decisions. For example, a household might think of its retirement
wealth as “out of bounds” and thereby protect it from premature spending.6 By contrast, a
household might view its checking account as fair game for all household expenditures.
Accordingly, the medium-term (e.g., six month) MPC out of retirement accounts is close to zero

4
  For evidence on heterogeneity in present bias, see Brown and Previtero (2014).
5
  See related work by Amador et al. (2006), who study the case of sophisticated agents in autarky. Here too, forced
savings is optimal, though this time it is self-imposed by the agents.
6
  However, see Argento et al. (2015) for evidence that households who are decades away from retirement frequently
withdraw from retirement accounts.

                                                         6
(among working age households), but the medium-term MPC out of a checking account is close
to one. Such mental accounting can also occur at the level of individual expenditure categories.
For example, Milkman and Beshears (2009) document a flypaper effect—money sticks where it
hits—with shopping coupons.7 When customers receive a coupon for $10 off any purchase from
an online grocery, they increase their spending at the online grocery by 16% of the value of the
coupon rather than exploiting fungibility and holding their grocery spending constant. Hastings
and Shapiro (2013) document a related mechanism at the gas pump. When gas prices fall (rise),
consumers disproportionately allocate the marginal savings (costs) towards purchasing a higher
(lower) grade of gasoline. Hastings and Shapiro (2018) find that the marginal propensity to
consume SNAP-eligible food out of SNAP benefits is 0.5 to 0.6, even though total spending on
SNAP-eligible food exceeds total SNAP benefits for the vast majority of SNAP recipients.

Reference point models. Reference point models with news utility may also explain consumption
dynamics (Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006, 2009; Pagel, 2017). In these models, total utility (i.e., the
agent’s objective) comes not only from current consumption, but also from “news utility”
reflecting changes in expectations about current and future consumption utility. For example, I
feel good today because I am consuming 5 ounces of chocolate, and I feel even better because I
had previously expected to consume only 4 ounces today. However, today’s utility is decreased
by the fact that yesterday, I had expected to consume 7 ounces of chocolate tomorrow, and now I
only expect to consume 6 ounces tomorrow. Using models with these features, it is possible to
find calibrations that generate over-consumption, under-saving, and consumption-income co-
movement. However, these properties do not arise generically in these models; in determining
today’s utility, today’s news about future consumption must be down-weighted sufficiently
compared to today’s news about today’s consumption.

Economists have also studied models of reference points where the reference point is the
consumption of other agents, rather than one’s own consumption or expectations thereof (e.g.,
Abel, 1990; Gali, 1994; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). Such “keeping up with the Joneses”
models do not in general predict private over-consumption8 or excessive consumption-income
co-movement,9 but they do imply the existence of social deadweight losses because of the
negative externality of one’s own consumption on other agents (e.g., Luttmer, 2005).10 See the
chapter on Social Preferences for an extended discussion of such preferences.

II. Borrowing



7
  See Hines Jr. and Thaler (1995) for a general discussion of the flypaper effect.
8
  See Bertrand and Morse (2016) for an empirical example of relative status considerations increasing consumption.
9
  However, one will observe excessive co-movement between one’s own consumption and the income of other
households (Kuhn et al., 2011).
10
   See Bernheim (2016) for a critique of the type of happiness measures used by Luttmer (2005) and others.

                                                        7
Zinman’s (2015) review paper points out that “research on household debt has lagged behind its
sister literatures on the asset side of the household balance sheet.”11 This is surprising because
household debt plays a large role in the economy: In the U.S., there is $14.6 trillion of household
debt (including collateralized debt like mortgages) outstanding as of 2017 Q1, or about 80% of
GDP.12

It is possible to rationalize borrowing at essentially any interest rate, provided there is no
competing, otherwise-identical credit product that offers a lower interest rate. To illustrate this
point, consider an environment with no uncertainty. If a perfectly patient agent with constant
relative risk aversion utility and no liquid savings expects her consumption to grow at a rate g
between this period and next period (e.g., due to a transitory current slump in income), she
should be willing to borrow a marginal dollar at a real interest rate of γg, where γ is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion. For example, if γ = 3 and g = 20%, then the agent should be
willing to borrow at a 60% per period real interest rate. If a period is just a week, then the agent
should be willing to pay 60% interest per week, which is higher than a typical payday loan
interest rate.

Willingness to borrow is further increased by the fact that debt is often an obligation that is
implicitly (or sometimes explicitly) state-contingent. When a household’s economic fortunes are
bleak, the household may be able to partially or even fully default on its debts, which increases
the household’s ex-ante willingness to borrow at high contractual rates of interest. Even
collateralized debts offer state-contingent opportunities to default (e.g., when a mortgage balance
is greater than the value of the house that serves as collateral). Countercyclical defaults can take
place at the level of an isolated unpaid debt/bill or through personal bankruptcy filings. In 2010,
during the aftermath of the 2007-2009 financial crisis, 1.6 million Americans filed for
bankruptcy, whereas in 2017, 0.8 million Americans filed for bankruptcy.13 Nearly one in ten
U.S. households has filed for bankruptcy at some point (Stavins, 2000).

Despite the seemingly large number of personal bankruptcies, classical economic analysis
implies that even more households could profitably file for bankruptcy immediately (e.g., White,
1998) and more aggressively exploit opportunities to take on debt that is dischargeable in
bankruptcy before filing (Zhang et al., 2015). Ethical qualms, stigma, the value of the option to
file for bankruptcy in the future, the probability that creditors will not take action to collect

11
   See also Tufano (2009).
12
   Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Financial Accounts of the United States (B.101 Balance Sheet of
Households and Nonprofit Organizations).
13
   Bankruptcy statistics from the American Bankruptcy Institute. Filings have grown rapidly since World War II
(e.g., Buckley and Brinig, 1998). Classical explanations include the decline in social stigma (Buckley and Brinig,
1998; Gross and Souleles, 2002b; Efrat, 2006; Livshits et al., 2010), reduced frictions (Livshits et al., 2010, but see
Gross et al., 2014), and strategic behavior, including preserving option value (White, 1998; Fay et al., 2002; Lefgren
and McIntyre, 2009).


                                                          8
delinquent debt, and lack of knowledge of bankruptcy procedures may explain why households
do not utilize the bankruptcy system more heavily (Buckley and Brinig, 1998; White, 1998;
Guiso et al., 2013).

Borrowing may also be motivated by the desire to invest in illiquid assets with high rates of
return and/or lumpiness that requires a small amount of borrowing to reach a certain threshold
for investment (Angeletos et al., 2001; Laibson et al., 2003, 2017; Kaplan and Violante, 2014).
For instance, households might borrow on their credit card to build up a down-payment that will
enable them to buy a house. Contributions to 401(k) plans represent another example. If a 401(k)
contribution is matched by an employer (e.g., 50 cents per dollar contributed), then it may make
sense to borrow at a high interest rate to fund such contributions as long as the debt is repaid
before too much interest compounds.

Income variation, expenditure shocks (e.g., medical bills), the option value of default, and the
benefits of borrowing to fund high-return investments all create powerful incentives for
household borrowing. Nevertheless, there are countervailing forces that should drastically reduce
household borrowing. If households rationally anticipate the shocks that create motives to
borrow, then households should save in anticipation (so-called buffer stock savings; see Deaton,
1991, and Carroll, 1992). Buffer stock savings enable households to dissave assets to smooth
consumption during temporary income declines or transitory periods of unusually high
expenditure instead of using high-cost debt. But many households don’t appear to be engaging in
active buffer stock saving. Forty-four percent of U.S. adults say that they could not come up with
$400 to cover an emergency expense or would have to borrow or sell something to do so
(Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 2017). Gross and Souleles (2002a) report that well over
half of households with bankcards carry debt from month to month (overwhelmingly at high
interest rates). They also report that almost 15 percent of bankcard accounts have utilization rates
exceeding 90 percent of the cardholder’s credit limit. When these high-utilization cardholders
receive additional liquidity (an increase in their bankcard credit limit), their marginal propensity
to consume is almost 50 percent. On average across all households in their analysis, the
propensity to consume out of marginal liquidity is about 12 percent.

Credit Cards

Simulations of populations of rational (exponentially discounting) households generate low
levels of equilibrium borrowing on credit cards compared to the amount of borrowing actually
observed (Angeletos et al., 2001). Accordingly, there exists a debt puzzle (Laibson et al., 2003):
It is difficult to reconcile the impatience that generates high frequencies/quantities of credit card
borrowing with the patience that delivers the observed life-cycle savings in partially illiquid
assets like retirement accounts and home equity. This tension has been explained with buffer
stock models augmented with an additional assumption: either discounting with present bias


                                                  9
(Laibson et al., 2003, 2017) or illiquid assets with very high rates of return and credit cards with
counterfactually low interest rates (Kaplan and Violante, 2014).

Present bias has also been used to explain willingness to hold high-interest debt (Ausubel, 1991),
suboptimal debt-repayment trajectories (Kuchler and Pagel, 2017), and heterogeneity in debt
levels. Individuals who exhibit present bias in laboratory tasks are 15 percentage points more
likely to have credit card debt, and conditional on borrowing, have about 25 percent more debt
(Meier and Sprenger, 2010).14

Credit cards offer two other puzzles that have been documented in the literature. First, consumers
often fail to choose the credit card contract that offers them the lowest borrowing costs. Ausubel
(1999) finds that customers are too sensitive to teaser interest rates relative to post-teaser interest
rates, suggesting that they underestimate how much they will borrow in the future. (Agarwal et
al., 2015a) report that 40% of consumers make the wrong choice between a credit card with an
annual fee but a lower interest rate and a card with no annual fee but a higher interest rate,
although the costliness of the error tends to be small. Stango and Zinman (2016) find that the
within-consumer difference between the highest and lowest credit card interest rate offers
received during a given month is typically several hundred basis points, and the result is that the
variation in realized credit card borrowing costs is large even after controlling for borrower risk
and card characteristics.

Second, consumers simultaneously hold high-cost credit card debt and liquid assets that earn low
rates of return (Gross and Souleles, 2002a). This may be explained by the fact that certain
expenses must be paid by cash or check, so households must hold some level of liquid asset
balances (Zinman, 2007a; Telyukova and Wright, 2008; Telyukova, 2013). Strategic motives to
increase non-collateralized debt in anticipation of bankruptcy may also explain why some
households roll over credit card debt while holding substantial cash equivalents (Lehnert and
Maki, 2007). Not paying down credit card debt despite holding liquid assets may additionally
serve to constrain the spending behavior of other members within the household or one’s future
present-biased self by reducing the amount of unused credit capacity (Bertaut et al., 2008).

These theories of why households borrow at high interest rates while lending/investing at low
interest rates have difficulty explaining another violation of the no-arbitrage condition that lies
solely within the credit card domain: People do not minimize interest costs when allocating their
purchases among the credit cards they already have. In surveys, they report paying little attention
to their credit card interest rates and preferring to spread purchases across their cards and to use
specific cards for specific kinds of purchases (Ponceet al., 2017). There is a similar failure to
minimize interest costs when paying down credit card debt. Gathergood et al. (2017) find that
rather than repaying the credit card with the highest interest rate first, borrowers use a “balance-

14
     See Brown and Previtero (2014) for evidence on heterogeneity in present bias as it relates to savings.

                                                            10
matching heuristic”—they allocate repayments to their credit cards in proportion to the balances
on each card.

In addition to present bias, other psychological factors may partially explain the popularity of
borrowing on credit cards and other related types of costly credit. Stango and Zinman (2009)
document the pervasiveness of exponential growth bias, which is the propensity to underestimate
how quickly interest compounds. Misunderstanding compounding may increase the willingness
to hold debt because it is perceived to be less costly than it actually is, and may reduce the
willingness to accumulate assets because they are perceived to yield lower long-run returns than
they actually do.

Bertrand et al. (2010) document using a field experiment the influence of advertising in the
consumer debt market. For instance, including a photograph of a woman in marketing materials
or presenting only one example loan (rather than four example loans) causes the same increase in
loan take-up as reducing the loan interest rate by 200 basis points.

Payday Loans

In recent years, payday loans have become an active topic of research for at least three reasons.
First, the market is large: In a single year, approximately 12 million U.S. households take out at
least one payday loan, representing at least 5% of the adult population (Pew Charitable Trusts,
2012). Second, payday loans charge extremely high rates of interest. For a two-week loan, a
typical finance charge is 15% or 30% of the principal, implying astronomical annualized gross
interest rates of 1.1526 – 1 = 3,686% to 1.3026 – 1 = 91,633%. Third, as a consequence of the first
two facts, payday loans have become a target of regulatory review.15

A body of research finds that payday loans harm consumers. Some people use payday loans
when less expensive options are available (Carter et al., 2011). Access to payday loans may
reduce job performance (Carrell and Zinman, 2014) and create a debt service burden that
increases the difficulty of paying mortgage, rent, medical, and utility bills (Melzer, 2011; Skiba
and Tobacman, 2011). Providing improved disclosure about the costs of payday loans reduces
take-up (Bertrand and Morse, 2011; Burke et al., 2015), though these effects are estimated to be
modest in magnitude (an 11-13% reduction in volume), suggesting that only a minority of
borrowers do not understand the nature of the contract.

However, other researchers have found that payday loans are not harmful or may even be helpful
in certain circumstances. There is some evidence that payday borrowing helps households
smooth consumption (Zinman, 2010; Morse, 2011) and that it does not have adverse impacts on


15
     http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/CFPB_Proposes_Rule_End_Payday_Debt_Traps.pdf

                                                     11
credit scores or job performance (Bhutta, 2014; Bhutta et al., 2015; Carter and Skimmyhorn,
2017).

Researchers have concluded that self-control problems (Gathergood, 2012) and a lack of
financial literacy (Lusardi and Scheresberg, 2013) contribute to payday borrowing, in part by
engendering the low asset accumulation and resulting financial distress that serve as pre-
conditions for payday borrowing.

Mortgages

Mortgages started to play a much more central role in the household finance literature after the
2007-2009 financial crisis, which brought a 32% decline in the S&P/Case-Shiller 20-City
Composite Home Price Index, falling mortgage values, collapsing prices of mortgage-backed
securities, and insolvency for many financial institutions that held mortgages or mortgage-
backed securities. Mortgages also play a dominant role in the consumer credit market. Of the
$14.6 trillion of household debt in the U.S. in 2017 Q1, $9.8 trillion is comprised of mortgages.16

Many behavioral economists interpret the financial crisis through the lens of a housing bubble.
According to this view, unsustainable housing prices—based in part on borrowers’ and lenders’
overly optimistic beliefs about future home price appreciation—and high loan-to-value
mortgages set the stage for the financial crisis (Foote et al., 2008, 2012; Gerardi et al., 2008;
Mayer et al., 2009; Kuchler and Zafar, 2016). When housing prices fell, homeowners, mortgage
holders, and MBS investors were left holding the bag.

A complementary perspective places special weight on the subprime market, arguing that
expansion in credit supply to borrowers with low credit scores and weak income growth played a
key role in the mortgage crisis of 2007-2009. Credit enabled these subprime borrowers to spend
more on non-durable consumption and buy homes that they otherwise wouldn’t have bought.
This credit boom may also have caused housing prices to rise and then fall when the bubble
burst, with these dynamics being especially forceful in low-income neighborhoods. Mian and
Sufi (2009) study the period leading up to the bursting of the housing bubble and argue that zip
codes with a higher fraction of subprime borrowers had more growth in mortgage credit, lower
growth in income, and a larger eventual increase in mortgage delinquencies. However, Adelino
et al. (2016) and Foote et al. (2016) dispute the notion that mortgage credit was extended
disproportionately to low-income subprime borrowers and that such borrowers were the primary
drivers of rising defaults during the housing bust.




16
 Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Financial Accounts of the United States (B.101 Balance Sheet of
Households and Nonprofit Organizations).

                                                      12
The period leading up to the financial crisis exhibited other behavioral anomalies. Gurun et al.,
(2016) find large residual variation in mortgage interest rates; even after controlling for borrower
and loan characteristics, the mean difference between the 5th and 95th percentile adjustable rate
mortgage (ARM) reset interest rates within geographic region and quarter was 3.1 percentage
points. Within a region, lenders that advertised more charged higher interest rates, and a given
lender charged more in regions where it advertised more. The positive relationship between
advertising and prices is particularly strong in areas with a high percentage of racial minorities,
less educated consumers, and low-income consumers.

Relatedly, Agarwal et al., (2016) find that lenders steered borrowers towards mortgages with
above-market costs that increased lender profits. These mortgages were disproportionately likely
to be complex mortgages—interest-only mortgages or option ARMs. Such complex mortgages
became more prevalent during the early 2000s before the financial crisis, raising concerns that
they were sold largely to take advantage of naïve borrowers. However, Amromin et al. (2018)
document that even though complex mortgages were much more likely to default, they were
primarily used by more sophisticated borrowers.

Even outside the run-up to the financial crisis, mortgage originations and refinancings are
characterized by numerous behavioral anomalies. Households overpay their mortgage brokers
because they solicit prices from too few brokers, and those who pay their brokers using both cash
and a commission from the lender (funded by a higher loan interest rate) pay twice as much as
observationally similar borrowers who pay their brokers using only a commission from the
lender (Woodward and Hall, 2012). Borrowers are too eager to pay mortgage points (an upfront
fee) in exchange for a lower interest rate, consistent with their overestimating how long they will
keep the mortgage (Agarwal et al., 2017).

The normative model of Campbell and Cocco (2003) finds that ARMs are generally more
attractive than fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) because of the high exposure of FRM real value to
inflation risk, but most borrowers choose FRMs. The share of FRMs is strongly negatively
correlated with the level of long-term interest rates, suggesting that households believe that long-
term rates are mean-reverting, even though long-term rate movements are in fact extremely hard
to forecast. Koijen et al. (2009) find that variation in the FRM share is highly correlated with the
difference between the five-year Treasury yield and the three-year moving average of past one-
year Treasury yields, indicating that households have adaptive expectations about future short
rates, although the authors argue that such a decision rule is close to optimal. Malmendier and
Nagel (2016) find that at a given point in time, individuals who have lived through higher
inflation are more likely to take out FRMs because they expect higher future inflation. These
results are identified by studying cross-sectional variation in inflation experiences across birth
cohorts, controlling for calendar time fixed effects.



                                                13
After obtaining their mortgages, FRM borrowers are too slow to refinance (Keys et al., 2016;
Andersen et al., 2018), even though the mass-market personal finance literature nearly
universally advises borrowers to refinance too quickly. Most books and websites recommend a
refinancing threshold linked to when the present value of doing so equals zero, rather than
incorporating the option value of waiting (Agarwal et al., 2013).

III. Payments

Households must decide which services and contractual arrangements to use when conducting
transactions. On a day-to-day level, households must frequently choose a mode of payment (e.g.,
cash versus credit card), and they must sometimes choose which payment plans to use when
entering long-term service contracts. On a broader level, households must decide which financial
institutions to interact with (e.g., banks versus check-cashing stores). In all of these decisions, it
is interesting to explore whether households are minimizing the costs that they incur.

Some households do not interact at all with traditional financial institutions. The 2015 FDIC
National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households finds that 7% of U.S. households
are “unbanked,” meaning that they do not hold a checking or savings account. Non-Asian
minorities, low-income households, less educated households, young households, and
households with disabled members are particularly likely to be unbanked. Unbanked households
rely on alternative financial service providers such as payday lenders and check-cashing stores
for transactional services. These providers’ fees are often high. For example, their fee for cashing
a check is typically between 1% and 3% of the check’s face value (and can be significantly
larger), whereas the holder of a traditional checking account can typically deposit a check
without paying a fee.

Why do some households rely on alternative financial service providers instead of traditional
financial institutions? In the FDIC survey, 57% of unbanked households say that a lack of
sufficient funds is one of the reasons they do not have a traditional bank account.17 Twenty-nine
percent cite a desire for privacy, and 28% cite mistrust of banks. Twenty-eight percent say that
high account fees are a reason, and 24% mention the unpredictability of account fees.18 Personal
experiences with the banking sector seem to play a role. Immigrants in the U.S. who lived
through a systemic banking crisis in their native country are 11 percentage points less likely to
have a checking account than immigrants from the same country who did not live through a
banking crisis (Osili and Paulson, 2014).




17
   Of course, as discussed in Section I, this explanation raises the question of why households have such low levels
of liquidity in the first place.
18
   The percentages sum to more than 100% because respondents could indicate multiple reasons.

                                                         14
Even among households that use traditional financial services, the fees paid for certain
transactions can be high. When a household executes a transaction that takes its bank account
balance below zero, the median overdraft fee charged by a large bank is $34 (Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, 2017). If the bank refuses the transaction, it charges a non-sufficient
funds (NSF) fee that is typically the same amount as an overdraft fee (except for declined debit
card transactions, which generally incur no fee). As much as $17 billion of overdraft and NSF
fees are paid in the U.S. each year, and the 8% of account holders who overdraft more than 10
times per year pay 74% of all overdraft fees (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2017)

Although incurring an overdraft fee may be the best option available to a household at a given
point in time, Stango and Zinman (2014) argue that inattention is an important driver of
overdrafts. They study a panel data set of individual checking accounts and find that a positive
shock to the amount of attention paid to overdrafts created by a survey asking overdraft-related
questions reduces the probability of incurring an overdraft fee in the month of the survey by 3.7
percentage points from a base probability of 30%.

Experience is also an important factor in determining the level of transaction fees paid by a
household. Agarwal et al. (2009) find that the level of credit card late payment fees, over limit
fees, and cash advance fees paid each follows a U-shaped pattern over the lifecycle, with the
bottom of the trough occurring between 50 and 60 years of age.19 They suggest that the U-shaped
pattern is the result of the confluence of two factors. First, households learn to reduce costs more
effectively as they gain experience, although at a diminishing rate as experience increases.
Second, households experience cognitive decline as they age, which tends to lead to higher costs.

A growing literature studies households’ choices among payment methods. Transaction
characteristics such as dollar value and payment-method characteristics such as prices, rewards
programs, credit limits, speed, convenience, security, and ease of record-keeping influence the
decision to use credit cards versus debit cards versus checks versus cash (White, 1975; Bounie
and François, 2006; Borzekowski et al., 2008; Klee, 2008; Zinman, 2009a; Bolt et al., 2010; Simon et al.,
2010; Ching and Hayashi, 2010; Schuh and Stavins, 2010, 2011, 2015; Arango et al., 2011; Bursztyn et
al., 2017). In a field experiment, Bursztyn et al. (2017) show that certain payment methods serve
as signals of social status. Willingness to pay to upgrade to a platinum credit card—which has
status signaling benefits when it is presented for payment because it has a distinctive appearance
and is only available to high-income individuals—is higher than willingness to pay to upgrade to
a credit card that is the same in all respects except that it is not labeled a platinum card and does
not have a distinctive appearance. Interestingly, there is also evidence that paying with a credit
card instead of cash may increase the willingness to pay for certain items (Prelec and Simester,



19
  Agarwal et al. (2009) also document that the costs associated with seven other financial decisions follow a similar
U-shaped pattern over the lifecycle.

                                                         15
2001), perhaps because credit cards create psychological distance between the act of making a
purchase and the loss of money that induces a “pain of paying” (Prelec and Loewenstein, 1998).

In addition to making decisions regarding their use of transactional services, households must
decide which payment plans to use when they enter long-term service contracts. DellaVigna and
Malmendier (2006) study the payment plan choices of members at three gyms. Among members
who chose a monthly membership and paid full price, the monthly fee was on average $75 for
the first six months of the membership. Since average attendance was 4.36 visits per month, the
fee per visit was more than $17. These members could have lowered their costs by instead
paying for each visit individually at a per-visit price of $12, or purchasing a ten-visit pass for
$100. Members who signed up for the monthly plan were either overly optimistic about their
future gym attendance or wished to use their monthly membership as a way of encouraging
themselves to visit the gym by lowering the marginal cost of a gym visit.20

IV. Asset Allocation

In this section, we discuss four puzzles in individuals’ asset allocation: low rates of stock market
participation, under-diversification, poor trading performance, and investment in actively
managed and costly mutual funds.

Stock Market Non-Participation

Many households do not hold any stocks, either directly or indirectly through mutual funds or
pension funds. Only half of U.S. households are stock market participants, and participation rates
are below 10% in Austria, Italy, Spain, and Greece (Guiso and Sodini, 2013). Haliassos and
Bertaut (1995) were the first to point out that non-participation is a puzzle because if agents have
expected utility preferences and their non-stock income is uncorrelated with stock returns, then
they should hold some stock as long as the equity premium is positive. Intuitively, if an agent
holds no stock, stock returns have zero covariance with her marginal utility, so she should be
risk-neutral with respect to a small additional stock position. Therefore, holding zero stock
cannot be optimal. Although background risks that are correlated with stock returns can in
principle drive an agent out of the stock market, given the correlations observed in the data, it is
difficult to generate this result in practice without implausibly high risk aversion (Heaton and
Lucas, 2000; Barberis et al., 2006).


20
   Nunes (2000) reaches the same qualitative conclusion studying a smaller sample of gym members. Train et al.
(1987) and Kridel et al. (1993) find similar results for telephone service plans, and Lambrecht and Skiera (2006)
find similar results for Internet service plans. Grubb (2009) shows that many customers do not choose the cost-
minimizing cellular phone plan and offers the interpretation that customers are overconfident in their projections,
underappreciating the variability of their own future usage. Grubb and Osborne (2015) provide formal estimates of
customers’ degree of overconfidence in the same data set. For evidence against the claim that households fail to
choose the cost-minimizing telephone service plan, see Miravete (2003).

                                                         16
Vissing-Jørgensen (2004) argues that small fixed costs of participation, such as information
acquisition costs and time spent opening accounts, can explain most non-participation. In her
highly stylized setting, the benefits of stock market participation are proportional to the stock
position size. Since most households have very little financial wealth, a fixed participation cost
of about $300 per year (in 2016 dollars) can rationalize 75% of non-participation. The fact that
participation rises with wealth is consistent with the importance of fixed costs. Briggs et al.
(2015) find that winning $150,000 in a Swedish lottery increases stock market participation by
12 percentage points among those not previously participating.

However, participation is not universal even among very wealthy households. Within the top 5%
of the wealth distribution, 6% of U.S. households and more than 65% of Austrian, Spanish, and
Greek households hold no stocks (Guiso and Sodini, 2013). Therefore, fixed costs are unlikely to
be the only explanation for non-participation.

A variety of preference-based explanations have been advanced for non-participation. Expected
utility preferences have a hard time generating non-participation because they are characterized
by second-order risk aversion (Segal and Spivak, 1990): Agents with such preferences are risk-
neutral with respect to infinitesimal risks. On the other hand, if agents have first-order risk
aversion, they are risk-averse even with respect to small gambles. Examples of utility functions
with first-order risk aversion that have been used to explain non-participation are prospect theory
(Barberis et al., 2006), disappointment aversion (Ang et al., 2005), ambiguity aversion (Epstein
and Schneider, 2010; Dimmock et al., 2016), and rank-dependent expected utility (Chapman and
Polkovnichenko, 2009). Barberis et al. (2006) find that first-order risk-averse preferences alone
cannot explain non-participation if the agent also bears risks outside the stock market. Because a
stock investment diversifies against these other risks, the agent will find stocks attractive. This
problem can be avoided if the agent is also assumed to engage in narrow framing (Kahneman
and Lovallo, 1993), whereby she evaluates each risk in isolation from the other risks in her life.
Choi et al. (2009a) provide evidence that investors do not consider their holdings in non-salient
accounts when making 401(k) asset allocation decisions.

An alternative set of explanations appeals to beliefs. Hurd et al. (2011) and Kézdi and Willis
(2011) find that survey respondents who report higher expectations for stock market returns are
more likely to participate. On the other hand, Guiso et al. (2008) argue that those who believe
that other market participants are likely to cheat them out of their investment will perceive stocks
to have low expected returns, and thus be more reluctant to participate. Indeed, they find that
trust is positively correlated with participation. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) explore the role of
personal experience. They find that individuals who have experienced higher average stock
market returns over their lifetime expect future stock market returns to be higher and are more
likely to participate. Motivated by neuroscience research on how adversity affects the brain’s


                                                17
response to subsequent outcomes, Kuhnen and Miu (2017) and Das et al. (2017) suggest one
reason why people with low socioeconomic status are less likely to invest in stocks: they update
their return beliefs less positively in response to good economic news than people with high
socioeconomic status.

A potentially important barrier to participation is lack of knowledge. Using changes in
compulsory schooling laws, Cole et al. (2014) estimate that an additional year of education
increases the probability of stock market participation by 4 percentage points, and they argue that
this is not simply an income effect. Grinblatt et al. (2011) find that IQ is positively correlated
with stock market participation even after controlling for income, wealth, age, occupation, and
family effects. Van Rooij et al. (2011) report a positive correlation between financial literacy and
stock market participation. This positive correlation remains after instrumenting for financial
literacy using the relative financial condition of the respondent’s siblings and the respondent’s
parents’ level of financial understanding. Calvet et al. (2007) find that many non-participating
households would likely invest suboptimally by under-diversifying if they did enter the stock
market, so they gain less from participation than they could in principle.

One mechanism through which financial knowledge might be gained is social interactions. Hong
et al. (2004) show that more social households—those that report interacting with their neighbors
or attending church—are more likely to invest in stocks. Brown et al. (2008a) instrument for the
stock ownership level in a Metropolitan Statistical Area using the lagged average ownership
level in the U.S. states in which its non-native residents were born, and conclude that a 10
percentage point increase in ownership prevalence in an individual’s community raises the
likelihood that the individual owns stock by 4 percentage points. Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012)
report that people are more likely to begin participating in the stock market if their neighbors
have recently experienced good stock returns. Using evidence from a field experiment, Bursztyn
et al. (2014) show that such peer effects are driven not only by learning but also because one’s
utility of owning an asset is directly affected by whether a peer owns the asset, perhaps because
of relative wealth concerns or the pleasure of being able to talk about a commonly held
investment.

Under-diversification

Harry Markowitz reportedly quipped that diversification is the only free lunch in investing.
Nevertheless, many individual investors do not fully diversify their portfolios. Blume and Friend
(1975) found that the median U.S. household that holds stocks directly held only two stocks, and
data from subsequent decades do not show significantly greater diversification in directly held
stock positions (Kelly, 1995; Barber and Odean, 2000).21 Investors exhibit home bias,

21
  However, overall portfolio diversification may be rising because of the spread of employer-sponsored retirement
savings plans, which are usually well-diversified, at least among investments within the U.S.

                                                       18
disproportionately holding the stock of their own employer (Benartzi, 2001; Mitchell and Utkus,
2003; Poterba, 2003), stocks of companies headquartered in their own country (French and
Poterba, 1991; Cooper and Kaplanis, 1994; Tesar and Werner, 1995), and stocks of domestic
companies headquartered closer to their home (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001a; Huberman,
2001; Ivković and Weisbenner, 2005).

When investors do diversify, they may do so sub-optimally. Benartzi and Thaler (2001) argue
that many 401(k) participants follow a naïve 1/n rule that spreads money evenly across the n
investment options offered in their 401(k). This means that they will tend to hold more equities if
their plan happens to offer more equity funds in the investment menu. In a cross-section of
retirement savings plans, they estimate that a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of
equity funds in the investment menu is associated with a 4 to 6 percentage point increase in
equity allocations. They find corroborating evidence using longitudinal data at a single plan that
twice changed its investment menu. However, Benartzi and Thaler (2007) individual-level data
to show that almost no plan participants have positive balances in every fund offered. The
median number of funds held is three to four, regardless of the number of funds in the menu.
Participants do tend to follow a conditional 1/n rule, dividing contributions evenly across the
funds in which they have positive balances. Huberman and Jiang (2006) find that a positive
relationship between equity funds offered and equity investment is present only in plans that
offer ten or fewer investment options, and that the fraction of equity funds offered explains only
a small amount of the variation in individual equity allocations.

Undiversified portfolios could be justified by an information advantage in the assets held
(Gehrig, 1993; Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, 2009, 2010). Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)
and Massa and Simonov (2006) find that individuals’ investments in stocks that are
geographically or professionally proximate to them realize higher average returns. Ivković et al.
(2008) find that individuals with discount brokerage portfolios that hold two or fewer stocks and
have more than $100,000 of balances enjoy positive abnormal returns. Countering these results
are Seasholes and Zhu (2010), who argue that there is no superior performance in geographically
proximate stocks after correcting methodological flaws of previous studies, Døskeland and
Hvide (2011), who find Norwegian investors earn negative abnormal returns in professionally
proximate stocks, and Benartzi (2001), who finds that 401(k) allocations to the stock of one’s
employer do not predict its future returns.

Even if under-diversifying leads to higher average returns, these higher average returns may not
adequately compensate for the additional idiosyncratic risk that undiversified investors bear.
Ivković et al. (2008) find that more concentrated discount brokerage portfolios have lower
Sharpe ratios, although they stress that one cannot draw welfare conclusions without more
information about the rest of the household’s assets. Using the same data as Ivković et al. (2008),
Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) conclude that under-diversification hurts all but a small fraction


                                                19
of individuals. In contrast, Calvet et al. (2007) use nearly comprehensive wealth data on Swedish
households to find that, because mutual fund and cash holdings are much more common than
direct stock holdings, most Swedish households experience minimal losses from under-
diversification. Nevertheless, a sizable minority does suffer considerable losses from under-
diversification.

DeMarzo et al. (2004) present a model where agents rationally concentrate their investment in
local securities because competition for a scarce local good (e.g., real estate) creates endogenous
concerns about one’s wealth relative to others in one’s community, which in turn creates an
incentive to hold a portfolio similar to those held by others in one’s community. If some agents
overweight local assets in their portfolio for corporate control purposes, to alleviate moral
hazard, because they are endowed with the assets and they are not tradable (e.g., local human
capital), or due to behavioral biases, other agents not subject to these constraints will also
overweight local assets. Roussanov (2010) puts concern about relative wealth directly into the
utility function and shows that it can generate concentrated holdings in assets uncorrelated with
peers’ portfolios.

The most direct evidence that under-diversification is not fully rational may come from financial
literacy surveys (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014). Hastings et al. (2013) report that only about half of
adults in the U.S., Netherlands, Japan, Germany, Chile, and Mexico can correctly answer a
question asking whether the statement, “Buying a single company stock usually provides a safer
return than a stock mutual fund,” is true or false—around what would be expected from random
guessing. In India and Indonesia, the proportion who give the correct answer is only about 30%.
Defined contribution plan participants on average rate the stock of their own employer to be less
risky than an equity mutual fund (Munnell and Sundén, 2002; Mitchell and Utkus, 2003).
Greater financial illiteracy is associated with more portfolio under-diversification (Guiso and
Jappelli, 2008; Abreu and Mendes, 2010; Von Gaudecker, 2015).

Researchers have proposed a number of additional explanations for home bias. Huberman (2001)
and Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001a) argue that a preference for the familiar drives home bias.
Their evidence could be consistent with the models of Uppal and Wang (2003) and Boyle et al.
(2012), where ambiguity averse investors shift their portfolio towards assets whose return
distributions are less ambiguous at the cost of diversification. Cohen (2009) and Morse and
Shive (2011) argue that loyalty to one’s employer and patriotism, respectively, contribute to
home bias. On the other hand, Branikas et al. (2018) find that a significant fraction of home bias
is driven by reverse causality: People tend to move to places that contain companies they are
inclined to invest in anyway.

Regarding under-diversification more generally, Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) emphasize
overconfidence, since high trading activity coupled with low return performance is associated


                                                20
with under-diversification. Alternatively, preference for right-skewed payoffs may cause
investors to hold concentrated portfolios (Polkovnichenko, 2005; Mitton and Vorkink, 2007;
Barberis and Huang, 2008). Brunnermeier et al. (2007) synthesize these last two ideas. In their
model, agents experience anticipatory utility, so it is optimal for them to distort their beliefs to
make their future seem brighter. This distortion must be traded off against the costs of making
decisions based on incorrect beliefs. Agents solve this problem by overweighting assets whose
returns are most positively skewed.

Trading Behavior

A long series of papers has found that individuals on average underperform in stock trading
(Odean, 1999; Barber and Odean, 2000; Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2000, 2009; Andrade et al.,
2008; Hvidkjaer, 2008; Barber et al., 2009a, 2009b; Choi et al., 2013). Why do individuals trade
if doing so is unprofitable? A leading explanation is overconfidence, either about the absolute
precision of one’s information (Alpert and Raiffa, 1982), one’s ability relative to others’ (the
“better-than-average” effect; Svenson, 1981), or one’s ability to control external events (the
illusion of control; Langer, 1975). Models where excessive trading is driven by overconfidence
include Kyle and Wang (1997), Benos (1998), Odean (1998a), Gervais and Odean (2001),
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Caballé and Sákovics (2003), and Hong et al. (2006).

Consistent with overconfidence driving trading, Barber and Odean (2000) find that those who
trade more perform worse, and Barber and Odean (2001) find that men, who are on average more
overconfident than women, trade more and have lower returns. Studies that estimate the
correlation between trading volume and direct measures of overconfidence have found
consistently positive associations with feelings that one is better than average, mixed support for
overestimation of precision, and little evidence for the importance of the illusion of control or the
tendency to attribute investment gains primarily to skill instead of luck (Biais et al., 2005; Dorn
and Huberman, 2005; Glaser and Weber, 2007; Deaves et al., 2009; Grinblatt and Keloharju,
2009). Graham et al. (2009) argue that the feeling of competence in understanding investments is
a more important driver of trading than the better-than-average effect.

Some individuals appear to trade for the thrill of the gamble. Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) use
receipt of speeding tickets as a proxy for having a sensation-seeking personality and find that
sensation-seeking is positively correlated with trading activity. Dorn and Sengmueller (2009)
find that individuals who report that they enjoy investing or gambling trade more often, and
numerous studies find that lotteries are a substitute for trading in the stock market (Barber et al.,
2009a; Dorn et al., 2015; Gao and Lin, 2015).

Although the conclusion that individual investors underperform on average was a consensus
view in the literature for a long time, several more recent papers have found that net individual


                                                  21
buying of a stock positively predicts its future returns over horizons of a week to a month
(Jackson, 2003; Kaniel et al., 2008, 2012; Barber et al., 2009b; Kelley and Tetlock, 2013) or has
no predictive power (Griffin et al., 2003). However, this short-term effect is negative in Asian
markets (Andrade et al., 2008; Barber et al., 2009a; Choi et al., 2013). Proposed reconciliations
of these newer findings with the remainder of the literature include the scarcity of institutional
investors in Asian markets and the possibility that the early literature sampled a particularly
unskilled subset of individuals. Barber and Odean (2013) argue that poor performance of
individual investors can coexist with short-term positive return effects because individuals hold
stocks for longer than the duration of the positive returns, so they are negatively affected by the
long-term return reversals documented in Barber et al. (2009b). However, Kelley and Tetlock
(2013) find no long-term return reversals in their data.

When selecting investments to buy, individuals favor stocks that have experienced high past
returns (Barber et al., 2009b)—consistent with survey evidence that, on average, they have
extrapolative beliefs (De Bondt, 1993; Fisher and Statman, 2000; Vissing-Jørgensen, 2004;
Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Choi and Robertson, 2017)—or recent attention-grabbing events
such as abnormally high trading volume, an extreme return, news coverage, or advertising
(Seasholes and Wu, 2007; Barber and Odean, 2008; Engelberg and Parsons, 2011; Engelberg et
al., 2012; Lou, 2014). Individuals also tend to sell stocks with high past returns, so that they are
net sellers of stocks with high returns over the past quarter and net buyers of stocks with high
returns in the more distant past (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2000, 2001b; Griffin et al., 2003;
Jackson, 2003; Kaniel et al., 2008; Barber et al., 2009b).

If individuals tend to have extrapolative return beliefs, why are they net sellers of stocks with
high returns over the past quarter? A large body of research, both observational and
experimental, has emphasized the importance of the stock’s current price relative to the price at
which the investor purchased it. The disposition effect is the tendency of investors to sell stocks
that have appreciated since purchase and hold stocks that have declined since purchase (Shefrin
and Statman, 1985; Odean, 1998b; Weber and Camerer, 1998; Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001b;
Shapira and Venezia, 2001; Feng and Seasholes, 2005; Brown et al., 2006; Barber et al., 2007;
Chen et al., 2007; Calvet et al., 2009). Although it could be rational for an investor to sell some
of an appreciated stock in order to rebalance her portfolio, Odean (1998b) and Brown et al.
(2006) show that investors are also more likely to completely liquidate a position when its price
has fallen since purchase.

A common preference-based explanation for the disposition effect appeals to prospect theory
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Shefrin and Statman, 1985; Odean, 1998b; Meng and Weng,
2016). Because the prospect theory value function is convex in the loss domain and concave in
the gains domain, investors will be risk-seeking in underwater positions and risk-averse in
appreciated positions, causing them to be prone to hold onto losing stocks and sell winning


                                                 22
stocks. But Barberis and Xiong (2009) show that a dynamic model where prospect theoretic
utility is experienced at the end of each year based on the past year’s trading profits fails to
reliably produce a disposition effect. This is because the kink in the value function around the
reference point is a much more significant driver of the reluctance to gamble than the value
function’s curvature away from the reference point. The further away the investor is from the
kink, the more risk tolerant he is. Since a stock must have had a positive expected return in order
for the investor to have bought it, the distance from the kink will tend to be larger after a gain
than a loss, causing a reverse disposition effect—the investor is more prone to sell after a loss
than a gain. Meng and Weng (2016) are able to restore prospect theory’s ability to generate a
disposition effect in the Barberis and Xiong (2009) setting by assuming that the reference point
equals the lagged expectation of end-of-year wealth rather than initial wealth, which moves the
reference point closer to the stock’s price after a gain.

Barberis and Xiong (2009) show that a model where gain-loss utility is experienced only at the
time a position is sold (“realization utility”) more robustly produces a disposition effect. The
reason is that the flattening of the prospect utility value function away from zero creates an
incentive to realize losses infrequently all at once while realizing gains more frequently in order
to enjoy each small gain separately (see also Ingersoll and Jin (2013). In fact, under realization
utility, the disposition effect can be produced even with linear utility over gains and losses, since
time discounting alone provides an incentive for an agent to delay selling underwater positions
(Barberis and Xiong, 2012). Frydman et al. (2014) provide brain imaging evidence that investors
experience gain-loss utility at the time of sale.

Alternatively, the right set of beliefs could produce the disposition effect. Odean (1998b)
discusses the possibility that an irrational belief in mean reversion drives the disposition effect.
Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012) argue that the disposition effect is more likely to be due to
overconfidence-driven speculation. They observe that the probability of selling as a function of
returns since purchase is V-shaped, with a minimum at 0% return and the left branch of the V
being shallower than the right branch. If an investor purchases a stock believing she has private
information, a subsequent positive price movement will cause her to infer that the market has
incorporated her private information. On the other hand, a subsequent negative movement may
cause her to infer that her private information was incorrect. The combination yields a V shape in
selling propensity, but overconfidence causes the left branch of the V to be shallower, since the
investor is less likely to conclude from a contrary market movement that her initial beliefs were
incorrect.

Intriguingly, there is a reverse disposition effect for actively managed mutual funds but not
passively managed mutual funds. Chang et al. (2016) argue that this indicates that the need to
maintain one’s self-image as a good investor is an important driver of the disposition effect.
Selling an underwater direct stock investment renders its loss permanent, making it hard to avoid


                                                 23
the conclusion that the investor made a mistake. In contrast, a loss in a mutual fund investment
can be blamed on the fund manager. They provide experimental evidence that reminding subjects
of the reason they bought an asset strengthens the disposition effect for stocks and the reverse
disposition effect for funds. They also find that making salient the delegated nature of mutual
funds strengthens the reverse disposition effect for funds.

Mutual Fund Choices

There are three puzzles regarding individuals’ mutual fund investments: why do individuals (1)
hold separate stocks instead of mutual funds that offer superior diversification, (2) hold actively
managed funds instead of passively managed funds, and (3) pay such high mutual fund fees? The
prior sections have discussed literature relevant to the first question. We take up the second and
third questions in this subsection.

The Investment Company Institute (2017) reports that in 2016, individual investors held 89% of
mutual fund assets and 95% of non-money-market mutual fund assets in the U.S. Only 16% of
all mutual fund assets and 25% of equity mutual fund assets are in index funds. Many studies
have found that on average, actively managed mutual funds underperform their benchmarks and
passive funds (e.g., French, 2008; Gruber, 1996; Jensen, 1968; Malkiel, 1995; Fama & French,
2010). In light of this underperformance, why are so many dollars invested in active funds?

One explanation in keeping with investor rationality is that active funds provide attractive
hedging properties, outperforming in high marginal utility states of the world. Consistent with
this explanation, Moskowitz (2000) and Kosowski (2011) find that actively managed U.S. equity
funds deliver relatively high returns in recessions. Glode (2011) and Savov (2014) present
rational-actor models that produce this pattern of returns. In their survey of individuals, Choi and
Robertson (2017) find that 28% of active equity fund investors report that the belief that the
active fund would have higher returns during recessions or market crashes despite having lower
average returns was a very or extremely important factor in causing them to invest in an active
fund instead of a passive fund.

However, Choi and Robertson (2017) also find that 51% of active equity fund investors say that
a belief that the active fund would have a higher average return was a very or extremely
important factor in their decision to invest in an active fund. Müller and Weber (2010) report that
individuals who have low levels of financial literacy or who say they are better than the average
investor at selecting securities are less likely to invest in index funds. Goetzmann and Peles
(1997) provide evidence for a mechanism that might sustain overconfidence in fund-picking
ability: in a small survey sample, individuals on average overestimate the past returns of their
mutual funds, consistent with cognitive dissonance causing them to justify past investment
choices by adjusting their beliefs.


                                                24
External forces may also influence individuals to make poor mutual fund choices. Investor flows
to funds increase with marketing and media mentions (Sirri and Tufano, 1998; Jain and Wu,
2000; Barber et al., 2005; Cronqvist, 2006; Reuter and Zitzewitz, 2006; Gallaher et al., 2015).
Bergstresser et al. (2009) and Christoffersen et al. (2013) observe that funds that pay higher sales
incentives to brokers attract greater inflows, and Bergstresser et al. (2009) and Del Guercio and
Reuter (2014) find that broker-sold funds generally underperform compared to funds sold
directly to investors.22 These last two findings suggest that brokers often act in their own best
interest rather than their customers’ interest when selling funds.

The amount individuals pay for mutual fund services varies greatly across funds, despite the
presence of thousands of competing funds and the fact that higher expenses are associated with
lower net returns (Gruber, 1996; Carhart, 1997). Particularly puzzling is the fact that price
dispersion is as large among S&P 500 index funds, which offer nearly identical pre-expense
returns, as among actively managed funds (Elton et al., 2004; Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004).
One explanation is that S&P 500 index funds are not homogeneous products, since they come
bundled with non-portfolio services such as customer service, financial advice, and discounted
access to other investment vehicles. Another is that high investor search costs allow price
dispersion to persist. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) present a model that uses these two factors
to explain the empirical pattern of index fund expenses.

Choi et al. (2010) run a laboratory experiment to see what happens when non-portfolio services
and search costs are eliminated. Their highly-educated subjects—Harvard undergraduates,
Wharton MBA students, and Harvard staff—allocated a portfolio across four S&P 500 index
funds and received a payment that depended on their portfolio’s subsequent performance.
Because the payments were given by the experimenters, the funds’ non-portfolio services were
irrelevant. In one condition, subjects were given a one-page summary of the funds’ expenses,
making search costs trivial. Nevertheless, very few subjects minimized their portfolio’s fees,
suggesting that financial illiteracy is a primary source of demand for high-fee index funds.
Grinblatt et al. (2016) find that high-IQ investors choose cheaper mutual funds. Gabaix et al.
(2016) show that competition only weakly drives down equilibrium markups in markets where
consumers make random evaluation errors.

V. Insurance

In the classical economic model, households purchase insurance policies to maximize the
expectation of their utility of consumption. Concavity of the utility function causes households to

22
  In contrast, Barber et al. (2005) find that net flows decrease with sales loads using a sample covering a different
time period. Christoffersen et al. (2013) hypothesize that their results differ because Barber et al. (2005) use data on
net flows and the fund’s maximum load, whereas Christoffersen et al. (2013) use data on inflows and the amount
actually paid to brokers.

                                                           25
use insurance products to smooth consumption across states of the world. However, market
imperfections may prevent firms from supplying households with insurance contracts that make
perfect consumption smoothing possible. In particular, there may exist information asymmetries
between households and firms regarding households’ levels of risk, both as determined by
characteristics observable to the household but not to the firm at the time of contracting (adverse
selection) and as determined by non-contractable household actions taken after an insurance
policy is in place (moral hazard).

Even taking into account the effects of these market imperfections, an emerging body of
empirical evidence documents that household decisions do not match the classical benchmark of
constrained optimal insurance. In this section, we provide a selective discussion of several
insurance markets in which households purchase too little or too much insurance relative to the
benchmark. We also briefly discuss the literature on participation in lotteries, a form of “anti-
insurance.” Note that we do not review in this section the large literature on health insurance or
the related literature on long-term care insurance. While these markets are certainly relevant to
household finance, they are discussed in the chapter on Behavioral Health Economics. Interested
readers should also see Kunreuther et al. (2013) for an extensive review of behavioral economics
research on insurance markets.

Life Insurance and Life Annuities

The most valuable asset for many households is their human capital, which yields income from
household members’ labor supply. The standard model predicts that the household should
purchase life insurance to protect against the possible death of household members—at least
those with high earnings—in order to support the consumption level of surviving household
members in that state of the world.23 Do households tend to purchase life insurance in this
manner? Bernheim et al. (2003) examine data from the 1992 wave of the Health and Retirement
Study and compare households’ observed life insurance holdings to the predictions of a rich
lifecycle model of household financial decisions. The authors find that life insurance holdings
are essentially unrelated to objective measures of risk exposure and need. While the average
household would experience only a minor deterioration in its standard of living if a spouse were
to die, there is wide variation in vulnerability to potential losses. Forty-three percent of wives
and 49% of husbands are the beneficiaries of life insurance on their spouses even though they do
not need insurance to prevent a drop in their standard of living upon the spouse’s death.
Conversely, 20% of wives and 8% of husbands would experience a decrease in their standard of
living of at least 20% upon their spouse’s death. Bernheim et al. (2006) find similar results in a
sample of Boston University employees.


23
  Similarly, households should hold disability insurance in case disability reduces a household member’s future
income.

                                                        26
Researchers have documented a related puzzle in the domain of life annuities—insurance
contracts in which households pay a lump sum up front in exchange for a stream of future
income that lasts as long as the household beneficiary or beneficiaries are alive. These products
are the mirror image of life insurance; while life insurance provides protection against dying too
soon, life annuities provide protection against living “too long” and running out of assets.24 In the
face of uncertainty regarding longevity, the standard economic model predicts that households
should purchase life annuities (Yaari, 1965; Davidoff et al., 2005).25 However, households invest
very little in life annuities in the individual private market, a fact known as the “annuity puzzle.”
U.S. households over the age of 65 hold only 1% of their wealth in private-market annuities
(Johnson et al., 2004), and similar results have been found in other countries (James and Song,
2001).

A large literature proposes and tests extensions within the classical framework to resolve the
annuity puzzle. The typical approach is to begin by solving a lifecycle model that augment the
baseline model with realistic features of annuity markets or related markets, relevant background
institutions, additional components of the household utility function, or a more complete range of
risks faced by households. Many researchers include multiple such modifications to the baseline
model. Calibrated or estimated versions of the new model then generate quantitative predictions
that are compared to data on annuity demand.

An important limitation on the attractiveness of annuities is the divergence between market
prices and actuarially fair prices. Friedman and Warshawsky (1990) show that the low yields
offered by annuities in the market compared to alternative investments can explain the low
demand for private-market annuities. Mitchell et al. (1999) calculate the “money’s worth” of life
annuities available in the private market in 1995, and they find that the present discounted value
of benefit payments was only $0.75-$0.85 per dollar of premium for a random individual in the
population. The wedge between the “money’s worth” and the premium covers the costs incurred
by the insurance company in marketing and administering the annuity, the impact of adverse
selection—which on its own can explain a large fraction of the wedge (Finkelstein and Poterba,
2002, 2004)—and the insurance company’s profits.

Another possible reason for low take-up of private-market annuities is the high fraction of
household wealth that is already annuitized in the form of future benefits from public retirement
income programs, such as Social Security in the U.S., and from private defined benefit
retirement plans (Bernheim, 1991). For example, Dushi and Webb (2004) emphasize that such
existing streams of annuity income, combined with actuarial unfairness in private-market

24
   Other products that are labeled “annuities,” such as fixed-term annuities and variable annuities, do not offer
longevity insurance in the way that life annuities do, although some of these other products can be converted into
life annuities. We focus on life annuities in this chapter.
25
   Households should not hold life insurance and life annuities simultaneously. The two products provide offsetting
exposures to longevity risk, and neither can be obtained at an actuarially fair price in private markets.

                                                        27
pricing, may make it optimal for households to delay private-market annuity purchases until they
have reached their mid-70s or to forgo participation in the private market for annuities entirely.

Many researchers have also argued for the importance of bequest motives in explaining the
annuity puzzle. The value of a life annuity drops to zero when every household member on
whose life the contract is written dies, so households who wish to leave bequests should not
annuitize all of their wealth. Bernheim (1991) argues for the importance of bequest motives by
showing that increases in Social Security benefits increase life insurance holdings and decrease
private-market annuity holdings, implying that households actively seek to leave bequests.
Inkmann et al. (2011) show in an empirically motivated model that a bequest motive combined
with the opportunity to invest in equities can drive annuity demand down to the observed levels.

Others have argued, however, that bequest motives are not empirically relevant. Using panel data
on retired households, Hurd (1987, 1989) infers from the dynamics of consumption that bequest
motives are weak and that observed bequests are in large part accidental—they are the result of
uncertain lifespan and are on average larger than desired bequests. Brown (2001) finds that
bequest motives are not predictive of annuity demand in defined contribution retirement savings
plans, and Johnson et al. (2004) find that households with children have the same propensity to
purchase annuities as childless households. Furthermore, as Brown (2007) explains, bequest
motives on their own cannot account for the fact that many households annuitize none of their
wealth. Most households do not plan to bequeath the entire stock of wealth they hold at
retirement, and in such cases, households should annuitize at least some of their wealth.

Lockwood (2012) points out, however, that bequest motives interact with actuarially unfair
pricing. Households with stronger bequest motives place a lower utility value on the ability to
purchase actuarially fair annuities, and the observed wedges between private-market annuity
prices and actuarially fair prices are enough to drive such households out of the market entirely.

A richer account of the wide array of risks that households face can also help to resolve the
annuity puzzle. Many analyses of the annuity purchase decision focus on the case of a single
individual, but Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) point out that a couple faces a different decision
problem than a single individual because members of a couple can partially insure each other
against longevity risk. When one member dies earlier than expected, there are more resources
available to help meet financial needs if the other member lives longer than expected. Brown and
Poterba (2000) calculate that the utility increase experienced by a couple from the purchase of a
joint-and-survivor annuity contract, which provides a stream of payments until both members of
the couple die, is less (on a proportional money-metric basis) than the utility increase
experienced by a single individual from the purchase of a single-life annuity, which provides a
stream of payments until that one person dies. Many potential buyers of annuities are members



                                                28
of couples, so the lower value that couples place on annuitization can help to explain low levels
of annuity purchases.

Another important set of household risks that could drive the annuity puzzle is uncertainty
regarding medical payments and the cost of long-term nursing care in poor health states. The
lack of perfect insurance markets for health status implies that households may refrain from
purchasing annuities and instead use accumulated wealth to self-insure against the risk of health
shocks (Sinclair and Smetters, 2004; Turra and Mitchell, 2008; De Nardi et al., 2009, 2010;
Peijnenburg et al., 2017). Ameriks et al. (2011) place particular emphasis on the role of “public
care aversion”—the distaste for long-term care in a public nursing facility—in explaining the
annuity puzzle. Using a survey to disentangle the impact of public care aversion from the impact
of bequest motives, they find evidence that both factors are important for explaining the low
demand for life annuities. Reichling and Smetters (2015) point out that health shocks may
simultaneously increase mortality risk and increase medical spending needs, implying that life
annuities, which decrease in value when mortality risk increases, are an anti-hedge for certain
health shocks. When they simulate their model, they find that optimal holdings of annuities are
low and roughly match observed levels of annuitization, especially when they introduce
additional realistic frictions.

Pashchenko (2013) develops an elaborate model that includes many of the extensions described
above as well as others in order to assess the relative importance of different classical
explanations for the annuity puzzle. She finds that pre-existing annuitization from government
pension programs, bequest motives, minimum purchase amounts for private-market annuities,
and the illiquidity of housing wealth (which makes it costly to convert housing wealth into
annuities) are key contributors to the low demand for annuities. Thus, extensions of the classical
economic model have had some success resolving the annuity puzzle.

Nonetheless, important challenges to classical models of annuity demand remain, many of them
summarized by Brown (2007). First, many classical models explain the annuity puzzle by relying
at least in part on actuarially unfair prices in the private market. Such explanations presume that
household annuity demand responds strongly to prices, but the evidence for this proposition is
weak. For example, choosing to delay the start of one’s Social Security benefits increases the
size of one’s monthly Social Security payments once they begin, so delaying benefits is
equivalent to purchasing an annuity, where the purchase price is the foregone early benefits. The
implied annuity prices from delaying Social Security benefits are approximately actuarially fair
or in some cases even better than actuarially fair (Shoven and Slavov, 2014).26 Nevertheless,

26
   A caveat to this analysis is that it assumes that Social Security benefits will be paid as promised, which many
Americans doubt. In 2015, 51% of non-retirees (including 30% of those ages 50 to 64) said that Social Security
would not be able to pay them a benefit when they retire, and 43% of retirees think that there will eventually be cuts
to their Social Security benefits. (http://news.gallup.com/poll/184580/americans-doubt-social-security-benefits.aspx,
accessed May 16, 2018)

                                                         29
Coile et al. (2002) document that only about 10% of men retiring before age 62 delay claiming
their benefits for at least one year after they become eligible. Chalmers and Reuter (2012a) study
Oregon public employees choosing between partial and full annuitization of their pension
benefits. Exploiting variation in pricing driven by the various formulas determining annuity
rates, the researchers find that annuity take-up is not sensitive to price but is sensitive to factors
such as life expectancy, risk aversion, and the level of annuitized income available. Previtero
(2014) shows that annuity take-up is negatively correlated with recent stock market returns.
Households appear to extrapolate when forming beliefs about future stock returns and therefore
prefer lump sums that can be invested in equities when recent returns have been high.

Other researchers have stressed that the annuitization decision is complex and that households
may not have the cognitive abilities or financial literacy necessary for making well-considered
annuity choices. Warner and Pleeter (2001) study the decisions of military personnel as they
complete their service and choose between an annuity and a lump-sum payment. The annuity in
this case is a fixed-term annuity (not a life annuity), but the context is still informative regarding
the factors influencing life annuity decisions. Even though choosing the lump sum implies that
future income is valued using a discount rate of more than 17% per year, more than 50% of the
officers and more than 90% of the enlisted personnel choose the lump sum, and choosing the
lump sum is negatively associated with education and age. However, when Simon et al. (2015)
study a later instance of military personnel choosing between an annuity and a lump sum, they
find much more modest implied discount rates of around 3% for officers and around 7% for
enlistees. The difference between the two studies is likely driven by the fact that in the first
study, individuals who chose the annuity were simultaneously agreeing to enlist in the military
reserves for the life of the annuity, while those who chose the lump sum were committing to only
three years in the reserves and received other benefits. This confound makes the estimates of
discount rates from the later study more credible. Nonetheless, the later study shows that choice
of the lump sum is negatively correlated with performance on the Armed Forces Qualification
Test, a measure of cognitive ability. It also replicates the finding that choice of the lump sum is
negatively correlated with education.

On the other hand, annuitization may be less complex than alternative mechanisms for optimally
spending down accumulated wealth, in which case low financial literacy cannot explain the
annuity puzzle. Agnew and Szykman (2011) conduct a laboratory experiment in which
participants choose between a simple option—a commitment to receive an annuity-like payout
over all rounds of the experiment—and a complex option—a dynamic decision-making task
involving a withdrawal choice and an asset allocation choice in each round. The researchers find
that financial literacy is negatively associated with choice of the annuity, the opposite of the
Simon et al. (2015) finding.




                                                  30
Benartzi et al. (2011) concur with the view that annuities can simplify the problem of how to
manage the drawdown of assets during retirement. However, they note that institutional factors
often make it inconvenient for households to purchase annuities. For example, few defined
contribution retirement savings plans provide annuities as an option in the investment menu, and
small frictions in the process of purchasing an annuity may decrease annuity take-up
substantially. Thus, the relationships among cognitive ability, financial literacy, and annuity
purchases may depend heavily on the details of the decision-making context.

One particularly important contextual influence on annuity purchases is the framing of the
decision. Brown et al. (2008b) conduct an online survey and randomly assign participants to
contemplate an annuity purchase in an investment frame or in a consumption frame. The
investment frame, which emphasizes the possible future financial returns from purchasing an
annuity, leads only 21% of participants to select the annuity. The consumption frame, which
emphasizes the amount of consumption that the annuity would finance, leads 72% of respondents
to select the annuity. Beshears et al. (2014b) also find in an online survey that the investment
frame decreases annuity take-up relative to the consumption frame.

Several papers have argued that the mental accounting invoked by the investment frame may
apply the “loss” label to situations in which a household member dies early and fails to “break
even” on the annuity purchase. For loss-averse households, such loss scenarios loom large and
make annuities unattractive (Brown, 2007; Hu and Scott, 2007). Benartzi et al. (2011) provide
evidence consistent with this argument. Annuitization rates at retirement are higher in defined
benefit plans, which consistently frame accrued benefits in terms of a stream of income to be
consumed, than in cash balance plans, which function nearly identically but which consistently
frame accrued benefits in terms of a stock of assets to be invested. Similarly, Brown et al.
(2016b) find supportive data for the importance of loss aversion in a survey experiment that
studies the decision to delay the claiming of Social Security benefits. Framing the decision in
terms of a “break even” analysis—an investment frame—leads to earlier claiming. Additional
factors that decrease annuity take-up among survey respondents include making the annuitization
decision all-or-nothing instead of allowing partial annuitization, and emphasizing the loss of
flexibility and control inherent in purchasing an annuity Beshears et al. (2014). Brown (2007)
and Benartzi et al. (2011) provide further discussion of psychological factors that may play a role
in annuitization decisions.

Finally, even if classical models of annuity demand can approximately match the cross-sectional
distribution of annuity holdings, Koijen et al. (2016) show that a related puzzle remains
regarding the time-series pattern of annuity holdings within a household. The classical model
predicts that households will slowly shift from holding life insurance to holding annuities as their
human capital is depleted, but the empirical evidence indicates that households rarely adjust
these financial exposures to mortality risk, perhaps because of inertia or institutional forces.


                                                31
Property and Casualty Insurance

The property and casualty insurance market is another domain in which households sometimes
purchase too little insurance relative to the classical economic benchmark. For example,
households often neglect to purchase insurance against catastrophic risks such as floods and
earthquakes, even though such insurance is available at prices that are approximately actuarially
fair or even subsidized (Kunreuther et al., 2013). This fact is probably not the result of a reliance
on government disaster relief, as Kunreuther et al. (1978) document that few households believe
they will receive such relief. A leading explanation for the lack of catastrophic insurance demand
is that households underestimate or even completely ignore the probability that a catastrophe
might strike, and it does not occur to them (or it is perceived as too costly) to gather additional
information about the extent of their risk (Kunreuther and Pauly, 2004).

Conditional on purchasing property and casualty insurance, households often purchase too much
protection against modest losses by choosing deductibles (the amount of losses the household
will absorb before insurance coverage begins) that imply implausibly high levels of risk aversion
under the standard expected utility model. Sydnor (2010) studies data on 50,000 home insurance
policies issued by a large insurance provider. Adopting a simplified version of Sydnor’s
calculations, a household’s deductible choice problem from a menu of one-year policies is
                          max 𝜋 ⋅ 𝑢<𝑤 − 𝑃9 − 𝐷9 A + (1 − 𝜋) ⋅ 𝑢<𝑤 − 𝑃9 A
                                 9
where 𝑗 indexes the available policies, 𝜋 is the probability of an insurance claim during the year,
𝑤 is the household’s initial wealth, 𝑃9 is the policy’s premium, 𝐷9 is the policy’s deductible, and
𝑢 is a constant relative risk aversion utility function over wealth. Assume that the household
experiences at most one claim per year and that the loss in the event of a claim is always between
the amount of the highest available deductible and the insurance coverage limit.27 The parameters
𝑃9 and 𝐷9 are directly observed for the policies in the menu offered to a given household. For a
given level of wealth and claim probability, a choice of one deductible over other available
deductibles generates bounds on the household’s implied coefficient of relative risk aversion.

Focusing on new policyholders in the data set, and assuming wealth of $1 million and a claim
probability equal to the average frequency among households who chose the deductible level,
Sydnor calculates that the median household that chose a $500 deductible (the most popular
choice, where the other available deductibles were $100, $250, and $1,000) has an implied
coefficient of relative risk aversion between 1,839 and 5,064. This level of risk aversion is
extreme, given that 10 is the commonly accepted reasonable upper bound on this parameter
(Mehra and Prescott, 1985). It implies that if households applied the same utility function across
all their financial decisions, essentially all of the households that chose a $500 deductible would

27
     Each home insurance policy studied by Sydnor (Sydnor, 2010) had a coverage limit equal to the house value.

                                                          32
reject a gamble featuring a 50% chance of losing $1,000 and a 50% chance of gaining any
positive amount of money, no matter how large (Rabin, 2000). Cutler and Zeckhauser (2004)
provide similar calculations for home insurance, auto insurance, and warranties on consumer
durables, and they also find high levels of implied risk aversion. Kunreuther et al. (2013) argue
that cancer insurance, flight insurance, and rental car insurance are similarly overpurchased.
Cohen and Einav (2007) examine deductible choices among Israeli auto policy holders and find
that an important fraction of individuals in the sample exhibit high levels of implied risk aversion
but that the majority of individuals exhibit much more modest levels of implied risk aversion.

Beyond the question of whether households purchase too much insurance against modest losses,
researchers have used data on property and casualty insurance to examine other insurance
puzzles that are difficult to explain with the classical model. Households may display
inconsistent levels of risk aversion across contexts, and their decisions can be subject to
probability distortions. Insurance choices may also be influenced by framing, whether the losses
are salient, and a desire to avoid ambiguity.

To assess whether households display consistent levels of risk aversion across multiple insurance
choices, Barseghyan et al. (2011) study a data set that links the deductible choices of households
in the home, auto collision, and auto comprehensive insurance domains. Using the deductible
choice methodology to place bounds on the coefficient of relative risk aversion implied by a
household’s choices in each domain, they show that only 23% of households have overlapping
implied intervals. As a benchmark, if choices were randomly assigned, we would expect 14% to
have overlapping implied intervals. Households exhibit more risk aversion in home insurance
deductible choices than in auto insurance deductible choices. Einav et al. (2012) study the
choices of Alcoa employees across several benefit domains, including disability insurance,
health insurance, and retirement savings asset allocation, and they find that only 30% of the
sample is internally consistent across the six domains.

Several explanations have been proposed for the high and internally inconsistent levels of risk
aversion implied by property and casualty insurance deductible choices and warranty purchases.
Household choices may imply high levels of risk aversion because households behave according
to prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Schoemaker and Kunreuther, 1979; Tversky
and Kahneman, 1992; Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006, 2007). Such households are loss averse—the
disutility from experiencing a loss relative to a reference point is greater than the utility from
experiencing a gain of the same magnitude—so there is a strong motive to protect against losses.
However, a difficulty with this explanation is that loss aversion should also apply to the premium
paid for an insurance policy, making insurance less attractive.28 In addition, the prospect theory
value function is risk seeking in the loss domain, further decreasing the attractiveness of

28
  This concern can be resolved if households do not code the purchase price as a loss (Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006,
2007).

                                                        33
insurance. The feature of prospect theory that increases the attractiveness of insurance is the
probability weighting function, which leads small probability events to receive more weight in
the decision calculus than they would receive under the expected utility model. Sydnor (2010)
notes that typical calibrations of the probability weighting function can partially explain his
results.

Barseghyan et al. (2013a) simultaneously estimate households’ degree of risk aversion and the
extent to which choices reflect probability distortions, whereby states of the world receive
decision weights that are not proportional to their objective probabilities of occurring. The
prospect theory weighting function may be the source of probability distortions, but
misperceptions of risk and other factors are also possible sources. Using the data set on
deductible choice in home, auto collision, and auto comprehensive insurance, the researchers
find that probability distortions play an important role in deductible choices. For example, a 2%
objective probability translates into an 8% decision weight, and a 10% objective probability
translates into a 16% decision weight. Barseghyan et al. (2013b) show that probability weighting
can in fact be distinguished from risk misperceptions when choices across several domains are
combined.29

Many other factors may cause the risk of a low-probability negative event to receive
disproportionately high weight in insurance decisions. Moving beyond the question of deductible
choice to consider the willingness to pay for insurance more broadly, Johnson et al. (1993)
demonstrate the role of framing effects in shaping insurance demand. In their laboratory
experiment, more vivid descriptions of a hazard increase insurance take-up.

Another factor that can increase the salience of risks is losses experienced in the past, either by
oneself or another similar individual. Flood insurance, which covers a peril typically excluded
from home insurance contracts, is an ideal setting for studying the role of past experiences with
losses. Gallagher (2014) examines community-level data on flood insurance policies linked with
county-level flood data. Following a flood, flood insurance take-up increases by 9%.
Furthermore, flooding in a nearby county with a shared media market leads to a 3% increase in
flood insurance take-up. To explain these results, Gallagher proposes a learning model in which
people react to the salient event but forget over time. Atreya et al. (2015) also find that prior
flooding increases flood insurance take-up, with the effect dissipating over three years.

Changing perceptions of the probability of a loss are likely a key driver of these effects. Botzen
et al. (2015) show that experiencing a flood leads to an increase in the perception of flood risk.
However, the relationship between past experiences with losses and insurance take-up is not
monotonic. Michel-Kerjan et al. (2012) study zip-code-level claims data from the National Flood

29
  For a detailed discussion of these findings in particular and models of insurance choices more generally, see
Barseghyan et al. (2016).

                                                         34
Insurance Program and U.S. Census data on flood insurance penetration and find that
experiencing a small claim (less than 10% of the limit) in the first year of holding insurance
leads to higher subsequent insurance take-up relative to having no claim. But they also find that
having a large claim (more than 75% of the limit) in the first year of holding insurance leads to
lower subsequent take-up. After a large claim, perhaps a household is unable to afford insurance
or tends to move to a new geographic location. It is also possible that households believe that
large claims, unlike small claims, predict a lower frequency or size of future losses.

While misperceptions of the size of losses likely influence insurance decisions, the direction of
misestimation seems to vary across contexts. In a field survey on washing machine warranty
purchases, Huysentruyt and Read (2010) find that people overstate the cost of repairs and the
likelihood of breakdowns. Botzen et al. (2015), on the other hand, show that twice as many
people underestimate flood damages as overestimate flood damages.

Finally, there is evidence that ambiguity regarding the likelihood of experiencing a loss increases
insurance demand. In a laboratory experiment, Hogarth and Kunreuther (1995) show that people
are more likely to purchase warranties for consumer electronics when they are not given
information about the likelihood of a loss than when the loss probability is stated. Schade et al.
(2012) provide evidence that this effect is driven by “worry” as opposed to probability
misperception or ex-post rationalizations.

Lotteries

In 2015, lottery sales in the U.S. exceeded $70 billion, or more than $200 per person.30
According to the classical model, a household should not accept a gamble that offers negative
expected returns and that generates fluctuations in wealth that are uncorrelated with any other
risks borne by the household. Such gambles cause the household to lose money on average
without providing any hedging benefits. From the perspective of the classical model, it is
therefore a puzzle that participation in lotteries is so prevalent.31

A first category of explanations for lottery participation posits that participation enters the
household utility function in a way that is distinct from its implications for household wealth
(Fishburn, 1980; Thaler and Ziemba, 1988; Conlisk, 1993). Adams (1996) argues that lottery
participation generates positive affect from feelings of anticipation and is also a positive social
experience shared with family members, friends, and colleagues. Consistent with this hypothesis,
Forrest et al. (2002) show that the excitement generated by a lottery, as captured by the size of its

30
  National Association of State and Provincial Lotteries, http://www.naspl.org/faq.
31
  It might also be considered a puzzle that participation in casino gambling and other games of chance is
widespread, but these activities are structured in such a way that the direct entertainment value is apparent (Oster,
2002). Nonetheless, the explanations for lottery participation that we discuss can also explain participation in casino
gambling.

                                                          35
maximum prize, has explanatory power for U.K. lottery purchases beyond the expected value of
a lottery ticket relative to its price. However, many explanations of this type are unsatisfying
because it is unclear why the posited benefits of lottery participation, such as positive affect and
positive social experiences, are not also available from purchasing assets with positive expected
returns.

Several other explanations have been put forward as resolutions to the lottery participation
puzzle. An individual may have a utility function over wealth that is concave around the current
level of wealth, generating positive demand for insurance, and convex around higher levels of
wealth, generating positive demand for lotteries (Friedman and Savage, 1948). Garrett and Sobel
(1999) find evidence consistent with this hypothesis when they estimate a cubic utility function
over wealth using data on the prizes and winning probabilities offered in U.S. lotteries.32 One
possible explanation for a utility function that is convex around levels of wealth significantly
higher than the current level is that such wealth may confer social status benefits.

Chetty and Szeidl (2007) show that positive demand for lotteries can arise even when the utility
function is strictly concave. They posit a utility function that takes two arguments: a good whose
quantity is costless to adjust (e.g., food), and a good whose quantity is costly to adjust (e.g.,
housing). Such an agent will adjust his housing only if his wealth changes by a sufficiently large
amount. Suppose the agent’s wealth is just below the threshold at which he would find it
worthwhile to pay the adjustment cost to move to a better house. At that point, he is consuming a
large amount of food relative to housing, so his marginal utility of food is relatively low. The
utility loss from losing a dollar, which would be entirely accommodated by lowering food
consumption, is then less than the utility gain from gaining a dollar, which would cause him to
move to a better house. Thus, a lottery becomes attractive.

Financial desperation may be another important driver of lottery participation. A household that
is experiencing financial hardship may participate in a lottery in the hopes of winning a prize that
enables it to escape the difficult situation. Clotfelter and Cook (1989) document that spending on
lotteries as a fraction of income falls as income rises. Blalock et al. (2007) show that lottery sales
are positively correlated with poverty rates, and they argue that this pattern is not the result of an
association between poverty and increased demand for inexpensive entertainment, as poverty is
not correlated with movie ticket sales. In an experiment, Haisley et al. (2008) find that low-
income participants are more likely to participate in a lottery when they are primed to think about
their low economic status.

A household that participates in a lottery because of a negative financial shock may continue to
participate in lotteries even after recovering from the shock if this behavior becomes a habit.
Guryan and Kearney (2010) provide evidence that lottery participation is addictive. After the sale

32
     Golec and Tamarkin (1998) find similar results for horse-race betting markets.

                                                           36
of a winning lottery ticket, lottery purchases in the zip code of the winning sale increase by 14%,
and approximately half of this increase remains six months later. Farrell et al. (1999) similarly
find evidence for habit formation in time-series analysis of aggregate U.K. lottery data.

Another possible explanation for lottery participation is that households perceive the probability
of winning the lottery to be higher than the objective probability. Relatedly, households that
correctly perceive the win probability may nonetheless make decisions as if it were higher, as
modeled by the prospect theory probability weighting function.33 Clotfelter and Cook (1989)
document that lottery participation is negatively correlated with education, suggesting that a
misunderstanding of probability plays a role in lottery participation. Cook and Clotfelter (1993)
hypothesize that individuals judge the likelihood of winning the lottery based on the frequency
with which somebody wins instead of the objective probability. This error could explain why
states with larger populations tend to have higher lottery sales per capita. A larger population
increases the size of jackpots, which increases per capita demand for the lottery, holding all else
equal. A larger population also decreases the objective probability that a given individual wins
the lottery, but this does not reduce lottery demand if individuals simply use the frequency of
observing lottery winners to judge the likelihood of winning.

The illusion of control (Langer, 1975) is another factor that may inflate perceptions of the
probability of winning the lottery. Sales at a store that sells a winning lottery ticket increase
afterwards by 12% to 38%, suggesting that households believe they can increase their chances of
winning by purchasing tickets from a “lucky store,” and this effect is more pronounced in areas
with low levels of education (Guryan and Kearney, 2008). Furthermore, even though choosing
numbers that are not chosen by others increases the expected value of a lottery ticket by reducing
the likelihood of having to share a prize, lottery participants tend to choose similar numbers,
presumably because these numbers are “lucky” (Finkelstein, 1995; Farrell et al., 2000; Roger and
Broihanne, 2007).


Part 2: Interventions

If people make financial mistakes, can firms and policymakers move outcomes towards
normative prescriptions? In Part 2, we summarize the research on the impact of interventions to
do so. We first discuss less intrusive approaches (education and information, peer effects and
social influence, product design, advice and disclosure, choice architecture) before examining
more intrusive measures (directly targeting market prices or quantities). This part of the chapter
also discusses “interventions” that are deployed by profit-maximizing firms, which may not be
designed to improve social welfare.

33
  However, DellaVigna and Pope (2017) do not find evidence for probability weighting in a real-effort experiment,
as a lottery offered as an incentive for effort does not have the positive impact on performance predicted by the
overweighting of small probabilities.

                                                       37
VI. Education and Information

If financial mistakes result from a lack of knowledge, then financial education could presumably
improve financial outcomes. A large body of research has documented low financial literacy in
many different countries and virtually all demographic subgroups (Hastings et al., 2013; Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2014). Although many different approaches have been used to measure financial
literacy, one that has become popular in the last decade is the so-called “Big Three,” a module of
three multiple-choice questions (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011):

        Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
        years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to
        grow?
           • More than $102
           • Exactly $102
           • Less than $102
           • Don’t know

        Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
        2% per year. After 1 year, would you be able to buy more than today, exactly the same as
        today, or less than today with the money in this account?
            • More than today
            • Exactly the same as today
            • Less than today
            • Don’t know

        Do you think that the following statement is true or false: Buying a single company stock
        usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund?
           • True
           • False
           • Don’t know

Hastings et al. (2013) report that in the 2010 Health and Retirement Study, 71% of U.S. adults
correctly answered the compound interest question, 81% correctly answered the inflation
question, and 64% correctly answered the risk diversification question. Only 43% provided the
correct response to all three questions.

A sizeable literature has documented correlations between financial literacy (and related
concepts34) and a wide range of financial behaviors and outcomes, including beneficial personal

34
  Measures related to financial literacy include more general measures of cognitive ability, numeracy, and feelings
of financial competence.

                                                        38
financial management practices (Hilgert et al., 2003), planning for retirement (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2007; Clark et al., 2015), saving and wealth accumulation (Ameriks et al., 2003;
Lusardi, 2004; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2011; Stango and Zinman, 2008; Hung et al., 2009;
Van Rooij et al., 2012), stock market participation (Kimball and Shumway, 2006; Christelis et
al., 2010; Van Rooij et al., 2011), choosing a low-fee investment portfolio (Choi et al., 2010;
Duarte and Hastings, 2012), portfolio diversification and the frequency of stock trading (Graham
et al., 2009), debt accumulation (Stango and Zinman, 2008; Lusardi and Tufano, 2015), high-
cost borrowing (Lusardi and Tufano, 2015), poor mortgage choice (Moore, 2003), and mortgage
delinquency and home foreclosure (Gerardi et al., 2010).

The literature also shows a robust association between financial education and a variety of
financial outcomes (Bernheim and Garrett, 2003; Lusardi, 2004; Danes and Haberman, 2004;
Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007; Bell et al., 2008; Bell et al., 2009). Despite these strong correlations,
the evidence on the causal effect of financial education on either financial literacy or actual
financial behaviors and outcomes is mixed. A recent meta-analysis of dozens of papers on the
impact of financial education concludes that “interventions to improve financial literacy explain
only 0.1% of the variance in financial behaviors studied” (Fernandes et al., 2014). The biggest
limitation of this literature is a dearth of studies that credibly estimate causal effects. Additional
difficulties in characterizing the results of this literature arise from the fact that what constitutes
“financial education” runs the gamut from low-touch, time-limited, and narrowly tailored
informational interventions to high-touch, long-duration interventions designed to impart a broad
range of knowledge. The populations studied include schoolchildren, college students, members
of the military, small business owners and the self-employed, farmers, potential home buyers,
older individuals nearing retirement, and broader general populations.

The early literature on financial education exploited endogenous cross-sectional variation in
participation in financial education programs or courses to measure their effect. The cross-
sectional variation used in these early studies has an obvious problem when it comes to causal
inference: individuals who enroll in financial education are almost surely different from those
who do not. For example, individuals with lower levels of financial competence might feel a
greater need for financial education. This could explain why many early studies find no
relationship between financial education and financial literacy (e.g., Jump$tart, 2006; Mandell,
2008). Meier and Sprenger (2013) find that individuals who elect to participate in the financial
education program they study are more future-oriented than those who do not. If those with
lower time discount rates are more likely to save for retirement, then comparisons between those
who do receive education and those who don’t will give a biased estimate of the impact of
financial education on saving. Other factors that could similarly bias the estimates of financial
education’s impact include personality (Borghans et al., 2008) and family background (Cunha
and Heckman, 2007; Cunha et al., 2010).



                                                  39
Recent studies exploit natural experiments that create quasi-exogenous variation in who receives
financial education. Skimmyhorn (2016) evaluates the phased roll-out across military bases of a
mandatory eight-hour financial literacy course for enlisted personnel in the U.S. Army.
Compared to soldiers hired just before the financial education course was implemented, those
hired just after are twice as likely to participate in the U.S. federal government’s Thrift Savings
Plan (a 401(k)-like retirement savings account) and contribute roughly twice as much, although
much of this effect is probably due to the fact that the course instructors offered direct assistance
in enrolling in the Thrift Savings Plan. More likely to be the result of the educational portion of
the course are the reductions in debt balances, delinquent accounts, and probability of facing an
adverse legal action (foreclosures, liens, judgments, and bankruptcies), although none of these
credit effects are statistically significant by the second year after the course.

Several papers have exploited differences in high school curriculum requirements across states
and/or over time as a source of variation in financial education. Cole et al. (2016) find that
financial education mandates passed from 1957 to 1982 had no impact at midlife (average age
around 45) on wealth accumulation, the likelihood of paying bills on time, credit scores, and the
likelihood of bankruptcy. Cole et al. (2016) also examine the impact earlier in adulthood
(average age around 30) of a set of 1984-1994 math curriculum reforms that increased the
number of math courses taken in high school. In contrast to the null results estimated for
financial education, they find that additional math education does affect several financial
outcomes, increasing financial market participation, investment income, and home equity, and
decreasing the likelihood of loan delinquency and home foreclosure.35

Urban et al. (2018) study high school financial education mandates enacted in Georgia, Idaho,
and Texas in 2007. They compare financial outcomes at ages 18-21 for students in these states to
those for students in demographically similar states (defined using synthetic control methods)
that did not mandate financial education before 2011. Using a difference-in-differences
approach, they find that financial education decreases debt delinquency and improves credit
scores, and these effects are stronger in later cohorts, perhaps due to implementation delays and
growing teacher familiarity with the material.



35
   The first study to use high school curriculum mandates for identification, Bernheim et al. (2001a), examines self-
reported financial outcomes in 1995 for individuals born between 1946 and 1965. They conclude that attending high
school when a state financial education mandate was in place is associated with higher levels of wealth
accumulation. Because their empirical specification does not include state fixed effects, much of their identifying
variation comes from differences across states rather than differences over time within the same state. Cole et al.
(2016) revisit the Bernheim et al. (2001a) results using data from the Census and the Survey of Income and Program
Participation. They replicate the Bernheim et al. (2001a) results in these data using the original empirical
specification, but when they additionally control for state-of-birth and year-of-birth fixed effects, the effects of
financial education on wealth accumulation disappear. They conclude that state adoption of these mandates was
correlated with economic growth, which could have had an independent effect on savings and wealth accumulation.

                                                         40
Brown et al. (2016c) examine three types of state-level high school curriculum reforms enacted
between 1998 and 2012: mandates that require students to (1) take an economics course, (2) take
a financial literacy course, or (3) take more math courses. They use an event study approach that
controls for state ´ year fixed effects, birth cohort ´ year fixed effects, and linear state ´ cohort
time trends. They find that math education improves creditworthiness but also increases student
debt, while financial literacy education decreases loan delinquencies and the likelihood of having
any debt. On the other hand, requiring students to take an economics course increases the
probability of holding debt and the probability of having repayment difficulties. The salutary
effects of financial literacy and math training dissipate by the time people reach their mid-
twenties, which could reconcile these estimates and those of Urban et al. (2018) with the null
findings of Cole et al. (2016).

Brown et al. (2016c) also report the results of a difference-in-differences analysis of the impact
of financial education on financial literacy using assessments conducted by the National
Jump$tart Coalition in states that either implemented a financial literacy mandate between 2005
and 2007 (treatment states) or did not have a mandate during that time (control states). In
contrast to the weak results found in studies using the same data but relying solely on cross-
sectional variation (Jump$tart, 2006; Mandell, 2008), they find that financial education increases
financial literacy scores by one standard deviation, a very large effect.

Choi et al. (2005) study the impact of media coverage of the Enron, WorldCom, and Global
Crossing bankruptcies in the early 2000s. All three of these firms’ employees held in their 401(k)
plans large amounts of their employer’s stock, which became worthless after the bankruptcies.
The “financial education” provided by this media coverage had only a small effect on the 401(k)
asset allocations of employees in a group of other large firms. The percent of balances invested
in employer stock at these other firms was reduced by at most 2 percentage points from a base of
36%.

A growing body of more recent research has used random assignment to financial education
programs or interventions in order to estimate their causal impact. The results from these studies
are also mixed. Bruhn and Zia (2013) and Berg and Zia (2017) both find that financial education
increases measures of financial literacy. The latter study randomizes whether individuals were
paid to watch a South African soap opera with a storyline about gambling and debt management,
or paid to watch another soap opera airing at the same time. They find that treated viewers score
higher on a financial literacy assessment, and while no less likely to borrow, are 2.8 percentage
points (62%) more likely borrow from a formal creditor, 7.1 percentage points (61%) more likely
to borrow for productive purposes conditional on borrowing, 4.4 percentage points (23%) less
likely to use retail credit, and 5.2 percentage points (17%) less likely to gamble.




                                                 41
Lusardi et al. (2014) compare the effects of four different approaches to providing financial
education. While all four approaches increase self-efficacy (the belief that one can accomplish a
specified goal), only some increase performance on a subsequent financial literacy assessment.
Carpena et al. (2015) find that financial education has a positive impact on both short- and
longer-run measures of financial awareness and financial attitudes, but has no impact on
participants’ ability to perform financial calculations correctly or on actual financial behaviors
such as budgeting, saving, or reducing debt utilization. Ambuehl et al. (2016) find that financial
education improves performance on a financial literacy assessment but does not improve the
quality of financial decision-making in a task where individuals can make objectively better or
worse decisions. Liebman and Luttmer (2015) study an intervention that provided information to
55 to 65 year old workers on the incentives embedded in the U.S. Social Security system. Those
given more information are 4 percentage points (6%) more likely to be employed one year later
but are equally likely to have claimed Social Security benefits (conditional on being age-eligible
and not having claimed at the time of the intervention).

The largest randomized field study of financial education to date was conducted by Bruhn et al.
(2013) in Brazil. Eight hundred ninety-two high schools were randomly assigned to either have
one eleventh grade class participate in a new financial education program or not. The financial
education was integrated throughout the curriculum over a 17-month period. The lessons were
designed to take between 72 and 144 hours of classroom teaching time and included exercises
for students to complete at home with their parents. The researchers find positive effects on a
number of student outcomes immediately after the curriculum ended: scores on a financial
literacy exam (a 0.2 standard deviation increase), grade-level passing rates, employment, saving
(a 1.4 percentage point—or 11%—increase in the percent of disposable income saved),
budgeting, and negotiating over prices. But the program also caused students to become 2.9
percentage points (10%) more likely to borrow money, and there is some evidence that they were
more likely to fall behind in their loan repayments. Interestingly, the program also had an impact
on students’ parents, who scored higher on a financial literacy assessment and were more likely
to report saving and using a budget. This result suggests that well-designed financial education
programs could have meaningful spillover effects.

The mixed findings on the impact of financial education have led to a shift away from studies
designed to assess “does it work” to studies designed to assess “what makes it more or less
effective.” Much of this latter work draws on behavioral concepts to inform the strategies that
might make financial education more effective.

Drexler et al. (2014) evaluate two approaches to providing financial education to micro-
entrepreneurs in the Dominican Republic. One approach provided standard accounting training,
while the other taught simple financial management rules of thumb. One year after the program,
the authors find no difference between the financial behaviors of the group that received the


                                                42
accounting-based financial education and those of a control group. In contrast, the group that
received the rules-of-thumb financial education program exhibited significant improvements in
financial behavior relative to the control group.

In a field experiment with farmers in China, Cai and Song (2017) find that an educational
intervention that helps farmers calculate the value of weather insurance under different scenarios
has no impact on subsequent insurance take-up. In contrast, playing a multi-round game in which
farmers draw a random weather shock and then experience a payout from that shock based on
whether they purchased insurance nearly doubles insurance demand. Moreover, whether a
participant experienced a weather shock in the later rounds of the game is the most important
driver of this effect. This study suggests that financial education could be more effective if it is in
some way experiential36 and if principles are made more salient. Relatedly, Berg and Zia (2017)
attribute the effectiveness of their South African soap opera intervention to the emotional
connection that viewers had with its main character.37

Carpena et al. (2015) evaluate a five-week financial education intervention in India ten months
after the program ended. As previously mentioned, the baseline financial education intervention
increases financial awareness and attitudes, but has no impact on financial acumen or behaviors.
They also study the effect of coupling financial education with an intervention in which
respondents are asked to set a target date for achieving several concrete financial planning goals
and to mark those dates on a calendar. Consistent with the psychological literature on goal
setting (Locke and Latham, 2002), they find that this dual intervention leads to some changes in
financial behavior. Pairing financial education with individualized financial counseling is
somewhat more effective than pairing education with the target-date intervention. The
combination of all three interventions—financial education, goal setting, and counseling—is the
most effective, increasing the likelihood of making a regular monthly budget by 4.8 percentage
points (75%), having informal savings by 6.4 percentage points (80%), having formal savings by
9.0 percentage points (30%), and purchasing life insurance by 5.4 percentage points (163%). In a
similar vein, Carlin and Robinson (2012) conduct a less methodologically rigorous study of the
Junior Achievement financial education program for teenagers and find that financial education
is more effective when coupled with decision support. These results suggest that one factor
contributing to the mixed effectiveness of financial education programs is that the cognitive
limitations that financial education addresses are not the only barrier to better financial
outcomes.




36
   Although not a study of financial education, Choi et al. (2009b) find evidence that decisions about how much to
save are consistent with a model of experience-based reinforcement learning.
37
   See Lerner et al. (2015) for a review of the more general literature on emotions and decision-making.

                                                        43
A body of literature has studied lower-touch interventions designed to provide financial
information to consumers. These papers often examine the effect of providing written materials
that require less time and attention from recipients than financial education programs.

Bertrand and Morse (2011) study a trio of behaviorally informed interventions targeted at
customers of a payday lender. One treatment, designed to address borrower overconfidence
about the likelihood of timely repayment, provides borrowers with an infographic on the
distribution of how many times a new payday loan is rolled over. The other two treatments
provide simple comparisons of the cost of a payday loan relative to other sources of credit.
Relative to a control group, all three interventions reduce future payday borrowing by 11-13% at
the lender studied.

We previously discussed in the subsection on mutual fund choice the laboratory experiment of
Choi et al. (2010), where subjects allocated a portfolio across four S&P 500 index funds. They
find that providing a single page with information about the funds’ fees causes subjects to choose
a portfolio with modestly lower fees than those in the control group who did not receive the fee
summary, but the vast majority of the treatment group still fail to minimize fees by allocating
100% to the lowest-cost fund. This suggests that making relevant information salient is
somewhat effective at changing investor behavior but does not eliminate financial mistakes.
Giving subjects instead a single page highlighting the funds’ annualized returns since inception
shifts their portfolios toward funds with higher annualized returns since inception, even though
variation in this statistic is driven primarily by variation in the fund’s inception date, and in this
experiment, annualized returns since inception are positively correlated with fund fees. This
highlights the problems that can be created when information is provided by sources whose own
interests are not aligned with those of consumers.

Beshears et al. (2011) conduct a methodologically similar experiment that compares investor
decisions when given a set of regular full-length mutual fund prospectuses versus when given a
much more concise set of summary prospectuses. If most investors largely ignore the
information in prospectuses because they are so long (and therefore make worse decisions), then
shorter, more user-friendly prospectuses could improve investment outcomes. Beshears et al.
(2011) find no impact of the summary prospectus on investment decision quality, although it
reduces the time that subjects spend making their decision.

Choi et al. (2011) examine an intervention in which employees were asked to complete a survey
about their 401(k) plan. As part of the survey, a random subset of respondents who were not
contributing enough to the 401(k) to receive the maximum possible employer matching
contribution were asked to calculate how much match money they would forego each year if
they contributed nothing to the 401(k). The thought was that doing this calculation would make
the cost of not receiving the maximum possible match more salient and motivate employees to


                                                 44
increase their contribution. But there is no significant difference in the 401(k) contributions of
the treatment versus control groups in the three months following the experiment, although a low
survey completion rate may be at least partially responsible for this weak effect.

On the other hand, Duflo and Saez (2003) find small positive effects when they offer randomly
selected university employees a payment if they go to a benefits fair that provides information
about the school’s retirement savings plan. This informational intervention increases retirement
savings plan participation in incentivized employees’ departments by 1 percentage point (about
4%) on an intent-to-treat basis. Goda et al. (2014) also find small intent-to-treat effects of
providing information to university employees. Those randomly assigned to receive general
information on saving for retirement and their retirement savings plan, as well as projections for
how additional contributions would affect balances and income at retirement, were 1.2
percentage points more likely to change their contribution rate, raising their average contribution
rate by 0.15% of salary.

Drawing on the psychological literature on planning and implementation intentions (Gollwitzer,
1999; Rogers et al., 2015), Lusardi et al. (2009) study a simple one-page planning aid designed
to shepherd new employees through the process of enrolling in their employer’s supplemental
retirement account. Relative to employees hired in the seven months before the aid was
introduced, employees given the planning aid were 16 percentage points (55%) more likely to
have opened an account 60 days after hire. These results, along with those of Carpena et al.
(2015) discussed earlier, suggest that follow-through may be an equally important or even
greater barrier than lack of financial knowledge to achieving better financial outcomes.
Motivated by query theory (Weber et al., 2007), which posits that people tend to favor options
they consider earlier over options they consider later, Johnson et al. (2016) study hypothetical
decisions about when to claim Social Security. They find that people are more likely to state a
preference to claim Social Security early when given a list of reasons to do so followed by a list
of reasons not to do so, rather than when they receive these two lists in the reverse order.
Moreover, the effects are large: Those who first receive the list with reasons to claim early prefer
to claim 18 months earlier.

Altogether, the literature suggests that financial education and informational interventions can be
effective tools for improving financial outcomes for consumers, but the effects are often small or
null and appear to depreciate rapidly with time. This has caused some to question whether high-
touch financial education is cost-effective (Willis, 2011; Benartzi et al., 2017).

VII. Peer Effects and Social Influence

Given the accumulating evidence that peers influence individuals’ decisions in financial and
other domains, it seems that a natural policy instrument is the dissemination of information about
one’s peers, an approach that has been called “social norms marketing.” Social norms marketing
                                                45
could work if it corrects inaccurate beliefs that people hold about their peers, or simply makes
peer actions more salient. Social norms marketing has been shown to cause people to move
towards their peers’ behavior in entrée selections in a restaurant, contributions of movie ratings
to an online community, small charitable donations, music downloads, towel re-use in hotels,
taking petrified wood from a national park, stated intentions to vote, and energy use (Frey and
Meier, 2004; Cialdini et al., 2006; Salganik et al., 2006; Goldstein et al., 2008; Cai et al., 2009;
Gerber and Rogers, 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Allcott, 2011; Allcott and Rogers, 2014).

Even so, social norms marketing can have perverse effects. Beshears et al. (2015c) run a field
experiment where they sent information to a randomly selected subset of a firm’s low-saving
employees about what fraction of coworkers in their age group were contributing to the 401(k)
plan or contributing at least 6% of their pay to the plan. They find that while peer information
has a marginally significant positive effect on 401(k) contributions for some people, it has a
perversely significant negative effect for others. Surprise that so few people are saving does not
seem to drive the negative effect, since exogenous increases in the reported fraction of peers
contributing decreases subsequent contributions in the negatively affected subpopulation.
Because the negative effect is stronger among those who have low incomes relative to their local
coworkers, Beshears et al. (2015c) hypothesize that discouragement from comparisons that make
one’s low economic status salient drives the negative effect. Other field experiments have also
generated perverse peer effects. For example, Bhargava and Manoli (2015) find that the
likelihood of claiming the Earned Income Tax Credit is reduced by telling households eligible
for the credit, “Usually, four out of every five people claim their refund.”

VIII. Product Design

Firms can influence households’ financial decisions by making some product attributes salient
(e.g., one-year investment returns during a bull market) and by shrouding others (e.g., the
expense ratio). A firm can also introduce noise or complexity into its marketing (Carlin, 2009;
Gabaix et al., 2016) to induce some potential customers to overestimate the quality or
underestimate the price of the firm’s products (e.g., a mutual fund advertisement that implies
without evidence that active management is superior to passive management).

There are many situations in which households have been shown to overweight salient attributes
and underweight shrouded attributes. For example, adjustable rate mortgage borrowers are more
attentive to initial rates than to reset rates (Gurun et al., 2016). Investors are more sensitive to
mutual fund front-end loads than to ongoing costs embedded in the expense ratio (Barber et al.,
2005, although see Christoffersen et al., 2013). Making salient the existence of a 50% discount
on overdraft fees reduces overdraft usage, consistent with customers overlooking the fact that
overdrafts have a positive price, whereas making salient the availability of overdrafts without
mentioning their cost increases usage (Alan et al., 2016). In general, marketing raises demand for


                                                 46
financial products and lowers their price elasticity of demand; Hastings et al. (2017) demonstrate
these effects in the Mexican mutual fund market.

In classical models, consumers should infer that information shrouded by the seller is likely to be
bad news for the consumer about price or quality. But the evidence suggests that consumers
frequently fail to make this inference. This mis-inference is closely related to Eyster and Rabin’s
(2005) concept of cursed equilibrium.

As one would expect, firms exploit these propensities by designing products and contracts that
make appealing attributes salient while shrouding fees and quality problems (Ellison, 2005;
Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Ellison and Ellison, 2009; Bordalo et al., 2012, 2016; Heidhues and
Kőszegi, 2015; Heidhues et al., 2016a, 2016b; Ru and Schoar, 2017). Other products and
contracts attempt to exploit consumers’ naïveté (DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004; Eliaz and
Spiegler, 2006; Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2015) or overconfidence with respect to future
consumption (Grubb, 2009). For example, credit card companies exploit consumers’ biases by
back-loading or shrouding fees (Ru and Schoar, 2017). In the banking industry, competition can
have the perverse effect of increasing shrouding (Agarwal et al., 2016b; Di Maggio et al., 2016).

IX. Advice and Disclosure

If financial mistakes result from cognitive limitations, psychological biases, or lack of
knowledge, advice from experts who are less subject to these weaknesses could improve
financial outcomes. The 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances finds that 26% of households say
they used advice from financial planners to make savings and investment decisions, 9% from
brokers, 33% from bankers, and 10% from accountants (Panis and Brien, 2016).38

Kim et al. (2016) develop a rational actor model in which individuals can choose to manage their
own financial assets with an age-varying time cost of doing so, or delegate that management at
some monetary cost to a financial expert who always acts in the best financial interests of the
client. Within this framework, there is demand for delegated management that varies with the
opportunity cost of time, the decision-making efficiency of individual investors (which varies
with age), and the level of financial wealth. The potential for delegated management improves
consumer welfare. Although this is an interesting benchmark model for thinking about the
demand for financial advice, it assumes away many interesting aspects of the real world: There
are no investor biases, and advisors always optimize outcomes for their clients.

In contrast to the model of Kim et al. (2016), a growing body of evidence suggests that advisors
often do a poor job for their clients. Several papers have found that consumers earn lower risk-
adjusted returns and/or pay higher fees when investing with an advisor (Bergstresser et al., 2009;

38
     Each household could give multiple answers to this question, so percentages need not add to 100%.

                                                          47
Chalmers and Reuter, 2012b; Hackethal et al., 2012; Del Guercio and Reuter, 2014; Reuter,
2015). Foerster et al. (2017) show that advisor fixed effects are a much more important
determinant of clients’ asset allocations than investor-specific attributes such as risk tolerance,
age, or financial sophistication. These results suggest that advisors provide very little customized
advice despite the fees charged for their services.

Why aren’t financial advisors optimizing outcomes for their clients? The predominant
explanation in the literature is that the compensation structure for advisors, which often relies on
commissions that vary by product, motivates advisors to recommend products that pay them
more even if they are not the best products for the client. Studies in diverse settings show that
advisors are swayed by financial incentives that generate conflicts of interest. In an audit study of
life insurance agents in India, Anagol et al. (2017a) find that agents recommend unsuitable
products that are strictly dominated from the consumers’ standpoint but generate higher
commissions for the agents. In an audit study of financial advisors in the U.S., Mullainathan et
al. (2012) find that advisors reinforce the mistaken beliefs of their clients and argue against their
correct beliefs when doing so is in the advisor’s financial interest.

Models of commission-based compensation find that from a theoretical standpoint, such
incentive schemes are neither unambiguously good nor unambiguously bad. In particular, the
degree to which consumers are attentive to advisors’ incentives influences the models’
predictions. Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a, 2012b) find that if consumers are wary of advisors’
conflicted motives, contingent commissions create incentives for advisors to learn about which
products best meet their clients’ needs, which can improve consumer welfare. But if consumers
believe that advisors provide unbiased advice, commission-based incentive schemes can be used
to exploit their naïvete. In the model of Chang and Szydlowski (2016), consumers are rational, so
competition partially disciplines advisors’ conflicts of interest. Placing limits on the extent to
which advisors can earn conflicted compensation leads advisors to charge higher upfront fees
and may not improve consumer welfare.

The empirical evidence on whether consumers are wary or naïve about adviser incentives comes
down more on the side of the latter. Chater et al. (2010) find that investors are largely ignorant of
advisors’ potential conflicts of interest. Similarly, Hung et al. (2011) find that many consumers
do not understand the legal duties different types of financial advisors owe to their clients.

Another reason financial advisors may not act in their clients’ interests is that advisors must first
win a client’s business before being compensated. If catering to a client’s biased beliefs will help
secure the client’s business, advisors will be much less likely to challenge those beliefs, at least
initially. The audit studies of Anagol et al. (2017a) and Mullainathan et al. (2012) both find
evidence of this type of catering.



                                                 48
A less sinister reason why advisors may not act in their clients’ interests is that advisors may
themselves lack competence. Linnainmaa et al. (2016) find that most advisors invest their
personal portfolios in accordance with the advice given to their clients. They trade frequently,
chase past returns, and invest in expensive, actively managed funds over lower cost index funds.
Their conclusion is that many advisors are sincere in their poor recommendations.

If advisors are not providing competent advice, are they providing anything valuable to
consumers? Gennaoli et al. (2015) posit that advisors are selling trust. Having a trusted advisor
reduces perceptions of an investment’s risks, giving risk-averse investors the peace of mind to
make higher-risk, higher-expected-return investments than they would be willing to make on
their own. Managers pander to biased investor beliefs because doing so causes investors to invest
more and pay higher fees. Although financial advisors underperform the market net of fees,
investors nonetheless prefer using a financial advisor to investing on their own, and may even be
better off doing so because it enables them to take more risk. Gennaioli et al. (2015) also find
that trust reduces competitive pressures in the market for advisors, so that fees charged exceed
the cost of providing advice in equilibrium.

Previous empirical research has documented the important role trust plays in financial market
investment more generally (Guiso et al., 2008). In a survey of U.S. investors, Hung et al. (2011)
find that respondents have high levels of trust in their financial advisors. Do individuals have
greater trust in advisors who are both more competent and more likely to act in their clients’
interests? The limited empirical literature that speaks to this question is not particularly
encouraging. Bhattacharya et al. (2012) find that unbiased financial advice offered to German
retail investors by their brokerage firm was ignored. Agnew et al. (2016) conduct a survey
experiment in which subjects were given conflicting advice from two different advisors about the
best choice in hypothetical financial situations. They find that respondents are poor judges of
advisor quality. First impressions matter: Subjects are more likely to follow bad advice in later
rounds if they received good advice in earlier rounds. Respondents are more likely to follow
advice if a credential is displayed, even though many are unable to distinguish between
legitimate and fake credentials. And they are more likely to accept bad advice on topics where
the quality of the advice is more difficult to assess. Stolper and Walter (2017) find that
individuals are more likely to follow the financial advice of advisors who are demographically
similar to them. The results of these last two studies suggest that it may be easy for unscrupulous
advisors to adopt client acquisition tactics that will promote trust.

The fact that trust can be fostered by factors other than competence and integrity may help
explain the findings of Egan et al. (2016). They document a segmented market for financial
advice: Firms with low rates of advisor misconduct exist alongside firms that are much more
tolerant of misconduct. Advisor misconduct is concentrated in firms with retail customers in
counties whose populations are less educated, older, and have higher incomes. They interpret this


                                                49
as evidence that some firms cater to unsophisticated consumers—a market segment in which
they can get away with higher levels of misconduct—while other firms use their less blemished
records to attract sophisticated consumers for whom the track record of their advisor matters
more.

The importance of commission-based payments in financial markets and the potential they create
for conflicts of interest have motivated regulation to require disclosure of some or all of these
conflicts. Such regulations have strong support from consumers: Hung et al. (2011) find that
86% of investors believe that advisors should be required to disclose their financial conflicts of
interest.

Whether or not disclosure solves the problems created by financial conflicts of interest is a
matter of some debate.39 In the model of Inderst and Ottaviani (2012b), mandated disclosure of
advisor commissions turns naïve customers into wary ones, increasing consumer welfare. In a
related paper, Inderst and Ottaviani (2009) show that when consumers rationally expect advisors
to be biased, firms themselves may prefer a regime with mandatory disclosure. The rationale is
that when consumers expect advisors to be biased, their willingness to pay for products that may
ultimately prove unsuitable will be lower. Mandatory disclosure of commissions acts as a
commitment device to reduce advisors’ inclination to recommend unsuitable products, which in
turn increases consumer willingness to pay—a benefit that accrues to advisors and the providers
of financial products. However, firms’ tendency to politically oppose regulations mandating
disclosure contradicts the prediction of this model. Sah and Loewenstein (2014) posit another
mechanism that may make disclosure effective: If advisors are averse to being viewed as biased,
disclosure can deter advisors from accepting conflicts of interest so that their only disclosure is
that they have no conflicts.

Inderst and Ottaviani (2012c) model a different channel through which disclosure may affect
welfare: the efficiency of supply. They show that mandatory disclosure reduces the commissions
that all firms are willing to pay, and this reduction is larger for the most cost-efficient firm. The
cost-efficient firm loses market share as a result. If advisors have sufficiently high concern that
their recommendations be suitable for customers, then in the absence of mandatory disclosure,
the cost-efficient firm’s market share is inefficiently low, and mandatory disclosure exacerbates
this inefficiency. Conversely, if advisors don’t care much about suitability, then the cost-efficient
firm has too much market share in the absence of mandatory disclosure, so mandatory disclosure
improves efficiency.

The literature also identifies some perverse effects of disclosure that arise from psychological
factors. Cain et al. (2005) show in a laboratory experiment that when conflicts of interest are
disclosed, advisors give even more biased advice, perhaps because they feel they have the moral

39
     See Loewenstein et al. (2014) for a more comprehensive review of the literature on disclosure.

                                                           50
license to do so once advisees have been informed of their conflicts, or because advisors expect
clients to discount their recommendations and so a more extreme recommendation is needed to
compensate. However, advisees in the experiment do not discount advice as much as they should
when the conflict is disclosed, making them worse off as a result of the disclosure.

Loewenstein et al. (2011) posit that disclosure can actually increase the trust clients place in their
advisors if the act of disclosure is interpreted as a sign of honesty. Furthermore, clients may feel
more compelled to follow advice after a disclosure of financial conflicts has been made lest they
be perceived as lacking trust, a phenomenon they refer to as the “burden of disclosure.” They
also note that if clients don’t know how they should act after receiving a disclosure about a
financial conflict, they may simply ignore the disclosure.

Lacko and Pappalardo (2004) point to another way in which disclosure could backfire. If
consumers are facing information overload, disclosing commissions may limit the attention they
give to other information relevant for a decision, diminishing decision quality. The fact that there
is a commission might lead some consumers to avoid those products altogether, even when they
may be particularly suitable for those clients’ needs.

Finally, advisors may strategically avoid following the spirit of disclosure rules. Anagol et al.
(2017a) evaluate a natural experiment requiring disclosure of commissions for some products
sold by advisors, but not all products. They find that advisors respond to this disclosure
requirement by recommending alternative products not subject to the disclosure requirement but
that nonetheless have high commissions.

Laboratory experiments have identified some mechanisms that can reduce these perverse effects.
Church and Kuang (2009) show that coupling disclosure with sanctions against advisors who are
caught giving self-interested advice greatly reduces advisors’ strategic exaggeration. Koch and
Schmidt (2010) find that with repeated advisor-client interactions, advisors’ reputational
concerns also decrease strategic exaggeration. Sah et al. (2013) show that the pressure clients
feel to comply with advice is reduced if: “(a) the disclosure is provided by an external source
rather than from the advisor, (b) the disclosure is not common knowledge between the advisor
and advisee, (c) the advisee has an opportunity to change his/her mind later, or (d) the advisee is
able to make the decision in private.”

X. Choice Architecture

Defaults

Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) report that only 28% of participants in TIAA-CREF
retirement plans had ever changed the asset allocation in their plan, which translated into only


                                                 51
2.5% of participants making a change per year. They argue that this extreme reluctance to act is
an example of “status quo bias.”

Madrian and Shea (2001) were the first to document that exogenously changing the status quo—
that is, the default—in a 401(k) plan has a dramatic effect on savings outcomes. At the company
they study, if employees took no action, the original default outcome was not to contribute to the
401(k). The company then changed its policy so that if newly hired employees did not opt out,
they would start contributing 3% of their salary to the 401(k), and these contributions would by
default be invested in a money market fund. Fifteen months after the institution of automatic
enrollment, among employees hired after the change, 86% were participating in the 401(k), 65%
were contributing exactly 3% of their salary, and 80% of their 401(k) balances were invested in
the money market fund. In contrast, among employees hired in the year before the change (and
hence never subject to automatic enrollment), only 49% were participating in the 401(k), only
4% were contributing exactly 3% of their salary, and only 8% of their 401(k) balances were
invested in the money market fund.

Choi et al. (2004b) study the longer-run effects of automatic 401(k) enrollment at the Madrian
and Shea (2001) company plus two others that instituted a default 2 or 3% contribution rate
invested entirely in a stable value fund.40 As tenure at a company increases, the automatic
enrollment effect on 401(k) participation diminishes—not because automatically enrolled
participants drop out of the 401(k), but because those subject to opt-in enrollment gradually join
the plan in greater numbers. Nevertheless, even four years after hire (at the one company with a
sufficiently long span of data), the fraction of employees who have ever contributed to the 401(k)
plan is 28 percentage points lower under opt-in enrollment than under automatic enrollment.
Almost half of employees hired in the automatic enrollment regime remain at the default
contribution rate and asset allocation at four years of tenure.

A positive default contribution rate pulls up the contributions of those who would have
contributed less under an opt-in regime, but it also pulls down the contributions of those who
would have contributed more. Therefore, after a couple of years of tenure, the average
contribution rate under a low 2-3% contribution rate default is only modestly higher than under a
0% contribution default. Beshears et al. (2009) find that raising the default contribution rate from
3% to 6% significantly raises average contribution rates without much effect on opt-outs. Clark
et al. (2015) report results broadly consistent with many of these findings in a sample of over
500,000 employees across 460 defined contribution pension plans.


40
   The most common default contribution rate in automatic enrollment 401(k) plans is 3% of income (Vanguard,
2017). This is not the result of a societal or regulatory effort to optimize defaults, but rather an arbitrary historical
starting point that was enshrined in legislation/regulation and is now institutionally sticky. Firms keep the default
contribution rate low in part to reduce their resulting matching contributions; firms that offer matching contributions
most frequently match the first 6% of income that employees contribute themselves (Vanguard, 2017).

                                                           52
Defaults can be dynamic rather than static. An example of a dynamic default is auto-escalation,
which automatically raises 401(k) contributions at regular intervals. Those who start out in auto-
escalation tend to stick with the program, so their contribution rates rise dramatically over the
course of the next few years (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004). Clark et al. (2015) present
corroborating evidence. Benartzi et al. (2012) find that the participation rate in auto-escalation is
much higher if enrolling in auto-escalation is the default rather than not the default—83% versus
27%.

Many different mechanisms could explain the effects of defaults, and it is likely the confluence
of multiple mechanisms that make defaults so powerful. Candidate mechanisms (many of which
are discussed in Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988) include the following:

(1) Opting out of a default requires paying an effort cost. Blumenstock et al. (2017) find that
    contribution rate opt-outs increase particularly after employees receive a financial
    consultation, suggesting that a significant portion of the effort cost consists of figuring out
    the implications of alternative choices. Choi et al. (2009c) and Beshears et al. (2013) find that
    offering individuals a simplified choice menu increases opt-out rates. Nevertheless, plausible
    levels of effort costs seem too small to justify staying at a savings default for four years. But
    time-inconsistent preferences can cause minor costs to create enormous delays, particularly if
    agents irrationally believe that they will be less time-inconsistent in the future (Laibson,
    1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). Choi et al. (2003) and Carroll et al. (2009) model
    default effects as arising from opt-out costs interacting with time inconsistency. Brown et al.
    (2016a), Brown and Previtero (2016), and Blumenstock et al. (2017) find that measures of
    time inconsistency are correlated with the propensity to remain at a default. Choi et al. (2002)
    find that survey respondents are overly optimistic about their likelihood of raising their
    401(k) contribution rate in the future, consistent with naiveté about future time inconsistency.

(2) Individuals may believe that the default is a choice recommended by the default setter. The
    extent to which this channel could matter will obviously depend upon the individual’s belief
    about the default setter’s benevolence and knowledge, and the strength of the individual’s
    own convictions about her optimal choice. Consistent with the default carrying an
    “endorsement effect,” Madrian and Shea (2001) find that the 401(k) automatic enrollment
    default asset allocation seems to influence the asset allocation of even those not subject to
    automatic enrollment. At the firm they study, employees hired before April 1998 were never
    automatically enrolled. Nonetheless, those in this cohort who opted into contributing to the
    401(k) after other employees began to be automatically enrolled were much more likely to
    choose an asset allocation equal to the automatic enrollment default (100% in a money
    market fund) than pre-April 1998 hires who opted in before the start of automatic enrollment.
    Brown et al. (2011) report that 20% of University of Illinois employees who stayed at the



                                                 53
   default when making an irrevocable choice among three pension plans say they did so
   because they perceived the default to be a recommendation.

   However, an endorsement effect is not necessary for defaults to be effective. Beshears et al.
   (2009) report that there appears to be no endorsement effect for contribution rates in the
   Madrian and Shea (2001) company. Blumenstock et al. (2017) find a powerful default effect
   for contributions even though employees knew that their default was randomly assigned and
   therefore could not contain an endorsement.

(3) Some people may be unaware that the default exists, and therefore fail to opt out of it. Brown
    et al. (2011) find that 19% of University of Illinois employees who ended up in the default
    pension plan were unaware that they could choose a pension plan. But defaults do not require
    unawareness to be effective. Blumenstock et al. (2017) find large default effects despite
    employees receiving in-person training about their savings account and repeated text
    message reminders about their current contribution amount and how to change their
    contribution rate.

(4) Starting with Tversky and Kahneman (1974), a large literature has found that asking people
    to consider an arbitrary number (an “anchor”) will bias subsequent judgments and
    estimations towards this number. The default may be such an anchor. Choi et al. (2016) and
    Goda et al. (2014) show in field experiments that employees raise their 401(k) contribution
    rates if they are exposed to arbitrary high contribution examples in communications.
    Bernheim et al. (2015) argue that a model with anchoring is able to explain default effects
    better than a model where defaults are driven by opt-out costs and time inconsistency.

(5) The default may become a reference point around which gains and losses are evaluated. Loss
    aversion would then cause people to be reluctant to move away from the default. Kahneman
    and Tversky (1982) argue that negative consequences of action are more aversive than
    negative consequences of inaction.

(6) In order to simplify their decision, individuals may consider only a subset of the possible
    choices, and the status quo may be disproportionately likely to be included in that subset,
    causing the status quo to be chosen more often. The fact that individuals are prone to choose
    a 401(k) contribution rate that is a multiple of five—such as 5%, 10%, or 15% of their
    income—suggests that many possible contribution rates are often not considered (Choi et al.,
    2002; Benartzi and Thaler, 2007).

(7) Cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957) may cause people who find themselves at the default
    to manufacture reasons why the default is the right choice for them, increasing persistence at
    the default. Blumenstock et al. (2017) find that employees randomly assigned to a positive


                                                54
   default contribution rate subsequently are more likely to report that the savings account
   increased their desire to save and that they are not too financially constrained to save, which
   could be consistent with cognitive dissonance.

The effect a default in one savings account has on the rest of the household balance sheet
remains an outstanding research question. To what extent are the extra contributions induced by
automatic enrollment financed by reduced consumption (the presumed goal of the intervention)
rather than the shifting of assets from one account to another or increased debt?

Blumenstock et al. (2017) find that automatic enrollment increases total household wealth in
their sample of workers in Afghanistan by an economically meaningful amount, but their wealth
data are so noisy that their point estimate is less than one standard error away from zero. Chetty
et al. (2014) find that when a worker switches to a firm that imposes a higher compulsory
pension contribution rate than his previous employer, his total savings rate increases by
approximately 80% of that marginal contribution even though he is able to offset the savings
elsewhere. In addition, there is no change in this pass-through rate for up to a decade after the
switch. Although compulsory contributions are not the same policy as automatic enrollment, this
result suggests that passive marginal savings induced in one part of the balance sheet are only
weakly offset elsewhere.

Beshears et al. (2017b) study the effects of automatic enrollment into the federal Thrift Savings
Plan (TSP) on debt for U.S. Army civilian employees by comparing employees hired during the
year after the Army began automatically enrolling new hires to employees hired during the year
prior. They find that automatic enrollment has no statistically significant effect on debt excluding
auto loans and first mortgages (e.g., credit card debt), nor does it affect credit scores or
delinquencies. However, they do find a modest increase in auto debt and a larger increase in first
mortgage debt. Because these latter two categories of debt are associated with asset purchases, it
is unclear to what extent increases in those liabilities indicate decreases in net worth.

Active Choice

If agents faced with a choice have the option of not actively expressing a preference, then setting
a default is inevitable, since some outcome must be implemented in the absence of an active
choice. An active choice mechanism removes the option of not expressing a preference after a
certain deadline. Carroll et al. (2009) study a company that required newly hired employees to
actively state a 401(k) enrollment preference within 30 days of hire. They conclude that active
choice results in participation rates that lie between those achieved under opt-in enrollment and
automatic enrollment. Under active choice, the 401(k) participation rate for employees three
months after hire is 69%. When the company later switched to an opt-in enrollment scheme, the
401(k) participation rate at three months of tenure fell to 41%. Even at 42 months of tenure, the
active choice cohort has a participation rate 5 percentage points above the opt-in cohort’s.
                                                55
Unlike default enrollment schemes, active choice does not create disproportionate clustering of
choices at a single outcome. Conditional on demographics, the contribution rate in effect under
active choice at three months of tenure is on average similar to the contribution rate that would
be in effect at thirty months of tenure under opt-in enrollment. Carroll et al. (2009) present a
model where default effects arise from opt-out costs interacting with time inconsistency. They
find that active choice is normatively preferable to default enrollment when time inconsistency is
strong and the optimal choice (in the absence of opt-out costs) is highly heterogeneous in the
population.

The U.S. Executive Office of the President (2016) evaluates an intervention that required U.S.
Army service members transferring to a new base to make an active choice about enrolling in the
Thrift Savings Plan. Active choice increased Thrift Savings Plan participation rates at four weeks
after orientation by 8.3 percentage points, compared to an enrollment rate at three control bases
of no more than 1.9%.

Commitment Devices

Bryan et al. (2010) define a commitment device as “an arrangement entered into by an agent who
restricts his or her future choice set by making certain choices more expensive, perhaps infinitely
expensive, while also satisfying two conditions: (a) The agent would, on the margin, pay
something in the present to make those choices more expensive, even if he or she received no
other benefit for the payment, and (b) the arrangement does not have a strategic purpose with
respect to others.” A demand for commitment devices is predicted by models of time
inconsistency (Strotz, 1955; Laibson, 1997), temptation (Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001, 2004), and
dual-self models where a long-run planning self is in conflict with a short-run doing self (Thaler
and Shefrin, 1981; Benhabib and Bisin, 2005; Fudenberg and Levine, 2006).

The scarcity of explicit, stand-alone commitment devices in household finance (and even outside
of household finance), at least in developed countries, poses a challenge for the above theories.
Laibson (2015) offers an analysis that shows how a combination of partial naiveté about future
time inconsistency, uncertainty, and direct costs of setting up a commitment can eliminate the
demand for commitment. A number of authors have argued that rotating savings and credit
associations (ROSCAs), an arrangement in the developing world where group members regularly
meet to contribute savings to a common pot that is disbursed to one of the members at the end of
the meeting, are commitment devices to save (Ambec and Treich, 2007; Gugerty, 2007; Basu,
2011; Kast et al., 2016). Even so, alternative explanations exist; for example, ROSCAs may lock
down assets and prevent other family members from claiming them (Anderson and Baland,
2002).



                                                56
One demonstration of a demand for commitment is found in Ashraf et al. (2006), who offer rural
Filipinos a savings account that restricts withdrawals until either a future date arrives or they
save up to a specified account balance. Twenty-eight percent of those who receive the offer take
up the account, and take-up of the account increases subsequent savings.

In laboratory experiments on U.S. subjects, Beshears et al. (2015a) find a demand for
commitment. Subjects allocate a monetary endowment between a liquid account that does not
restrict withdrawals and either one or two commitment accounts that impose a penalty on
withdrawals prior to a self-chosen commitment date. They find that when all the accounts pay
the same interest rate, commitment accounts attract more money as their withdrawal penalty
rises. On the other hand, when the commitment account pays a higher interest rate than the liquid
account, they find no relationship between commitment account deposits and illiquidity. They
explain this phenomenon by the presence of time-inconsistent individuals who fail to anticipate
their future time inconsistency and hence have no demand for commitment (O’Donoghue and
Rabin, 1999). When the commitment accounts pay the same interest rate as the liquid account,
these naifs never deposit any money to the commitment accounts, so the aggregate relationship
between illiquidity and commitment account deposits is driven by those who are sophisticated
about their future time inconsistency and thus demand commitment. When the commitment
accounts pay a higher interest rate, naifs allocate a positive amount to the commitment accounts
that diminishes with illiquidity. The combination of the naifs’ negatively sloped demand for
illiquidity and sophisticates’ positively sloped demand for illiquidity results in an overall flat
relationship between deposits and illiquidity.

XI. Interventions that Directly Target Prices or Quantities

Traditional economic approaches to influencing consumer financial outcomes by directly
targeting either the prices that consumers face or market quantities are widespread. Price-based
mechanisms include direct subsidies, indirect subsidies (and penalties) through the tax code,
price caps, and behaviorally informed pricing strategies to encourage certain types of behavior.
We also see attempts to directly influence market quantities through bans against certain types of
financial products and mandates for others. The effectiveness of these more traditional policy
tools depends on many of the behavioral factors that we have already discussed. For example,
incentives can be more or less effective depending on how they are framed, how salient they are,
and how complicated they are to understand.41

Many countries use their tax code to provide incentives for certain behaviors and discourage
others. In the domain of household finance, tax incentives are used to encourage saving for
retirement, home ownership, and having health insurance, while tax penalties are used to

41
  See Gneezy, Meier and Rey-Biel (2011) and Kamenica (2012) for reviews of the literature on behavioral
economics and incentives.

                                                      57
discourage actions such as early withdrawals from retirement savings accounts and foregoing
insurance. These tax incentives can be quite large: tax expenditures for retirement savings, health
insurance coverage, and home ownership (through the mortgage interest and property tax
deductions) cost the U.S. federal government $180 billion, $161 billion, and $90 billion,
respectively, in 2016 (Joint Committee on Taxation, 2017). In addition to tax incentives,
governments subsidize financial behaviors in a number of other ways, including direct subsidies
(e.g., for health insurance, college tuition, and deferred interest on student loans) and indirect
subsidies such as loan guarantees (e.g., for mortgages eligible for securitization and for student
loans).

How effective are these incentives at encouraging the behaviors they are designed to motivate?
Friedman (2017) reviews the research on tax incentives and retirement savings outcomes, which
has reached contradictory conclusions about their effects. Exploiting variation created by newly
enacted tax incentives for IRA and 401(k) savings in the U.S., Engen et al. (1994, 1996)
conclude that tax incentives have had little to no impact on national savings, and that these
incentives largely crowd out other forms of existing savings. Using more recent data from
Denmark, Chetty et al. (2014) draw similar conclusions about the impact of retirement saving tax
incentives in that country. In contrast, Feenberg and Skinner (1989), Venti and Wise (1990), and
Poterba et al. (1994, 1995) find that most of the savings generated by tax preferences for IRA
and 401(k) plans represented new savings.

In the face of this inconsistent empirical evidence, Friedman (2017) develops a framework to
articulate the conditions under which tax incentives are likely to be more versus less effective
drivers of behavior change. The three key parameters are the effect of the tax incentive on the
behavior of optimizing consumers, the fraction of consumers who pay attention to the tax
incentive and optimize accordingly, and the extent to which the tax incentive affects individuals
who are furthest from what is optimal. The empirical evidence on these three key parameters
suggests that tax incentives are likely to be less effective drivers of savings behavior than
“nudge-like” approaches such as automatic enrollment.

One factor that can undermine the effectiveness of tax incentives is the complexity of the tax
code. In a laboratory experiment designed to assess the impact of simple versus complex tax
incentives, Abeler and Jäger (2015) show that individuals are much less responsive to tax
incentives embedded in a complicated tax regime than to equivalent incentives embodied in a
simpler tax code.42 Beshears et al. (2014a) show that individuals in the U.S. have a poor
understanding of the tax incentives to save in retirement accounts; they suggest that, as a result,
savings behavior is not particularly responsive to changes in these incentives. Duflo et al. (2006)
study one particular tax incentive for saving in the U.S., the Saver’s Credit, which can equal as

42
   In this experiment, complexity is measured as the number of different rules used to determine an individual’s tax
rate.

                                                         58
much as half of an individual’s retirement savings contribution. The credit is economically
equivalent to a matching contribution, a common feature in many employer-sponsored retirement
savings plans, but the complicated rules governing the Saver’s Credit’s effective match rate and
credit eligibility make it both more difficult to understand and less salient than a matching
incentive. Duflo et al. find that individuals react more to randomly assigned matches for saving
in an IRA as part of a field experiment than they do to the Saver’s Credit. An increase in the
experimental IRA match rate from 20% to 50% increases IRA participation by 6 percentage
points, but an increase in the effective match rate of the Saver’s Credit from 25% to 100%
increases IRA participation by 1.3 percentage points at most.

In a related field experiment, Saez (2009) finds that taxpayers are less responsive to a 33% rebate
on IRA contributions than to a 50% match, even though the financial incentives are nearly
economically equivalent. The key difference is that the rebate condition requires a bigger initial
outlay and a two-week wait to receive the rebate. The Saez experiment also varies whether
taxpayers were notified in advance about the match and finds that the match is more effective
among those who receive advance notice.

Despite being more effective than complex tax incentives and equivalent rebates, matching
contributions are only a moderately effective tool when compared to other interventions that
more directly tackle the psychological frictions that impede saving. Madrian (2013) and Choi
(2015) survey the research on the impact of matching contributions on retirement savings.
Madrian (Madrian, 2013) provides a summary number: a matching contribution of 25%
increases savings plan participation by roughly 5 percentage points (Choi et al., 2002, 2004a,
2006; Duflo et al., 2006; Engelhardt and Kumar, 2007), an effect much smaller than that of the
choice architecture interventions discussed earlier.

From a behavioral standpoint, the most interesting impact of matching contributions is their
effect on the distribution of savings rates. In savings plans where contributions are chosen as a
fraction of pay, the most common contribution rates tend to be multiples of five: 5%, 10%, 15%,
and so on. But in plans where there is a match, the modal contribution rate is usually the match
threshold—the contribution rate beyond which there is no match (Choi et al., 2002, 2004a,
2006). These results suggest focal points play a strong role in determining how much individuals
save rather than the match rate per se.43 We also see hints that focal points matter in the mortgage
market, where there is excess mass of mortgages at the conforming loan limit44 and at a loan-to-
value ratio of 80% (Adelino et al., 2012; Defusco and Paciorek, 2017).

43
   Of course, even absent behavioral factors we would expect to see bunching at the match threshold because of the
kink in the budget set it generates. However, no such explanation exists for the excess mass at contribution rates that
are multiples of five.
44
   In U.S. mortgage markets, the conforming loan limit is the maximum loan size eligible for securitization through
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. There is both geographical variation in the conforming loan limit and variation over
time. Because mortgages above this limit are more expensive to underwrite, there is a discrete jump in mortgage

                                                          59
In addition to tax incentives to save for retirement, the tax code in the U.S. imposes a 10%
penalty on early withdrawals (usually before age 59½) from tax-qualified retirement savings
plans. Despite this penalty, Argento et al. (2015) estimate that for every dollar contributed to a
tax qualified retirement plan by individuals under the age of 55, between $0.30 and $0.40 leaks
out of the system through pre-retirement withdrawals (this excludes loans from these plans that
are eventually repaid). This stands in marked contrast to the retirement savings systems in
several other countries where pre-retirement withdrawals are entirely proscribed, greatly limited,
or more harshly penalized.45

The international heterogeneity in retirement system liquidity raises an obvious question of how
much liquidity is desirable. Beshears et al. (2018) consider a stylized setting where a benign
social planner is designing a savings system for naïve present-biased households. The planner
faces a tradeoff between making savings illiquid because of self-control problems and making
savings liquid in case households face uninsurable marginal utility shocks (e.g., health costs,
divorce, and other sources of financial hardship) before retirement. When the degree of present
bias is heterogeneous in the population, the socially optimal savings system is well-approximated
by one liquid account, one completely illiquid account, and one account with an early withdrawal
penalty of approximately 10%. This solution is surprisingly close to the U.S. system, which
features liquid accounts, Social Security, and IRAs/401(k)s with a 10% early withdrawal penalty.
However, the net contribution of the partially illiquid account to social welfare is almost zero,
which may explain why other countries do not have such an account.

The evidence on the impact of the mortgage interest deduction on home ownership suggests that
here, too, tax policy may be an ineffective tool. Glaeser and Shapiro (2003) note that although
the value of the federal mortgage interest deduction in the U.S. has changed significantly over
time (due to changes in tax law, inflation, and the evolution of house prices), the homeownership
rate has been essentially flat for decades; home ownership rates by state are also unrelated to the
magnitude of state tax incentives for home ownership. Why are households seemingly
unresponsive to tax incentives for home ownership? One explanation is that house prices adjust
to reflect the value of the mortgage interest deduction, particularly in areas with inelastic housing
supply (Green et al., 1996; Hilber and Turner, 2014). For households facing a down payment
constraint, this increase in house prices can have the perverse effect of actually reducing home
ownership (Bourassa and Yin, 2008). The mortgage interest deduction appears to increase home
ownership only for wealthy households living in areas with elastic housing supply (Hilber and


interest rates for loans above this amount. Adelino et al. (2012) show that the demand for conforming mortgages is
significant enough to affect house prices. Homes that would likely be eligible for financing with a conforming loan
with a standard 80% loan-to-value ratio transact at higher prices than similar homes that would not be eligible for a
conforming loan.
45
   See Beshears et al. (2015b) for a comparison of the pre-retirement liquidity in the retirement systems of these
countries.

                                                         60
Turner, 2014).

One interesting private-sector manipulation of pricing in the household finance domain comes in
the form of prize-linked savings products.46 The basic idea is that instead of or in addition to a
sure interest rate on their savings, savers are given a periodic probabilistic chance of winning a
large prize that is proportional to their savings balance. In contrast to traditional gambling
products, prize-linked savings investors retain their capital even if they don’t win.

There are at least three aspects of such products that might make them more attractive to
consumers than traditional savings products: (1) if individuals overweight the low probability of
winning, their valuation of a prize-linked savings product will exceed that of a standard savings
account with a fixed return of the same expected value, (2) as with traditional gambling products,
individuals may derive value from the anticipation of winning big, even if they don’t actually
win, and (3) there may be entertainment value to participating in a game of chance that makes
saving seem fun (Kearney et al., 2010). In a laboratory experiment, Filiz-Ozbay et al. (2015) find
that a prize-based incentive makes subjects more willing to defer payment to a later date than an
equivalent expected value fixed interest rate. Atalay et al. (2014) conduct an online experiment
and find that introducing a prize-linked savings product to a budget allocation task both increases
savings and reduces lottery expenditures. This latter finding has also been documented in real
world financial outcomes by Cookson (2017), who finds that casino gambling dropped by 3%
after a prize-linked savings product was introduced in Nebraska in 2012.

In addition to encouraging financial outcomes deemed to be in consumers’ best interests,
governments proscribe certain outcomes that they consider harmful. One common type of price-
based proscription is a limit on the fees that financial institutions can charge for their products
and services. Dating back to the Old Testament, usury laws, which restrict the interest rate that
may be charged on a loan, are the canonical example of a price cap. In the classical economic
model, there is no reason to prohibit a private agreement between a willing borrower and a
willing lender. Such a transaction does not in general impose negative externalities on other
parties, nor is there reason to believe that high interest rates are in general the consequence of
lenders’ market power. Perhaps usury laws achieve some distributional goal, but the more direct
justification for usury laws is that borrowers may not fully appreciate the consequences of
agreeing to a high interest rate—perhaps because of present bias, over-optimism regarding their
future ability to repay, a misunderstanding of loan terms, or exponential growth bias—and hence
lenders may be able to take advantage of borrowers if not for usury laws.47 Consistent with


46
  Kearney et al. (2010) survey the history and use of prize-linked savings products throughout the world.
47
   Benmelech and Moskowitz (2010) posit a different rationale for usury laws in 19th century America: to advance
the private interests of wealthy incumbents with political power by restricting market entry and lowering their cost
of capital. Glaeser and Scheinkman (1998) paint usury laws as a type of social insurance used to effect redistribution
from the rich to the poor.

                                                         61
standard economic models of credit supply, more stringent restrictions on interest rates
empirically reduce credit availability (e.g., Benmelech and Moskowitz, 2010; Rigbi, 2013).

The Military Lending Act is one specific example of a recently enacted usury law in the U.S.
Under this law, payday lenders can charge no more than a 36% annual percentage rate (APR) on
loans to members of the U.S. armed services and their families. The motivation for this law as
articulated by the U.S. Department of Defense, which lobbied for its passage, is that payday
loans are predatory and create financial distress, which compromises military readiness and
increases vulnerability to bribes and blackmail (U.S. Department of Defense, 2006). Despite the
intentions behind the law, Carter and Skimmyhorn (Carter and Skimmyhorn, 2017) estimate that it
has had no impact on a variety of labor market or credit outcomes for members of the U.S.
Army.

The Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act of 2009 is another
variant of a usury law. In addition to limiting interest rate increases for credit cards, the CARD
Act placed restrictions on non-interest credit card fees—including over-limit fees, late payment
fees, and inactivity fees. In contrast to much of the literature on usury laws, Agarwal et al.
(2015b) estimate that these restrictions reduced the fees paid to credit card companies without
leading to lower credit volume or offsetting increases in interest rates or other fees, thereby
saving U.S. consumers $12 billion per year.

Some investment products are also subject to fee restrictions. For example, Tapia and Yermo
(2008) document the limits placed by several countries on the fees that financial institutions
participating in defined contribution pension schemes can charge investors.

A more extreme version of a limit on fees is an outright ban on certain types of fees. Anagol and
Kim (2012) trace the impact of a series of reforms to the types of fees that Indian mutual funds
could charge. The final reform that they evaluate, which prohibited one previously allowed fee,
was rationalized by regulators in behavioral terms: “to bring more transparency and clarity to
investors.” Anagol et al. (2017b) study an Indian investor protection reform that banned the
distribution fees charged by mutual fund companies for the purposes of paying broker
commissions. They find no evidence that eliminating these fees redirected subsequent mutual
fund flows away from formerly high-fee funds and toward formerly low-fee funds. They do find
some evidence that fund companies increased other types of commissions to partially offset the
new regulation. Motivated by concerns about financial advisors’ conflicts of interest discussed
earlier and the inadequacy of disclosure in mitigating those conflicts, Australia and the U.K.
have both banned the payment of commissions to financial advisors by financial product
providers (Bowen, 2010; Collinson, 2012).




                                                62
Governments have in some cases prohibited certain types of products or sales to certain types of
consumers entirely. Some U.S. states ban payday lending, although research suggests that this
has the unintended consequence of causing consumers to substitute toward even higher-cost
credit like overdrafts (Morgan et al., 2012) and pawnshop loans (Bhutta et al., 2016). Until
recently, prize-linked savings products were not legal in the U.S. Many political jurisdictions
prohibit certain types of gambling. In addition to limiting credit card fees as discussed above, the
CARD Act restricts credit card issuance to individuals under the age of 21 without either an adult
co-signer or proof of income sufficient to repay any accrued debt.

At the other end of the spectrum, a variety of mandates are designed to improve consumer
financial well-being. Retirement savings system participation is mandatory in many countries.
Many divorced or separated parents are required to pay child support. Consumers are often
required to have certain types of insurance coverage, such as homeowners, flood, or car
insurance. Although insurance mandates are frequently motivated by concerns about market
failure in the presence of adverse selection, an additional behavioral rationale is that the
circumstances that make insurance valuable are often not salient in consumers’ minds until after
an insurable event has occurred. For example, as noted earlier, Gallagher (2014) finds that flood
insurance take-up increases substantially in the years immediately after an area has been hit by a
flood. Compliance with some of these mandates is often far from complete. Better understanding
the behavioral factors that affect compliance with mandates is an interesting question for future
research.

XII. Conclusion

The financial decisions that households make serve as a powerful lens through which to study
foundational theories of behavior. The first part of this chapter documented an array of
economically important contexts in which theories from the field of behavioral economics help
to explain otherwise puzzling outcomes. In the second part of the chapter, we examined the
evidence on the effectiveness of various interventions to improve financial outcomes for
consumers that are largely inspired by behavioral theories.

We conclude by highlighting a few themes that have emerged from this literature. First, many of
the deviations from classical behavior that we presented are economically meaningful. The field
of household finance encompasses some of the most consequential economic decisions
households make over their lifetimes, including choices about lifecycle and buffer stock saving,
asset allocation, and borrowing. The evidence assembled in this chapter serves as a reminder that
successful models need to explain why households fail to optimize even when mistakes have
large welfare costs.




                                                63
Second, there remains a host of interesting puzzles for which neither a classical nor a behavioral
theory has provided a complete quantitative explanation. For example, despite the myriad models
attempting to explain the magnitude of consumption-income co-movement, most of these studies
appear only to explain several of the empirical facts taken in isolation. Oftentimes, models that
can explain one set of facts have additional testable predictions, and these predictions are not
borne out in the data. Future work should distinguish among competing models by analyzing
their quantitative predictions (instead of focusing solely on their qualitative predictions), as well
as by favoring models that can parsimoniously explain numerous features of the data spanning
multiple decision-making domains. We anticipate that there will be no single magic bullet that
explains all the data. The household finance data seem to be generated by many different
behavioral and non-behavioral mechanisms. Researchers should seek to understand the relative
contributions of each factor.

Third, many behavioral interventions have had only modest success in affecting behavior.
Choice architecture, in particular, has famously powerful effects on behavior, but countervailing
unintended consequences can undermine the direct effect of this approach (e.g., Adams et al.,
2018; Beshears et al., 2017b). Other behavioral interventions, including the provision of financial
education, have very modest effect sizes or only a transitory impact. The subsection on price and
quantity controls argued that even a traditional incentive may have weak effects if the
intervention’s designer is not sensitive to the psychological principles that govern how those
incentives are received. If policymakers desire a large behavioral response, they should consider
policies that jointly deploy both classical incentives/regulations as well as psychologically
effective mechanisms.

Finally, an important challenge is to assess the welfare implications of interventions that affect
household outcomes (see the chapter on public finance for additional discussion of these
conceptual issues). These challenges are hardly unique to the field of household finance, but
from a methodological perspective, household finance has recently entered a golden age of
research where substantial progress is possible. As new detailed data sources on household
decisions become increasingly available (e.g., longitudinal records of each household’s credit
card, checking, and savings account transactions), the current generation of research is
transforming our understanding of household behavior and the associated consequences for
household welfare.




                                                 64
                              Table 1: Net Wealth Percentiles by Age

 Age                                                       Percentile
       Variable
Bucket                            25                            50                         75
                                 -313                         1,000                       7,330
           NW1
                             [-719; 92]                   [787; 1213]                [6,096; 8,564]
Ages                           -13,795                          40                        6,360
           NW2
21-30                   [-17,112; -10,479]                 [-156; 237]               [3,992; 8,729]
                                -3,827                        7,611                      41,616
           NW3
                          [-6,339; -1,316]              [5,195; 10,026]             [34,691; 48,541]
                                -1,183                         957                       12,793
           NW1
                           [-1,747; -620]                 [695; 1,220]              [10,632; 14,954]
Ages                            -6,339                        1,213                      38,535
           NW2
31-40                     [-8,325; -4,353]                [416; 2,009]              [30,145; 46,925]
                                1,525                         34,543                    134,311
           NW3
                             [5; 3,046]                [29,000; 40,086]           [112,948; 155,675]
                                -1,861                        1,231                      18,271
           NW1
                           [-2,909; -813]                 [803; 1,659]              [13,478; 23,063]
Ages                             -488                         9,158                     118,203
           NW2
41-50                       [-1,029; 54]                [5,783; 12,533]            [96,519; 139,887]
                                12,317                       101,486                    325,719
           NW3
                          [8,376; 16,257]             [88,919; 114,052]           [284,485; 366,953]
                                 -693                         1,953                      39,710
           NW1
                           [-1,158; -228]                [1,218; 2,688]             [30,483; 48,937]
Ages                              26                          22,493                    211,997
           NW2
51-60                        [-60; 112]                [16,962; 28,023]           [184,035; 239,959]
                                22,808                       155,805                    552,180
           NW3
                         [16,054; 29,562]            [134,342; 177,269]           [471,810; 632,550]
                                  14                          6,719                      87,549
           NW1
                              [-66; 94]                  [3,964; 9,475]            [65,062; 110,035]
Ages                              460                         36,942                    299,652
           NW2
61-70                        [192; 728]                [22,077; 51,808]           [246,501; 352,804]
                                41,561                       209,227                    682,127
           NW3
                         [31,566; 51,556]            [183,602; 234,851]           [585,007; 779,247]
NW1 is all financial assets excluding retirement accounts and whole life insurance minus all debt
excluding collateralized debts and student loans. NW2 is all financial assets excluding whole life
insurance minus all debt excluding collateralized debts. NW3 is all assets minus all debt. Households are
grouped by the age of the household head. Brackets contain 95% confidence intervals computed with 999
bootstraps using the method detailed in Web Appendix B, including a degrees-of-freedom correction.
Units are 2016 dollars. Source: 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances.


                                                   65
Web Appendix A: Assets and Debt by Age Bucket and Percentile

                                 Table A1: Assets Percentiles by Age

  Age                                                        Percentile
            Variable
 Bucket                              25                          50                           75
               A1                   708                         2,703                       9,600
                                [576; 840]                 [2,319; 3,087]              [8,420; 10,780]
 Ages          A2                   980                         4,336                       19,160
 21-30                         [770; 1,190]                [3,475; 5,197]             [16,265; 22,055]
               A3                  8,002                       24,686                      114,464
                              [6733; 9,271]              [22,117; 27,255]            [95,009; 133,919]
               A1                   826                         4,498                       19,260
                               [635; 1,017]                [3,892; 5,104]             [16,544; 21,976]
 Ages          A2                  1,378                       12,032                       55,826
 31-40                         [926; 1,831]               [9,695; 14,369]             [49,020; 62,632]
               A3                 19,866                      110,262                      283,076
                            [16,762; 22,970]            [99,888; 120,636]           [260,092; 306,060]
               A1                  1,126                        5,662                       27,500
                               [937; 1,315]                [4,691; 6,633]             [21,165; 33,835]
 Ages          A2                  1,846                       25,988                      141,496
 41-50                       [1,383; 2,309]              [20,308; 31,668]           [122,287; 160,705]
               A3                 38,590                      222,712                      524,592
                            [30,085; 47,095]           [203,495; 241,929]           [479,296; 569,888]
               A1                   888                         6,822                       45,320
                               [723; 1,053]                [5,585; 8,059]             [35,530; 55,110]
 Ages          A2                  1,825                       34,568                      226,200
 51-60                       [1,399; 2,251]              [26,316; 42,819]           [189,997; 262,403]
               A3                 48,002                      258,900                      720,647
                            [37,169; 58,836]           [238,587; 279,214]           [628,021; 813,273]
               A1                  1,350                       11,408                       99,080
                             [1,120; 1,580]               [9,029; 13,787]            [73,875; 124,285]
 Ages          A2                  1,898                       48,048                      319,453
 61-70                       [1,081; 2,715]              [32,058; 64,038]           [266,735; 372,171]
               A3                 89,705                      288,842                      782,282
                           [73,409; 10,6001]           [264,766; 312,918]           [698,972; 865,592]
A1 is all financial assets excluding retirement accounts and whole life insurance. A2 is all financial assets
excluding whole life insurance. A3 is all assets. Households are grouped by the age of the household
head. Brackets contain 95% confidence intervals computed with 999 bootstraps using the method detailed
in Web Appendix B, including a degrees-of-freedom correction. Units are 2016 dollars. Source: 2016
Survey of Consumer Finances.

                                                     66
                                 Table A2: Debt Percentiles by Age

   Age                                                     Percentile
         Variable
  Bucket                            25                          50                          75
                                     0                         948                         3,919
               D1
                                  [-8; 8]                  [738; 1,158]               [3,272; 4,567]
  Ages                              500                       5,917                       25,020
               D2
  21-30                         [307; 693]                [4,898; 6,935]            [22,691; 27,349]
                                   2,298                      23,188                      72,114
               D3
                              [1,530; 3,067]             [20,234; 26,143]           [62,179; 82,049]
                                    145                       2,227                        7,798
               D1
                                 [30; 260]                [1,983; 2,472]              [7,139; 8,457]
  Ages                             1,083                      7,091                       23,639
               D2
  31-40                        [744; 1,422]               [5,946; 8,235]            [21,435; 25,842]
                                   6,698                      47,917                     162,158
               D3
                              [5,119; 8,276]             [39,887; 55,946]         [151,472; 172,844]
                                    303                       3,072                        9,782
               D1
                                [193; 412]                [2,578; 3,565]             [8,926; 10,637]
  Ages                              903                       6,158                       22,943
               D2
  41-50                        [653; 1,154]               [5,312; 7,004]            [20,562; 25,324]
                                  10,000                      77,574                     204,500
               D3
                             [7,448; 12,552]             [66,955; 88,193]         [183,390; 225,610]
                                    164                       2,700                        9,719
               D1
                                 [44; 285]                [2,327; 3,073]             [8,697; 10,742]
  Ages                              383                       3,673                       14,957
               D2
  51-60                         [218; 548]                [3,234; 4,112]            [13,662; 16,252]
                                   4,068                      44,347                     154,282
               D3
                              [2,312; 5,824]             [35,382; 53,313]         [137,949; 170,615]
                                    287                       2,388                        7,515
               D1
                                [194; 379]                [2,105; 2,671]              [6,770; 8,260]
  Ages                              369                       2,662                        8,611
               D2
  61-70                         [209; 528]                [2,338; 2,986]              [7,511; 9,710]
                                   1,661                      19,727                      95,093
               D3
                              [1,113; 2,210]             [14,227; 25,227]          [85,408; 104,777]

D1 is all debt excluding collateralized debts and student loans. D2 is all debt excluding collateralized
debts. D3 is all debt. Households are grouped by the age of the household head. Brackets contain 95%
confidence intervals computed with 999 bootstraps using the method detailed in Web Appendix B,
including a degrees-of-freedom correction. Units are 2016 dollars. Source: 2016 Survey of Consumer
Finances.


                                                    67
Web Appendix B: Point Estimates and Standard Errors under Multiple Imputation in the
Survey of Consumer Finances

This appendix explains how to construct accurate point estimates and standard errors using the
Survey of Consumer Finances. It combines information from work by Donald Rubin and others,
guidance the SCF provides on its website and in working papers, and the documentation for the
SCF standard errors program scfcombo. The Stata program used to compute estimates and
confidence intervals, titled scfses, is available on GitHub.


Background and Point Estimates

The Federal Reserve imputes some data for the following reasons: (1) some questions include
left- or right-censoring; (2) the Fed adjusts some data to preserve respondent anonymity; and (3)
the survey suffers from significant non-response.

To fill in missing data, the Federal Reserve uses multiple imputation (MI) when it generates the
SCF datasets (Kennickell, 1998, 2000). Compared with not imputing, MI provides more efficient
estimates that (under certain ignorability conditions) are less likely to suffer from non-response
bias. In particular, the Federal Reserve uses its FRITZ software, which employs a modified EM
algorithm, to impute distributions and expectations for missing observations. FRITZ iteratively
generates five copies of the SCF data, each of which contains a different imputation, or
“implicate,” for each missing observation. The FRITZ model is described in Kennickell (2000).

To obtain a point estimate 𝜃E for some parameter 𝜃 from a survey with M implicates (in the case
of the SCF, M = 5), one takes the mean across implicates:
                                                            J
                                                     1
                                                 𝜃E = G 𝜃IH
                                                     𝑀
                                                            K


where 𝑖 indexes implicates and 𝜃IH refers to the computation of the estimated 𝜃K considering only
implicate 𝑖.

Computing the total uncertainty associated with a parameter estimate in the SCF requires
combining imputation error with sampling error.48

Imputation Error
We compute the imputation variance associated with 𝜃E as follows:

48
  In Barnard and Rubin (1999) and other work by Rubin, the imputation error is called “between error,” while the
sampling error is denoted “within error.”

                                                       68
     1. We obtain the variance of the point estimate from each implicate dataset by using the
        regular formula for the sample variance of a point estimate:
                                                                           R
                                                              ∑S  I I
                                                               T <NP QNA
                                                     𝐵NI =       JQ,
                                                                               .                                 (1)

         Here, 𝐵NI is the imputation variance of 𝜃E , 𝑖 indexes each implicate, 𝑀 is the total number
         of implicates, 𝜃IH is the point estimate of the parameter of interest 𝜃 obtained from
         implicate 𝑖, and 𝜃E is the mean of the point estimates 𝜃IH over 𝑀 implicate draws.

     2. When combining this variance with the sampling variance, we scale up this variance by
         J+,
          J
              , where 𝑀 denotes the number of implicate draws. This scaling factor corrects for the
         (possibly small) number of multiple imputations drawn (Barnard and Rubin, 1999).

Sampling Error

Following the Federal Reserve’s guidance, we obtain standard errors from sampling in the SCF
via the replicate weights, in a process similar to bootstrapping. What distinguishes this bootstrap
is that the SCF uses sampling weights. In a naive bootstrap, the weights in any given bootstrap
draw may not sum to the number of households in the United States, and the bootstrap sample
may not reflect the SCF’s survey design. Kennickell and Woodburn (1999) describe the process
of generating replicate weights for each bootstrap such that the weights capture the complex
sampling process of the SCF. The Federal Reserve provides 999 replicate weights; these
correspond to 999 bootstrap draws. These replicate weights, when multiplied by the number of
times each observation was drawn with replacement from the original survey, sum to the count
of the households in the United States.

Using the replicate weights, we bootstrap sampling error in the usual way. By taking up to 999
bootstraps draws, we obtain an estimate 𝜃E," that approximates the point estimate 𝜃E, .49 To compute
the sampling variance, we use a modification of equation (1); this time, we compute the
sampling variance 𝑈NI over all 𝐽 bootstrap draws:

                                                              ∑YW<N    X AR
                                                                  I W QN
                                                     𝑈NI =        ZQ,
                                                                               .                                 (2)

In this case, 𝜃E [ refers to the point estimate of 𝜃 drawn from bootstrap 𝑘. 𝜃̅ is the mean of those
point estimates over all 𝐽; i.e., it is the expectation of 𝜃 drawn via the bootstrap.

49
  Note that the Federal Reserve provides these replicate weights only for the first data set, which is why the
bootstrap draws only converge to ^ 𝜃, . Technically, within variance requires averaging the variance computed within
each of the implicate draws. Because the Federal Reserve does not provide replicate weights for each of the five
implicates, we must settle for variance in one dataset.

                                                         69
The total variance 𝑇 is simply the sum of the imputation variance, scaled up to account for a
possibly small number of implicates 𝑀, and the sampling variance:
                                          J+,
                                 𝑇NI =     J
                                                 𝐵NI + 𝑈NI .                      (3)

The standard error is the square root of the total variance.

Hypothesis Testing

We derive the confidence interval around a univariate50 parameter using the t-distribution:

                                `𝜃, 𝜃̅ b = c𝜃E − 𝑡e,f g𝑇NI , 𝜃E + 𝑡e,f g𝑇NI h.
                                                       R                      R


In this case, 𝛼 is the probability of Type I error (the significance level), and 𝑡e,f is the 𝑡-statistic
                                                                                                      R
from the 𝑡-distribution with 𝜈 degrees of freedom given as follows:
                                                                                             Q,
                                                               Q,                       z
                              epqr +s            J+, vw
                                                      I               epqr    J+, vw
                                                                                   I
               𝜈 = 𝜈klm noe             t u1 −             y        + JQ, u            y {        .       (4)
                               pqr +,             J xw
                                                     I                         J xw
                                                                                  I



where 𝜈klm is the degrees of freedom in the full dataset, including imputed data. Note that this
equation incorporates both a small-sample correction and a correction for the number of
implicates. See Barnard and Rubin (1999) for the derivation.

Web Appendix C: Scaling Credit Card Debt in the Survey of Consumer Finances

This appendix describes how the credit card debt variable was rescaled to generate an accurate
estimate of uncollateralized debt in the Survey of Consumer Finances.

Zinman (2009b) observes that aggregate annual credit card debt reported to the SCF is smaller
than the average revolving debt in the Federal Reserve’s G.19 Consumer Credit release, and
Brown et al. (2015) find that the SCF’s total credit card debt does not match the administrative
estimates in the Consumer Credit Panel. To generate accurate estimates of household debt, we
produce a scalar multiplier that yields larger estimates of credit card debt than is reported in the
SCF directly; in particular, we multiply each person’s reported credit card debt by this scalar to
come closer to matching administrative sources. Underreporting of credit card debt may be
associated with unobservable characteristics, so it is not immediate that multiplying credit card


50
  For more information on computing multidimensional parameters, see Barnard and Rubin (1999) and Monalto
(1996).

                                                           70
debt by a scalar reduces bias from underreporting of credit card debt. Even so, we choose to
adopt one method of rescaling to obtain aggregate credit card debt estimates.

We largely follow Zinman (2009b), though due to data limitations, we make several small
adjustments to Zinman’s approach.51

First, we obtain the estimate of revolving debt in the June issue of the G.19 survey in every year
the SCF is issued. The G.19 is thought to be accurate (as it is composed of administrative data
from issuers), but it reports several sources of revolving debt that the SCF excludes from its
measure of credit card debt. We will exclude those sources of debt and then generate the scalar
multiple of the SCF such that the yearly SCF aggregate precisely matches the G.19 survey. The
G.19 includes the following additional sources of revolving debt:
    1. Seasonal revolving debt
    2. Non-credit card revolving debt
    3. Credit card debt owed by businesses on personal credit card accounts
    4. Recent transactions

We will obtain an estimate for items 1-4 to subtract from the G.19 and render it comparable to
the SCF. Throughout, we subtract the maximum reasonable amount from the G.19 in order to
obtain the smallest possible scalar and hence a lower bound on credit card debt. We are arguing
that households’ net wealth positions are quite low. Generating a smaller scalar implies that we
provide an upper bound on median household wealth in the United States.

We handle seasonal debt by employing the June G.19, which is the month that Zinman (2009b)
argues best matches the patterns observed in the SCF.

Zinman (2007b) uses the methodology outlined in Furletti and Ody (2006) to reconstruct
aggregate non-credit card revolving lines using private Federal Reserve data; we use his
estimates in 2001 and 2004. In every other year, we use the estimate in the SCF (i.e., the
revolving debt obtained by combining SCF variables X1108, X1119, and X1130).52

From issue 776 of the Nilson Reports, we obtain the total credit card debt outstanding for
business-related expenses. As Zinman notes, this overstates the amount of credit card debt in the
G.19 that is not in the SCF, as neither survey contains estimates from commercial cards. But as

51
   Zinman (2007b), which is the working paper version of Zinman (2009b), gives a better sense of the process
Zinman uses to combine the data sources in the published paper. As a result, we follow the method in the working
paper.
52
   Note that Zinman (2009b), rather than using the SCF, linearly interpolates or extrapolates for years before 2001,
where Fed data were insufficiently granular to construct aggregate non-credit card revolving line measures. We
prefer to use a noisy measure (which Zinman employs in his working paper draft) over linear interpolation or
extrapolation.

                                                         71
there is no way to disaggregate business-related expenses on personal cards alone, we use this
overestimate and emphasize that this simply yields a smaller (more conservative) scalar. Because
this value is not available for subsequent years, we simply apply the 3-year rate of growth for all
unadjusted revolving debt; that is, we assume that business-related credit card debt grows at the
same rate as all revolving credit in the G.19.

We next obtain a measure of monthly transactions, modifying Zinman’s approach slightly.
Zinman uses the Nilson estimate of recent transactions and subtracts elements from the Nilson
data to render them comparable to the G.19 survey. With the same aim of obtaining conservative
estimates of credit card debt, we generate as large an estimate of recent transactions as possible
in order to produce as small a scalar as possible, but we also wish to obtain a reasonable
estimate. We begin by computing 1/12 of the Nilson estimate of annual purchasing volume on
credit cards.53 We use the data reported in Zinman (2007b) for the years 1989-2004. Our
estimates reflect rounding in the data reported in these papers. For the later years, we use Nilson
issues 914, 984, 1051, and 1119.54 The measure of monthly transactions includes monthly
spending on business purchases on personal lines and commercial purchases. Because
commercial lines are not included in the G.19, we subtract these from the cash transactions (so
that we do not subtract cash transactions not included in the G.19 survey). Commercial
transactions are given in Zinman (2007b) for the years 1989-2004, and Nilson issues 902, 965,
1049, and 1114 for subsequent years.55 Finally, we do not subtract transactions on personal lines
for business purposes from our estimate of the total amount of monthly transactions. That is
because we ultimately subtract the total transactions from the G.19 when deriving our estimate,
and the G.19 would include this form of spending. Therefore, this spending will not be included
as part of our estimate.56

After obtaining an adjusted Nilson estimate of the total monthly spending, we multiply the
Nilson estimate by 1.35, following Zinman, to obtain a minimal reasonable scalar.57

53
   All Nilson estimates are reported annually, so we compute 1/12 of all their data.
54
   Note that purchasing volume, the data reported in Nilson, is total volume minus cash advances. Zinman (2009b)
subtracts a proportion of cash advances from total transactions; to limit judgment in our scalar computation, we
subtract all cash advances from transactions, and we use the difference between total volume and purchasing volume
data to obtain cash advances where Nilson does not report the figure directly
55
   The estimate of commercial credit card purchasing volume reported in Nilson also includes prepaid and debit
cards. For years prior to 2016, there is no way to disaggregate credit card transactions from those on debit/prepaid
cards. Nilson issue 1114 separately records 2016 commercial credit and debit card purchasing volume. Credit cards
are responsible for approximately 80% of total commercial purchasing volume. In our baseline estimate of the G.19
scalar, we do not adjust for the debit card portion of commercial purchases. When we do subtract only commercial
credit card debt using the disaggregated 2016 data, the scalar changes from 1.49 to 1.40.
56
   Note that Zinman (2009b) uses the Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) in this section. As this survey is no
longer available, and to obtain a parsimonious estimate of the credit card scalar, we do not employ the SSBF.
57
   1.35 comes from the following observation: if a person who holds credit card debt makes use of a 15-25 day grace
period, the average amount of debt held will be between 1 and 1.4 times her monthly spending, even if she pays
down the full bill. We use 1.35, the number Zinman employs for his maximal correction. See Zinman (2009b) for
details.

                                                        72
Tables C1-C3, in the style of the tables in Zinman (2009b), illustrate the process we use and the
scalars we obtain.

                                          Table C1: Scalar by Year

                                           SCF                   Adjusted            CC Debt
                           Year                         =                       /
                                          Scalar                  G.19              in the SCF
                           1989            1.4          =          99.2         /       69.7
                           1992            1.9          =         180.6         /       97.0
                           1995            2.0          =         277.8         /      139.9
                           1998            2.2          =         410.1         /      186.3
                           2001            2.6          =         502.8         /      195.6
                           2004            2.0          =         536.7         /      265.9
                           2007            1.6          =         623.6         /      392.1
                           2010            1.5          =         502.7         /      328.3
                           2013            1.8          =         480.2         /      267.8
                           2016            1.5          =         469.1         /      315.8

Notes: Table C1 displays the scalars we generate for each year that the SCF is issued. To obtain the scalars, we
divide the adjusted G.19 totals by the total credit card debt in the SCF. See Tables C2 and C3 for details on
computing the adjusted G.19. Numbers in nominal billions of dollars. Source: Survey of Consumer Finances.


                                     Table C2: Adjusted G.19 by Year

                                      CC Debt              Other                                  Adjusted
                 Adjusted                                                       Businesses’
    Year                        =      in the       -    Revolving          -               -     Monthly
                  G.19                                                           CC Debt
                                        G.19               Debt                                   Charges
    1989           99.2         =      195.9        -       44.7            -       14.2     -     37.8
    1992           180.6        =      267.8        -       24.7            -       19.4     -     43.2
    1995           277.8        =      401.8        -       17.9            -       29.1     -     76.9
    1998           410.1        =      559.9        -       16.1            -       40.6     -     93.2
    2001           502.8        =      709.0        -       32.0            -       51.4     -     122.9
    2004           536.7        =      774.3        -       33.0            -       56.1     -     148.5
    2007           623.6        =      916.4        -       48.3            -       66.4     -     178.1
    2010           502.7        =      841.1        -      115.9            -       61.0     -     161.6
    2013           480.2        =      814.6        -       78.5            -       59.0     -     196.9
    2016           469.1        =      902.8        -      127.2            -       65.4     -     241.1

Notes: Table C2 displays the method by which we adjust the G.19 Consumer Credit release to render it comparable
to the SCF. Other revolving debt comes from Zinman (2007b) and the SCF. Businesses’ credit card debt comes from
Nilson issue 776 and is grown at the same rate as the unadjusted G.19. Adjusted monthly charges are computed from
Nilson; see Table C3 for details. Numbers in nominal billions of dollars. Source: Survey of Consumer Finances.




                                                            73
                             Table C3: Adjusted Monthly Charges by Year


                  Adjusted                              Nilson                               Charges on
                                                                           Cash
      Year        Monthly        = 1.35 X          (     Total       -                 -     Corporate          )
                                                                         Advances
                  Charges                               Charges                                Lines
      1989           37.8        =    1.35    X    (       35.0      -       2.0       -          5.0           )
      1992           43.2        =    1.35    X    (       44.0      -       3.0       -          9.0           )
      1995           76.9        =    1.35    X    (       72.0      -       9.0       -          6.0           )
      1998           93.2        =    1.35    X    (       95.0      -      14.0       -         12.0           )
      2001           122.9       =    1.35    X    (      127.0      -      18.0       -         18.0           )
      2004           148.5       =    1.35    X    (      157.0      -      23.0       -         24.0           )
      2007           178.1       =    1.35    X    (      199.1      -      23.2       -         43.9           )
      2010           161.6       =    1.35    X    (      179.8      -       8.8       -         51.3           )
      2013           196.9       =    1.35    X    (      228.6      -       8.9       -         73.9           )
      2016           241.1       =    1.35    X    (      287.4      -      13.8       -         95.1           )

Notes: Table C3 displays the method by which we adjust monthly charges to subtract from the G.19 Consumer
Credit release. We subtract total cash advances and charges on corporate lines from total monthly credit card
charges; these data come from multiplying Nilson annual estimates by 1/12. We scale what remains by 1.35,
following Zinman (2009b). Numbers in nominal billions of dollars. Source: Survey of Consumer Finances.




                                                       74
References

Abel, A. B. (1990). "Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the Joneses."
    American Economic Review 80(2), 38–42.

Abeler, J., & Jäger, S. (2015). "Complex Tax Incentives." American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy 7(3), 1–28.

Abreu, M., & Mendes, V. (2010). "Financial Literacy and Portfolio Diversification."
    Quantitative Finance 10(5), 515–528.

Adamopoulou, E., & Zizza, R. (2015). "Accessorizing: The Effect of Union Contract Renewals
   on Consumption." Working Paper, Bank of Italy.

Adams, D. J. (1996). "Playing the Lottery: Social Action, Social Networks and Accounts of
   Motive." Unpublished Dissertation, University of Arizona.

Adams, P., Guttman-Kenney, B., Hayes, L., Hunt, S., Laibson, D., & Stewart, N. (2018). "The
   Illusion of Success in Nudging Consumers to Increase the Value of Their Automatic Credit
   Card Payments." Financial Conduct Authority Working Paper.

Adelino, M., Schoar, A., & Severino, F. (2012). "Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence
    from Mortgage Market Segmentation." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper 17832.

Adelino, M., Schoar, A., & Severino, F. (2016). "Loan Originations and Defaults in the
    Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class." Review of Financial Studies 29(7), 1635–
    1670.

Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Ben-David, I., & Evanoff, D. D. (2016a). "Loan Product Steering in
    Mortgage Market." 22696.

Agarwal, S., Ben-David, I., & Yao, V. (2017). "Systematic Mistakes in the Mortgage Market and
    Lack of Financial Sophistication." Journal of Financial Economics.

Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., Liu, C., & Souleles, N. S. (2015a). "Do Consumers Choose the
    Right Credit Contracts?" Review of Corporate Finance Studies 4(2), 239–257.

Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., Mahoney, N., & Stroebel, J. (2015b). "Regulating Consumer
    Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1),
    111–164.

Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J. C., Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2009). "The Age of Reason: Financial
    Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation." Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity 2009(2), 51–101.

Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J. C., & Laibson, D. (2013). "Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed
    Form Solution." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(4), 591–622.

                                              75
Agarwal, S., Pan, J., & Qian, W. (2015c). "The Composition Effect of Consumption around
    Retirement: Evidence from Singapore." American Economic Review: Papers &
    Proceedings 105(5), 426–431.

Agarwal, S., Song, C., & Yao, V. (2016b). "Banking Competition and Shrouded Attributes:
    Evidence from the US Mortgage Market." Working Paper.

Agnew, J. R., Bateman, H., Eckert, C., Iskhakov, F., Louviere, J., & Thorp, S. (2016). "First
    Impressions Matter: An Experimental Investigation of Online Financial Advice."
    Management Science (Articles in Advance), 1–20.

Agnew, J. R., & Szykman, L. R. (2011). "Annuities, Financial Literacy, and Information
    Overload." In: O. S. Mitchell, A. Lusardi (Eds.), Financial Literacy: Implications for
    Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace (pp. 158–180), Oxford University Press,
    New York, NY.

Aguiar, M., & Hurst, E. (2005). "Consumption versus Expenditure." Journal of Political
    Economy 113(5), 919–948.

Aguiar, M., & Hurst, E. (2007). "Life-Cycle Prices and Production." American Economic
    Review.

Akerlof, G. A. (1991). "Procrastination and Obedience." American Economic Review 81(2), 1–
    19.

Alan, S., Cemalcılar, M., Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2016). "Unshrouding Effects on Demand for
    a Costly Add-on: Evidence from Bank Overdrafts in Turkey." Working Paper.

Allcott, H. (2011). "Social Norms and Energy Conservation." Journal of Public Economics 95(9–
     10), 1082–1095.

Allcott, H., & Rogers, T. (2014). "The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral
     Interventions: Experimental Evidence From Energy Conservation." American Economic
     Review 104(10), 3003–3037.

Alpert, M., & Raiffa, H. (1982). "A Progress Report on the Training of Probability Assessors."
    In: D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics
    and Biases (pp. 294–305), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Amador, M., Werning, I., & Angeletos, G.-M. (2006). "Commitment vs. Flexibility."
   Econometrica 74(2), 365–396.

Ambec, S., & Treich, N. (2007). "Roscas as Financial Agreements to Cope with Self-Control
   Problems." Journal of Development Economics 82(1), 120–137.

Ambuehl, S., Bernheim, B. D., & Lusardi, A. (2016). "The Effect of Financial Education on the
   Quality of Decision Making." Global Financial Literacy Excellence Center Working Paper
   2016-2.

                                               76
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Laufer, S., & Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2011). "The Joy of Giving or
   Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from Bequest
   Motives." Journal of Finance 66(2), 519–561.

Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., & Leahy, J. (2003). "Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity to Plan."
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 1007–1047.

Anagol, S., Cole, S., & Sarkar, S. (2017a). "Understanding the Advice of Commissions-
    Motivated Agents: Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market." Review of Economics
    and Statistics 99(1), 1–15.

Anagol, S., & Kim, H. (2012). "The Impact of Shrouded Fees: Evidence from a Natural
    Experiment in the Indian Mutual Funds Market." American Economic Review 102(1), 576–
    593.

Anagol, S., Marisetty, V., Sane, R., & Venugopal, B. (2017b). "On the Impact of Regulating
    Commissions: Evidence from the Indian Mutual Funds Market." World Bank Economic
    Review 31(1), 241–270.

Andersen, S., Campbell, J. Y., Nielsen, K., & Ramadorai, T. (2018). "Sources of Inaction in
    Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market.".

Anderson, S., & Baland, J.-M. (2002). "The Economics of Roscas and Intrahousehold Resource
    Allocation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3), 963–995.

Andrade, S. C., Chang, C., & Seasholes, M. S. (2008). "Trading Imbalances, Predictable
    Reversals, and Cross-Stock Price Pressure." Journal of Financial Economics 88(2), 406–
    423.

Ang, A., Bekaert, G., & Liu, J. (2005). "Why Stocks May Disappoint." Journal of Financial
    Economics 76(3), 471–508.

Angeletos, G.-M., Laibson, D., Repetto, A., Tobacman, J., & Weinberg, S. (2001). "The
    Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation."
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(3), 47–68.

Arango, C., Huynh, K. P., & Leonard Sabetti (2011). "How Do You Pay? The Role of Incentives
    at the Point-of-Sale." European Central Bank Working Paper 1386.

Argento, R., Bryant, V. L., & Sabelhaus, J. (2015). "Early Withdrawals From Retirement
    Accounts during the Great Recession." Contemporary Economic Policy 33(1), 1–16.

Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., & Yin, W. (2006). "Typing Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
    Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2),
    635–672.

Atalay, K., Bakhtiar, F., Cheung, S., & Slonim, R. (2014). "Savings and Prize-Linked Savings
     Accounts." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 107(Part A), 86–106.

                                              77
Atreya, A., Ferreira, S., & Michel-Kerjan, E. (2015). "What Drives Households to Buy Flood
    Insurance? New Evidence from Georgia." Ecological Economics 117, 153–161.

Attanasio, O., & Weber, G. (1995). "Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
     Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey." Journal of Political
     Economy 103(6), 1121–1157.

Ausubel, L. M. (1991). "The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market." American
    Economic Review 81(1), 50–81.

Ausubel, L. M. (1999). "Adverse Selection in the Credit Card Market.".

Aydin, D. (2016). "The Marginal Propensity to Consume Out of Liquidity: Evidence from
    Random Assignment of 54,522 Credit Lines." Job Market Paper, Stanford University.

Barber, B. M., Lee, Y.-T., Liu, Y.-J., & Odean, T. (2007). "Is the Aggregate Investor Reluctant
    to Realise Losses? Evidence from Taiwan." European Financial Management 13(3), 423–
    447.

Barber, B. M., Lee, Y.-T., Liu, Y.-J., & Odean, T. (2009a). "Just How Much Do Individual
    Investors Lose by Trading." Review of Financial Studies 22(2), 609–632.

Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2000). "Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock
    Investment Performance of Individual Investors." Journal of Finance 55(2), 773–806.

Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2001). "Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common
    Stock Investment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1), 261–292.

Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2008). "All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
    Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors." Review of Financial Studies
    21(2), 785–818.

Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2013). "The Behavior of Individual Investors." In: G. M.
    Constantinides, M. Harris, R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance 2,
    (pp. 1533–1570), North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Barber, B. M., Odean, T., & Zheng, L. (2005). "Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects of
    Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows." Journal of Business 78(6), 2095–2119.

Barber, B. M., Odean, T., & Zhu, N. (2009b). "Do Retail Trades Move Markets?" Review of
    Financial Studies 22(1), 151–186.

Barberis, N., & Huang, M. (2008). "Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability
    Weighting for Security Prices." American Economic Review 98(5), 2066–2100.

Barberis, N., Huang, M., & Thaler, R. H. (2006). "Individual Preferences, Monetary Gambles,
    and Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing." American Economic Review
    96(4), 1069–1090.

                                               78
Barberis, N., & Xiong, W. (2009). "What Drives the Disposition Effect? An Analysis of a Long-
    Standing Preference-Based Explanation." Journal of Finance 64(2), 751–784.

Barberis, N., & Xiong, W. (2012). "Realization Utility." Journal of Financial Economics 104(2),
    251–271.

Barnard, J., & Rubin, D. B. (1999). "Small-Sample Degrees of Freedom with Multiple
    Imputation." Biometrika 86(4), 948–955.

Barseghyan, L., Molinari, F., O’Donoghue, T., & Teitelbaum, J. C. (2013a). "The Nature of Risk
    Preferences: Evidence from Insurance Choices." American Economic Review 103(6),
    2499–2529.

Barseghyan, L., Molinari, F., O’Donoghue, T., & Teitelbaum, J. C. (2013b). "Distinguishing
    Probability Weighting from Risk Misperceptions in Field Data." American Economic
    Review 103(3), 580–585.

Barseghyan, L., O’Donoghue, T., Molinari, F., & Teitelbaum, J. C. (2016). "Estimating Risk
    Preferences in the Field." Journal of Economic Literature (Forthcoming).

Barseghyan, L., Prince, J., & Teitelbaum, J. C. (2011). "Are Risk Preferences Stable across
    Contexts? Evidence from Insurance Data." American Economic Review 101(2), 591–631.

Basu, K. (2011). "Hyperbolic Discounting and the Sustainability of Rotational Savings
    Arrangements." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3(4), 143–171.

Bell, C., Gorin, D., & Hogarth, J. M. (2008). "Financial Education - Does It Work and How Do
     We Know? Research Findings from a Study of Financial Education Among Soldiers."
     Community Invest 21, 15–16.

Bell, C., Gorin, D., & Hogarth, J. M. (2009). "Does Financial Education Affect Soldiers’
     Financial Behavior?" Networks Financial Institute at Indiana State University Working
     Paper 8.

Ben-David, I., & Hirshleifer, D. (2012). "Are Investors Really Reluctant to Realize Their
    Losses? Trading Responses to Past Returns and the Disposition Effect." Review of
    Financial Studies 25(8), 2485–2532.

Benartzi, S. (2001). "Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to
    Company Stock." Journal of Finance 56(5), 1747–1764.

Benartzi, S., Beshears, J., Milkman, K. L., Sunstein, C. R., Thaler, R. H., Shankar, M., …
    Galing, S. (2017). "Should Governments Invest More in Nudging?" Psychological Science
    28(8), 1–15.

Benartzi, S., Peleg, E., & Thaler, R. H. (2012). "Choice Architecture and Retirement Savings
    Plans." In: E. Shafir (Ed.), The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy (pp. 245–263),
    Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

                                               79
Benartzi, S., Previtero, A., & Thaler, R. H. (2011). "Annuitization Puzzles." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 25(4), 143–164.

Benartzi, S., & Thaler, R. H. (2001). "Naive Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
    Savings Plans." American Economic Review 91(1), 79–98.

Benartzi, S., & Thaler, R. H. (2007). "Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings Behavior."
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3), 81–104.

Benhabib, J., & Bisin, A. (2005). "Modeling Internal Commitment Mechanisms and Self-
    Control: A Neuroeconomics Approach to Consumption-Saving Decisions." Games and
    Economic Behavior 52(2), 460–492.

Benmelech, E., & Moskowitz, T. J. (2010). "The Political Economy of Financial Regulation:
    Evidence from U.S. State Usury Laws in the 19th Century." Journal of Finance 65(3),
    1029–1073.

Benos, A. V. (1998). "Aggressiveness and Survival of Overconfident Traders." Journal of
    Financial Markets 1(3), 353–383.

Berg, G., & Zia, B. (2017). "Harnessing Emotional Connections to Improve Financial Decisions:
    Evaluating the Impact of Financial Education in Mainstream Media." Journal of the
    European Economic Association 0(0), 1–31.

Bergstresser, D., Chalmers, J., & Tufano, P. (2009). "Assessing the Costs and Benefits of
    Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry." Review of Financial Studies 22(10), 4129–4156.

Bernheim, B. D. (1991). "How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates of
    the Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities." Journal of Political Economy 99(5), 899–
    927.

Bernheim, B. D. (2016). "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: A Unified Approach to Behavioral
    Welfare Economics." Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 7(1), 12–68.

Bernheim, B. D., Berstein, S., Gokhale, J., & Kotlikoff, L. J. (2006). "Saving and Life Insurance
    Holdings at Boston University – A Unique Case Study." National Institute Economic
    Review 198(1), 75–96.

Bernheim, B. D., Forni, L., Gokhale, J., & Kotlikoff, L. J. (2003). "The Mismatch between Life
    Insurance Holdings and Financial Vulnerabilities: Evidence from the Health and Retirement
    Study." American Economic Review 93(1), 354–365.

Bernheim, B. D., Fradkin, A., & Popov, I. (2015). "The Welfare Economics of Default Options
    in 401(k) Plans." American Economic Review 105(9), 2798–2837.

Bernheim, B. D., & Garrett, D. (2003). "The Effects of Financial Education in the Workplace:
    Evidence from a Survey of Households." Journal of Public Economics 87(7–8), 1487–1519.


                                               80
Bernheim, B. D., Garrett, D., & Maki, D. M. (2001a). "Education and Saving: The Long-Term
    Effects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates." Journal of Public Economics
    80(3), 435–465.

Bernheim, B. D., Skinner, J., & Weinberg, S. (2001b). "What Accounts for the Variation in
    Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?" American Economic Review 91(4), 832–857.

Bertaut, C. C., Haliassos, M., & Reiter, M. (2008). "Credit Card Debt Puzzles and Debt
     Revolvers for Self Control." Review of Finance 13(4), 657–692.

Bertrand, M., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zinman, J. (2010). "What’s Advertising
     Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 125(1), 263–306.

Bertrand, M., & Morse, A. (2011). "Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday
     Borrowing." Journal of Finance 66(6), 1865–1893.

Bertrand, M., & Morse, A. (2016). "Trickle-down Consumption." Review of Economics and
     Statistics.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Harris, C., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Sakong, J. (2015a). "Self-
    Control and Commitment: Can Decreasing the Liquidity of a Savings Account Increase
    Deposits?." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21474.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Hurwitz, J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2015b). "Liquidity in
    Retirement Savings Systems: An International Comparison." American Economic Review
    105(5), 420–425.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2009). "The Importance of Default
    Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States." In: S. J. Kay,
    T. Shinha (Eds.), Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas (pp. 59–87), Oxford
    University Press, New York, NY.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). "How Does Simplified Disclosure
    Affect Individuals’ Mutual Fund Choices?" In: D. A. Wise (Ed.), Explorations in the
    Economics of Aging (pp. 75–96), University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2013). "Simplification and Saving."
    Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 95, 130–145.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2014a). "Does Front-Loading Taxation
    Increase Savings? Evidence from Roth 401(k) Introductions." National Bureau of Economic
    Research Working Paper 20738.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2017a). "Does Aggregated Returns
    Disclosure Increase Portfolio Risk Taking?" Review of Financial Studies 30(6), 1971–2005.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Milkman, K. L. (2015c). "The Effect of

                                                 81
     Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions." Journal of Finance 70(3),
     1161–1201.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Skimmyhorn, W. L. (2017b).
    "Borrowing to Save? The Impact of Automatic Enrollment on Debt.".

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Zeldes, S. P. (2014b). "What Makes
    Annuitization More Appealing?" Journal of Public Economics 116, 2–16.

Bhargava, S., & Manoli, D. (2015). "Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete Take-up of
    Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment." American Economic Review
    105(11), 3489–3529.

Bhattacharya, U., Hackethal, A., Kaesler, S., Loos, B., & Meyer, S. (2012). "Is Unbiased
    Financial Advice to Retail Investors Sufficient? Answers from a Large Field Study."
    Review of Financial Studies 25(4).

Bhutta, N. (2014). "Payday Loans and Consumer Financial Health." Journal of Banking and
    Finance 47(C), 230–242.

Bhutta, N., Goldin, J., & Homonoff, T. (2016). "Consumer Borrowing After Payday Loan Bans."
    Journal of Law and Economics 59(1), 225–259.

Bhutta, N., Skiba, P. M., & Tobacman, J. (2015). "Payday Loan Choices and Consequences."
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47(2–3), 223–260.

Biais, B., Hilton, D., Mazurier, K., & Pouget, S. (2005). "Judgemental Overconfidence, Self-
     Monitoring, and Trading Performance in an Experimental Financial Market." Review of
     Economic Studies 72(2), 287–312.

Blalock, G., Just, D. R., & Simon, D. H. (2007). "Hitting the Jackpot or Hitting the Skids:
     Entertainment, Poverty, and the Demand for State Lotteries." American Journal of
     Economics and Sociology 66(3), 545–570.

Blume, M. E., & Friend, I. (1975). "The Asset Structure of Individual Portfolios and Some
    Implications for Utility Functions." Journal of Finance 30(2), 585–603.

Blumenstock, J., Callen, M., & Ghani, T. (2017). "Mobile-Izing Savings with Automatic
    Contributions: Experimental Evidence on Present Bias and Default Effects in Afghanistan."
    Working Paper.

Bolt, W., Jonker, N., & Van Renselaar, C. (2010). "Incentives at the Counter: An Empirical
     Analysis of Surcharging Card Payments and Payment Behaviour in the Netherlands."
     Journal of Banking and Finance 34(8), 1738–1744.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., & Shleifer, A. (2012). "Salience Theory of Choice under Risk."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1243–1285.


                                                82
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., & Shleifer, A. (2016). "Competition for Attention." Review of
    Economic Studies 83(2), 481–513.

Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Ter Weel, B. (2008). "The Economics and
    Psychology of Personality Traits." Journal of Human Resources 43(4), 972–1059.

Borzekowski, R., Kiser, K. E., & Ahmed, S. (2008). "Consumers’ Use of Debit Cards: Patterns,
    Preferences, and Price Response." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40(1), 149–172.

Botzen, W. J. W., Kunreuther, H., & Michel-Kerjan, E. (2015). "Divergence between Individual
    Perceptions and Objective Indicators of Tail Risks: Evidence from Floodplain Residents in
    New York City." Judgment and Decision Making 10(4), 365–385.

Bounie, D., & François, A. (2006). "Cash, Check or Bank Card? The Effects of Transaction
    Characteristics on the Use of Payment Instruments." Telecom Paris Economics and Social
    Sciences Working Paper No. ESS-06-05.

Bourassa, S. C., & Yin, M. (2008). "Tax Deductions, Tax Credits and the Homeownership Rate
    of Young Urban Adults in the United States." Urban Studies 45(5–6), 1141–1161.

Bowen, C. (2010). "Future of Financial Advice: Information Pack." Technical Report, Treasury
   of Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.

Boyle, P., Garlappi, L., Uppal, R., & Wang, T. (2012). "Keynes Meets Markowitz: The Trade-
    Off Between Familiarity and Diversification." Management Science 58(2), 253–272.

Branikas, I., Hong, H., & Xu, J. (2018). "Location Choice, Portfolio Choice." Working Paper.

Briggs, J. S., Cesarini, D., Lindqvist, E., & Östling, R. (2015). "Windfall Gains and Stock
    Market Participation." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21673.

Broda, C., & Parker, J. (2014). "The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and the Aggregate
    Demand for Consumption." Journal of Monetary Economics 68(S), S20–S36.

Brown, J. (2007). "Rational and Behavioral Perspectives on the Role of Annuities in Retirement
    Planning." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13537.

Brown, J., Farrell, A., & Weisbenner, S. (2011). "The Downside of Defaults." NBER Retirement
    Research Center Paper No. NB 11-01.

Brown, J., Farrell, A., & Weisbenner, S. (2016a). "Decision-Making Approaches and the
    Propensity to Default: Evidence and Implications." Journal of Financial Economics 121(3),
    477–495.

Brown, J., Ivković, Z., Smith, P., & Weisbenner, S. (2008a). "Neighbors Matter: Causal
    Community Effects and Stock Market Participation." Journal of Finance 63(3), 1509–1531.

Brown, J., Kapteyn, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2016b). "Framing and Claiming: How Information-

                                               83
     Framing Affects Expected Social Security Claiming Behavior." Journal of Risk and
     Insurance 83(1), 139–162.

Brown, J., Kling, J. R., Mullainathan, S., & Wrobel, M. V. (2008b). "Why Don’t People Insure
    Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the under-Annuitization Puzzle."
    American Economic Review 98(2), 304–309.

Brown, J., & Poterba, J. M. (2000). "Joint Life Annuities and Annuity Demand by Married
    Couples." Journal of Risk and Insurance 67(4), 527–553.

Brown, J., & Previtero, A. (2014). "Procrastination, Present-Biased Preferences, and Financial
    Behaviors." NBER Retirement Research Center Paper No. NB 14-04.

Brown, J., & Previtero, A. (2016). "Saving for Retirement, Annuities and Procrastination."
    Working Paper.

Brown, J. R. (2001). "Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize." Journal
    of Public Economics 82(1), 29–62.

Brown, M., Grigsby, J., Van Der Klaauw, W., Wen, J., & Zafar, B. (2016c). "Financial
    Education and the Debt Behavior of the Young." Review of Financial Studies 29(9), 2490–
    2522.

Brown, M., Haughwout, A., Lee, D., & Van Der Klaauw, W. (2015). "Do We Know What We
    Owe? Consumer Debt as Reported by Borrowers and Lenders." Federal Reserve Bank of
    New York Economic Policy Review 21(1), 19–44.

Brown, P., Chappel, N., Da Silva Rosa, R., & Walter, T. (2006). "The Reach of the Disposition
    Effect: Large Sample Evidence Across Investor Classes." International Review of Finance
    6(1–2), 43–78.

Browning, M., & Collado, M. D. (2001). "The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated Income
    Changes: Panel Data Estimates." American Economic Review 91(3), 681–692.

Bruhn, M., De Souza Leão, L., Legovini, A., Marchetti, R., & Zia, B. (2013). "The Impact of
    High School Financial Education: Experimental Evidence from Brazil." World Bank Policy
    Research Working Paper 6723.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Gollier, C., & Parker, J. (2007). "Optimal Beliefs, Asset Prices, and the
    Preference for Skewed Returns." American Economic Review 97(2), 159–165.

Bryan, G., Karlan, D., & Nelson, S. (2010). "Commitment Devices." Annual Review of
    Economics 2(1), 671–698.

Buckley, F. H., & Brinig, M. F. (1998). "The Bankruptcy Puzzle." Journal of Legal Studies
    27(1), 187–207.

Bureau, C. F. P. (2017a). "A Closer Look: Overdraft and the Impact of Opting-In.".

                                               84
Bureau, C. F. P. (2017b). "A Closer Look: Overdraft and the Impact of Opting-In.".

Burke, K., Leary, J. B., & Wang, J. (2015). "Information Disclosure and Payday Lending in
    Texas." Working Paper.

Bursztyn, L., Ederer, F., Ferman, B., & Yuchtman, N. (2014). "Understanding Mechanisms
    Underlying Peer Effects: Evidence From a Field Experiment on Financial Decisions."
    Econometrica 82(4), 1273–1301.

Bursztyn, L., Ferman, B., Fiorin, S., Kanz, M., & Rao, G. (2017). "Status Goods: Experimental
    Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards." The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Caballé, J., & Sákovics, J. (2003). "Speculating against an Overconfident Market." Journal of
    Financial Markets 6(2), 199–225.

Cai, H., Chen, Y., & Fang, H. (2009). "Observational Learning: Evidence from a Randomized
     Natural Field Experiment." American Economic Review 99(3), 864–882.

Cai, J., & Song, C. (2017). "Do Disaster Experience and Knowledge Affect Insurance Take-up
     Decisions?" Journal of Development Economics 124(C), 83–94.

Cain, D. M., Loewenstein, G., & Moore, D. A. (2005). "The Dirt on Coming Clean: Perverse
    Effects of Disclosing Conflicts of Interest." Journal of Legal Studies 34(1), 1–25.

Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., & Sodini, P. (2007). "Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs
    of Household Investment Mistakes." Journal of Political Economy 115(5), 707–747.

Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., & Sodini, P. (2009). "Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by
    Individual Investors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1), 301–348.

Campbell, J. Y., & Cocco, J. F. (2003). "Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
   Choice." Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Campbell, J. Y., & Cochrane, J. H. (1999). "By Force of Habit : A Consumption-Based
   Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior." Journal of Political Economy 107(2),
   205–251.

Campbell, J. Y., & Mankiw, N. G. (1989). "Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates:
   Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence." In: O. J. Blanchard, S. Fischer (Eds.), NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual 1989 4, (pp. 185–246), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Carhart, M. M. (1997). "On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance." Journal of Finance 52(1),
    57–82.

Carlin, B. (2009). "Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets." Journal of Financial
     Economics 91(3), 278–287.

Carlin, B., & Robinson, D. (2012). "Financial Education and Timely Decision Support: Lessons

                                               85
     from Junior Achievement." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 102(3),
     305–308.

Carpena, F., Cole, S., Shapiro, J. P., & Zia, B. (2015). "The ABCs of Financial Education:
    Experimental Evidence on Attitudes, Behavior, and Cognitive Biases." World Bank Policy
    Research Working Paper 7413.

Carrell, S., & Zinman, J. (2014). "In Harm’s Way? Payday Loan Access and Military Personnel
     Performance." Review of Financial Studies 27(9), 2805–2840.

Carroll, C. (1992). "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving : Some Macroeconomic Evidence."
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992(2), 61–156.

Carroll, G., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2009). "Optimal Defaults
    and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1639–1674.

Carter, S. P., Skiba, P. M., & Tobacman, J. (2011). "Pecuniary Mistakes? Payday Borrowing by
     Credit Union Members." In: O. S. Mitchell, A. Lusardi (Eds.), Financial Literacy:
     Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace (pp. 145–157), Oxford
     University Press, New York, NY.

Carter, S. P., & Skimmyhorn, W. (2017). "Much Ado about Nothing? New Evidence on the
     Effects of Payday Lending on Military Members." Review of Economics and Statistics
     99(4), 606–621.

Chalmers, J., & Reuter, J. (2012a). "How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence from
    Public Employees." Review of Financial Studies 25(8), 2601–2634.

Chalmers, J., & Reuter, J. (2012b). "Is Conflicted Investment Advice Better Than No Advice?."
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18158.

Chang, B., & Szydlowski, M. (2016). "The Market for Conflicted Advice." Working Paper.

Chang, T., Solomon, D. H., & Westerfield, M. M. (2016). "Looking for Someone to Blame:
    Delegation, Cognitive Dissonance, and the Disposition Effect." Journal of Finance 71(1),
    267–302.

Chapman, D. A., & Polkovnichenko, V. (2009). "First-Order Risk Aversion, Heterogeneity, and
    Asset Market Outcomes." Journal of Finance 64(4), 1863–1887.

Chater, N., Huck, S., & Inderst, R. (2010). "Consumer Decision-Making in Retail Investment
    Services: A Behavioural Economics Perspective." Report to the European Commission
    (SANCO), Decision Technology Ltd., London.

Chen, G., Kim, K., Nofsinger, J. R., & Rui, O. M. (2007). "Trading Performance, Disposition
    Effect, Overconfidence, Representativeness Bias, and Experience of Emerging Market
    Investors." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 20(4), 425–451.


                                               86
Chen, Y., Harper, F. M., Konstan, J., & Li, S. (2010). "Social Comparisons and Contributions to
    Online Communities: A Field Experiment on MovieLens." American Economic Review
    100(4), 1358–1398.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Leth-Petersen, S., Nielsen, T., & Olsen, T. (2014). "Active vs. Passive
    Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3), 1141–1219.

Chetty, R., & Szeidl, A. (2007). "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 122(2), 831–877.

Ching, A. T., & Hayashi, F. (2010). "Payment Card Rewards Programs and Consumer Payment
    Choice." Journal of Banking and Finance 34(8), 1773–1787.

Choi, J. J. (2015). "Contributions to Defined Contribution Pension Plans." Annual Review of
    Financial Economics 7(1), 161–178.

Choi, J. J., Haisley, E., Kurkoki, J., & Massey, C. (2016). "Small Cues Change Savings
    Choices." Working Paper.

Choi, J. J., Jin, L., & Yan, H. (2013). "What Does Stock Ownership Breadth Measure?" Review
    of Finance 17, 1239–1278.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2004a). "Plan Design and 401 (k) Savings
    Outcomes." National Tax Journal 57(2), 275–298.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2005). "Are Empowerment and Education Enough?
    Underdiversification in 401(k) Plans." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2005(2),
    151–198.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2009a). "Mental Accounting in Portfolio Choice:
    Evidence from a Flypaper Effect." American Economic Review 99(5), 2085–2095.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2010). "Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An
    Experiment on Index Mutual Funds." Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1405–1432.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). "$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal
    Investment in 401(k) Plans." Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3), 748–763.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2002). "Defined Contribution Pensions:
    Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance." In: J. M. Poterba (Ed.),
    Tax Policy and the Economy 16, (pp. 67–114), NBER and MIT Press Journals, Cambridge,
    MA.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2003). "Optimal Defaults." American
    Economic Review 93(2), 180–185.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2004b). "For Better or for Worse:

                                                87
     Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior." In: D. A. Wise (Ed.), Perspectives on the
     Economics of Aging (pp. 81–121), University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2006). "Saving for Retirement on the
    Path of Least Resistance." In: E. McCaffrey, J. Slemrod (Eds.), Behavioral Public Finance:
    Toward a New Agenda (pp. 304–351), Russell Sage Foundation, New York, NY.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2009b). "Reinforcement Learning and
    Savings Behavior." Journal of Finance 64(6), 2515–2534.

Choi, J. J., & Robertson, A. Z. (2017). "From the Horse’s Mouth: What Matters to Individual
    Investors?" Working Paper.

Choi, J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. (2009c). "Reducing the Complexity Costs of 401 (k)
    Participation Through Quick Enrollment." Developments in the Economics of Aging
    401(March), 57–82.

Christelis, D., Jappelli, T., & Padula, M. (2010). "Cognitive Abilities and Portfolio Choice."
     European Economic Review 54(1), 18–38.

Christoffersen, S. E. K., Evans, R., & Musto, D. K. (2013). "What Do Consumers’ Fund Flows
     Maximize? Evidence from Their Brokers’ Incentives." Journal of Finance 68(1), 201–235.

Church, B. K., & Kuang, X. (Jason) (2009). "Conflicts of Interest, Disclosure, and (Costly)
    Sanctions: Experimental Evidence." Journal of Legal Studies 38(2), 505–532.

Cialdini, R. B., Demaine, L. J., Sagarin, B. J., Barrett, D. W., Rhoads, K., & Winter, P. (2006).
     "Managing Social Norms for Persuasive Impact." Social Influence 1(1), 3–15.

Clark, J., Utkus, S. P., & Young, J. A. (2015). "Automatic Enrollment: The Power of the
     Default." Vanguard, Valley Forge, PA.

Clotfelter, C. T., & Cook, P. J. (1989). Selling Hope: State Lotteries in America. Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Cochrane, J. H. (1989). "The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation of Consumption
    to Near-Rational Alternatives." American Economic Review 79(3), 319–337.

Cohen, A., & Einav, L. (2007). "Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice."
    American Economic Review 97(3), 745–788.

Cohen, L. (2009). "Loyalty-Based Portfolio Choice." Review of Financial Studies 22(3), 1213–
    1245.

Coile, C., Diamond, P., Gruber, J., & Jousten, A. (2002). "Delays in Claiming Social Security
     Benefits." Journal of Public Economics 84(3), 357–385.

Cole, S., Paulson, A., & Shastry, G. K. (2014). "Smart Money? The Effect of Education on

                                                88
    Financial Outcomes." Review of Financial Studies 27(7), 2022–2051.

Cole, S., Paulson, A., & Shastry, G. K. (2016). "High School Curriculum and Financial
    Outcomes: The Impact of Mandated Personal Finance and Mathematics Courses." Journal
    of Human Resources 51(3), 656–698.

Collinson, P. (2012). "FSA Ban on Commission-Based Selling Sparks “Death of Salesman”
     Fears." The Guardian, London. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/30/fsa-
     ban-commission-selling-death (accessed 07/31/2017).

Conlisk, J. (1993). "The Utility of Gambling." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 6(3), 255–275.

Cook, P. J., & Clotfelter, C. T. (1993). "The Peculiar Scale Economies of Lotto." American
    Economic Review 83(3), 634–643.

Cookson, J. A. (2017). "When Saving Is Gambling." Journal of Financial Economics
    (Forthcoming).

Cooper, I., & Kaplanis, E. (1994). "Home Bias in Equity Portfolios, Inflation Hedging, and
    International Capital Market Equilibrium." Review of Financial Studies 7(1), 45–60.

Cronqvist, H. (2006). "Advertising and Portfolio Choice." Working Paper, Ohio State
    University.

Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. J. (2007). "The Technology of Skill Formation." American Economic
    Review 97(2), 31–47.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., & Schennach, S. M. (2010). "Estimating the Technology of Cognitive
    and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Econometrica 78(3), 883–931.

Cutler, D. M., & Zeckhauser, R. (2004). "Extending the Theory to Meet the Practice of
     Insurance." In: R. E. Litan, A. M. Santomero (Eds.), Brooknigs-Wharton Papers on
     Financial Services (pp. 1–53), Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Danes, S. M., & Haberman, H. (2004). "Evaluation of the NEFE High School Financial Planning
    Program 2003-04." National Endowment for Financial Education, Denver.

Das, S., Kuhnen, C. M., & Nagel, S. (2017). "Socioeconomic Status and Macroeconomic
     Expectations." 24045.

Davidoff, T., Brown, J., & Diamond, P. (2005). "Annuities and Individual Welfare." American
    Economic Review 95(5), 1573–1590.

De Bondt, W. F. M. (1993). "Betting on Trends: Intuitive Forecasts of Financial Risk and
    Return." International Journal of Forecasting 9(3), 355–371.

De Nardi, M., French, E., & Jones, J. B. (2009). "Life Expectancy and Old Age Savings."
    American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99(2), 110–115.

                                              89
De Nardi, M., French, E., & Jones, J. B. (2010). "Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of
    Medical Expenses." Journal of Political Economy 118(1), 39–75.

Deaton, A. (1991). "Saving and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica 59(5), 1221–1248.

Deaves, R., Lüders, E., & Luo, G. Y. (2009). "An Experimental Test of the Impact of
    Overconfidence and Gender on Trading Activity." Review of Finance 13(3), 555–575.

Defusco, A. A., & Paciorek, A. (2017). "The Interest Rate Elasticity of Mortgage Demand:
    Evidence From Bunching at the Conforming Loan Limit." American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy 9(1), 210–240.

Del Guercio, D., & Reuter, J. (2014). "Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Generate
    Alpha." Journal of Finance 69(4), 1673–1704.

DellaVigna, S., & Malmendier, U. (2004). "Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and
     Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2), 353–402.

DellaVigna, S., & Malmendier, U. (2006). "Paying Not to Go to the Gym." American Economic
     Review 96(3), 694–719.

DellaVigna, S., & Pope, D. (2017). "What Motivates Effort? Evidence and Expert Forecasts.".

DeMarzo, P. M., Kaniel, R., & Kremer, I. (2004). "Diversification as a Public Good: Community
   Effects in Portfolio Choice." Journal of Finance 59(4), 1677–1715.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., & Korgankar, S. (2016). "Deregulation, Competition and the Race
    to the Bottom." Harvard Business School Working Paper 17-008.

Dimmock, S. G., Kouwenberg, R., Mitchell, O. S., & Peijnenburg, K. (2016). "Ambiguity
   Aversion and Household Portfolio Choice Puzzles: Empirical Evidence." Journal of
   Financial Economics 119(3), 559–577.

Dorn, A., Dorn, D., & Sengmueller, P. (2015). "Trading as Gambling." Management Science
    61(10), 2376–2393.

Dorn, D., & Huberman, G. (2005). "Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and What
    They Do." Review of Finance 9(4), 437–481.

Dorn, D., & Sengmueller, P. (2009). "Trading as Entertainment?" Management Science 55(4),
    591–603.

Døskeland, T. M., & Hvide, H. K. (2011). "Do Individual Investors Have Asymmetric
    Information Based on Work Experience?" Journal of Finance 66(3), 1011–1041.

Drexler, A., Fischer, G., & Schoar, A. (2014). "Keeping It Simple: Financial Literacy and Rules
    of Thumb." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(2), 1–31.

Duarte, F., & Hastings, J. S. (2012). "Fettered Consumers and Sophisticated Firms: Evidence
                                              90
     from Mexico’s Privatized Social Security Market." National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper 18582.

Duflo, E., Gale, W. G., Liebman, J., Orszag, P., & Saez, E. (2006). "Savings Incentives for Low-
    and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4), 1311–1346.

Duflo, E., & Saez, E. (2003). "The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
    Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 118(3), 815–842.

Dushi, I., Munnell, A. H., Sanzenbacher, G. T., Webb, A., & Chen, A. (2016). "Do Households
    Save More When the Kids Leave Home?." Issue in Brief 16-8, Center for Retirement
    Research at Boston College.

Dushi, I., & Webb, A. (2004). "Household Annuitization Decisions: Simulations and Empirical
    Analyses." Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 3(2), 109–143.

Efrat, R. (2006). "The Evolution of the Bankruptcy Stigma." Theoretical Inquiries in Law 7(2),
     365–393.

Egan, M., Matvos, G., & Seru, A. (2016). "The Market for Financial Adviser Misconduct."
    Working Paper.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Pascu, I., & Cullen, M. R. (2012). "How General Are Risk
    Preferences? Choices under Uncertainty in Different Domains." American Economic
    Review 102(6), 2606–2638.

Eliaz, K., & Spiegler, R. (2006). "Contracting with Diversely Naive Agents." Review of
     Economic Studies 73(3), 689–714.

Ellison, G. (2005). "A Model of Add-On Pricing." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2), 585–
     637.

Ellison, G., & Ellison, S. (2009). "Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on the Internet."
     Econometrica 77(2), 427–452.

Elton, E. J., Gruber, M., & Busse, J. A. (2004). "Are Investors Rational? Choices among Index
     Funds Author(S):" Journal of Finance 59(1), 261–288.

Engelberg, J., & Parsons, C. A. (2011). "The Causal Impact of Media in Financial Markets."
    Journal of Finance 66(1), 67–97.

Engelberg, J., Sasseville, C., & Williams, J. (2012). "Market Madness? The Case of Mad
    Money." Management Science 58(2), 351–364.

Engelhardt, G. V., & Kumar, A. (2007). "Employer Matching and 401(k) Saving: Evidence from
    the Health and Retirement Study." Journal of Public Economics 91(10), 1920–1943.

                                                 91
Engen, E. M., Gale, W. G., & Scholz, J. K. (1994). "Do Saving Incentives Work?" Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 1994(1), 85–180.

Engen, E. M., Gale, W. G., & Scholz, J. K. (1996). "The Illusory Effects of Saving Incentives on
    Saving." Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4), 113–138.

Epstein, L. G., & Schneider, M. (2010). "Ambiguity and Asset Markets." Annual Review of
     Financial Economics 2(1), 315–346.

Eyster, E., & Rabin, M. (2005). "Cursed Equilibrium." Econometrica 73(5), 1623–1672.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. (2010). "Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual Fund
    Returns." Journal of Finance 65(5), 1915–1947.

Farrell, L., Hartley, R., Lanot, G., & Walker, I. (2000). "The Demand for Lotto: The Role of
     Conscious Selection." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18(2), 228–241.

Farrell, L., Morgenroth, E., & Walker, I. (1999). "A Time Series Analysis of UK Lottery Sales:
     Long and Short Run Price Elasticities." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61(4),
     513–526.

Fay, S., Hurst, E., & White, M. (2002). "The Household Bankruptcy Decision." American
     Economic Review 92(3), 706–718.

Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2017). "Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
    Households in 2016.".

Feenberg, D., & Skinner, J. (1989). "Sources of IRA Saving." Tax Policy and the Economy 3,
    25–46.

Feldstein, M. (1985). "The Optimal Level of Social Security Benefits." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 100(2), 303–320.

Feng, L., & Seasholes, M. S. (2005). "Do Investor Sophistication and Trading Experience
    Eliminate Behavioral Biases in Financial Markets?" Review of Finance 9(3), 305–351.

Fernandes, D., Lynch Jr., J. G., & Netemeyer, R. G. (2014). "Financial Literacy, Financial
    Education, and Downstream Financial Behaviors." Management Science 60(8), 1861–1883.

Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford University Press, Redwood
     City, CA.

Filiz-Ozbay, E., Guryan, J., Hyndman, K., Kearney, M. S., & Ozbay, E. Y. (2015). "Do Lottery
      Payments Induce Savings Behavior? Evidence from the Lab." Journal of Public Economics
      126, 1–24.

Finkelstein, A., & Poterba, J. M. (2002). "Selection Effects in the United Kingdom Individual
    Annuities Market." Economic Journal 112(January), 28–50.

                                               92
Finkelstein, A., & Poterba, J. M. (2004). "Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder
    Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market." Journal of Political Economy 112(1), 183–208.

Finkelstein, M. (1995). "Estimating the Frequency Distribution of the Numbers Bet on the
    California Lottery." Applied Mathematics and Computation 69(2–3), 195–207.

Fishburn, P. C. (1980). "A Simple Model for the Utility of Gambling." Psychometrika 45(4),
     435–448.

Fisher, K., & Statman, M. (2000). "Investor Sentiment and Stock Returns." Financial Analysts
     Journal 56(2), 16–23.

Foerster, S., Linnainmaa, J. T., Melzer, B. T., & Previtero, A. (2017). "Retail Financial Advice:
    Does One Size Fit All?" Journal of Finance (Forthcoming).

Foote, C. L., Gerardi, K., Goette, L., & Willen, P. S. (2008). "Just the Facts: An Initial Analysis
    of Subprime’s Role in the Housing Crisis." Journal of Housing Economics 17, 291–305.

Foote, C. L., Gerardi, K., & Willen, P. S. (2012). "Why Did So Many People Make So Many Ex-
    Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis." Federal Reserve Bank of
    Boston Public Policy Discussion Papers No. 12-2.

Foote, C. L., Loewenstein, L., & Willen, P. S. (2016). "Cross-Sectional Patterns of Mortgage
    Debt During the Housing Boom: Evidence and Implications." Working Paper, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Boston.

Forrest, D., Simmons, R., & Chesters, N. (2002). "Buying a Dream: Alternative Models of
     Demand for Lotto." Economic Inquiry 40(3), 485–496.

French, K., & Poterba, J. M. (1991). "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets."
    American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 81(2), 222–226.

French, K. R. (2008). "Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing." Journal of Finance
    63(4), 1537–1573.

Frey, B. S., & Meier, S. (2004). "Social Comparisons and Pro-Social Behavior: Testing
     “Conditional Cooperation” in a Field Experiment." American Economic Review 94(5),
     1717–1722.

Friedman, B., & Warshawsky, M. J. (1990). "The Cost of Annuities: Implications for Saving
     Behavior and Bequests." Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(1), 135–154.

Friedman, J. (2017). "Tax Policy and Retirement Savings." In: A. J. Auerbach, K. Smetters
     (Eds.), The Economics of Tax Policy Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Friedman, M. (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton University Press,
     Princeton, NJ.


                                                 93
Friedman, M., & Savage, L. J. (1948). "The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk." Journal
     of Political Economy 56(4), 279–304.

Frydman, C., Barberis, N., Camerer, C., Bossaerts, P., & Rangel, A. (2014). "Using Neural Data
    to Test a Theory of Investor Behavior: An Application to Realization Utility." Journal of
    Finance 69(2), 907–946.

Fudenberg, D., & Levine, D. K. (2006). "A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control." American
    Economic Review 96(5), 1449–1476.

Furletti, M., & Ody, C. (2006). "Measuring U.S. Credit Card Borrowing: An Analysis of the
     G.19’s Estimate of Consumer Revolving Credit." Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
     Payment Cards Center Discussion Paper No. 06-03.

Gabaix, X. (2015). "Boundedly Rational Dynamic Programming: A Sparse Approach." Working
    Paper, New York University.

Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2006). "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
    Suppression in Competitive Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2), 505–540.

Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., Li, D., Li, H., Resnick, S., & De Vries, C. G. (2016). "The Impact of
    Competition on Prices with Numerous Firms." Journal of Economic Theory 165, 1–24.

Gali, J. (1994). "Keeping up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice, and
     Asset Prices." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 26(1), 1–8.

Gallagher, J. (2014). "Learning about an Infrequent Event: Evidence from Flood Insurance Take-
     Up in the United States." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(3), 206–233.

Gallaher, S., Kaniel, R., & Starks, L. (2015). "Advertising and Mutual Funds: From Families to
     Individual Funds." Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 10329.

Ganong, P., & Noel, P. (2017). "Consumer Spending During Unemployment: Positive and
    Normative Implications." Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Gao, X., & Lin, T.-C. (2015). "Do Individual Investors Treat Trading as a Fun and Exciting
    Gambling Activity? Evidence from Repeated Natural Experiments." Review of Financial
    Studies 28(7), 2128–2166.

Garrett, T., & Sobel, R. S. (1999). "Gamblers Favor Skewness, Not Risk: Further Evidence from
    United States’ Lottery Games." Economics Letters 63(1), 85–90.

Gathergood, J. (2012). "Self-Control, Financial Literacy and Consumer over-Indebtedness."
    Journal of Economic Psychology 33(3), 590–602.

Gathergood, J., Mahoney, N., Stewart, N., & Weber, J. (2017). "How Do Individuals Repay
    Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic." National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper 24161.

                                               94
Gehrig, T. (1993). "An Information Based Explanation of the Domestic Bias in International
    Equity Investment." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95(1), 97–109.

Gelman, M., Kariv, S., Shapiro, M., Silverman, D., & Tadelis, S. (2014). "Harnessing Naturally
    Occurring Data to Measure the Response of Spending to Income." Science 345(6193), 212–
    215.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. (2015). "Money Doctors." Journal of Finance 70(1),
    91–114.

Gerardi, K., Goette, L., & Meier, S. (2010). "Financial Literacy and Subprime Mortgage
    Delinquency: Evidence from a Survey Matched to Administrative Data." Federal Reserve
    Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2010-10.

Gerardi, K., Lehnert, A., Sherlund, S. M., & Willen, P. S. (2008). "Making Sense of the
    Subprime Crisis." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2008(Fall), 69–145.

Gerber, A. S., & Rogers, T. (2009). "Descriptive Social Norms and Motivation to Vote:
    Everybody’s Voting and so Should You." Journal of Politics 71(1), 178–191.

Gervais, S., & Odean, T. (2001). "Learning to Be Overconfident." Review of Financial Studies
    14(1), 1–27.

Glaeser, E. L., & Scheinkman, J. (1998). "Neither a Borrower nor a Lender Be: An Economic
    Analysis of Interest Restrictions and Usury Laws." Journal of Law and Economics 41(1), 1–
    36.

Glaeser, E. L., & Shapiro, J. M. (2003). "The Benefits of the Home Mortgage Interest
    Deduction." Tax Policy and the Economy 17, 37–82.

Glaser, M., & Weber, M. (2007). "Overconfidence and Trading Volume." GENEVA Risk and
    Insurance Review 32(1), 1–36.

Glode, V. (2011). "Why Mutual Funds “Underperform.”" Journal of Financial Economics 99(3),
    546–559.

Goda, G. S., Manchester, C. F., & Sojourner, A. J. (2014). "What Will My Account Really Be
    Worth? Experimental Evidence on How Retirement Income Projections Affect Saving."
    Journal of Public Economics 119(C), 80–92.

Goetzmann, W. N., & Kumar, A. (2008). "Equity Portfolio Diversification." Review of Finance
    12(3), 433–463.

Goetzmann, W. N., & Peles, N. (1997). "Cognitive Dissonance and Mutual Fund Investors."
    Journal of Financial Research 20(2), 145–158.

Goldstein, N., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). "A Room with a Viewpoint: Using
    Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels." Journal of Consumer

                                               95
     Research 35(3), 472–482.

Golec, J., & Tamarkin, M. (1998). "Bettors Love Skewness, Not Risk, at the Horse Track."
    Journal of Political Economy 106(1), 205–225.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). "Implementation Intentions: Strong Effects of Simple Plans."
    American Psychologist 54(7), 493–503.

Gourinchas, P.-O., & Parker, J. (2001). "The Empirical Importance of Precautionary Saving."
    American Economic Review 91(2), 406–412.

Gourinchas, P.-O., & Parker, J. (2002). "Consumption over the Life Cycle." Econometrica 70(1),
    47–89.

Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., & Huang, H. (2009). "Investor Competence, Trading Frequency,
    and Home Bias." Management Science 55(7), 1094–1106.

Green, R. K., Hendershott, P. H., & Capozza, D. R. (1996). "Taxes, Mortgage Borrowing and
    House Prices." In: H. J. Aaron, W. G. Gale (Eds.), Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax
    Reform (pp. 171–210), Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Greenwood, R., & Shleifer, A. (2014). "Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns." Review
    of Financial Studies 27(3), 714–746.

Griffin, J. M., Harris, J., & Topaloglu, S. (2003). "The Dynamics of Institutional and Individual
     Trading." Journal of Finance 58(6), 2285–2320.

Grinblatt, M., Ikäheimo, S., Keloharju, M., & Knüpfer, S. (2016). "IQ and Mutual Fund Choice."
    Management Science 62(4), 924–944.

Grinblatt, M., & Keloharju, M. (2000). "The Investment Behavior and Performance of Various
    Investor Types: A Study of Finland’s Unique Data Set." Journal of Financial Economics
    55(1), 43–67.

Grinblatt, M., & Keloharju, M. (2001a). "How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
    Stockholdings and Trades." Journal of Finance 56(3), 1053–1073.

Grinblatt, M., & Keloharju, M. (2001b). "What Makes Investors Trade?" Journal of Finance
    56(2), 589–616.

Grinblatt, M., & Keloharju, M. (2009). "Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trading
    Activity." Journal of Finance 64(2), 549–578.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., & Linnainmaa, J. T. (2011). "IQ and Stock Market Participation."
    Journal of Finance 66(6), 2121–2164.

Gross, D., & Souleles, N. S. (2002a). "Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
    Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics

                                                96
     117(1), 149–185.

Gross, D., & Souleles, N. S. (2002b). "An Empirical Analysis of Personal Bankruptcy and
    Delinquency." Review of Financial Studies 15(1), 319–347.

Gross, T., Notowidigdo, M. J., & Wang, J. (2014). "Liquidity Constraints and Consumer
    Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates." Review of Economics and Statistics 96(3), 431–
    443.

Grubb, M. D. (2009). "Selling to Overconfident Consumers." American Economic Review
    99(5), 1770–1807.

Grubb, M. D., & Osborne, M. (2015). "Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning, and
    Bill Shock." American Economic Review 105(1), 234–271.

Gruber, M. (1996). "Another Puzzle: The Growth in Actively Managed Mutual Funds." Journal
    of Finance 51(3), 783–810.

Gugerty, M. K. (2007). "You Can’t Save Alone: Commitment in Rotating Savings and Credit
    Associations in Kenya." Economic Development and Cultural Change 55(2), 251–282.

Guiso, L., & Jappelli, T. (2008). "Financial Literacy and Portfolio Diversification." European
    University Institute Working Paper ECO 2008/31.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2008). "Trusting the Stock Market." Journal of Finance
    63(6), 2557–2600.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2013). "The Determinants of Attitudes toward Strategic
    Default on Mortgages." Journal of Finance.

Guiso, L., & Sodini, P. (2013). "Household Finance: An Emerging Field." In: G. M.
    Constantinides, M. Harris, R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance (pp.
    1397–1532), North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Gul, F., & Pesendorfer, W. (2001). "Temptation and Self-Control." Econometrica 69(6), 1403–
     1435.

Gul, F., & Pesendorfer, W. (2004). "Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption."
     Econometrica 72(1), 119–158.

Gurun, U. G., Matvos, G., & Seru, A. (2016). "Advertising Expensive Mortgages." Journal of
    Finance.

Guryan, J., & Kearney, M. S. (2008). "Gambling at Lucky Stores: Empirical Evidence from State
    Lottery Sales." American Economic Review 98(1), 458–473.

Guryan, J., & Kearney, M. S. (2010). "Is Lottery Gambling Addictive?" American Economic
    Journal: Economic Policy 2(3), 90–110.

                                               97
Hackethal, A., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (2012). "Financial Advisors: A Case of
    Babysitters?" Journal of Banking and Finance 36(2), 509–524.

Haider, S. J., & Stephens Jr., M. (2007). "Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle? Evidence
    Using Subjective Retirement Expectations." Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2),
    247–264.

Haisley, E., Mostafa, R., & Loewenstein, G. (2008). "Subjective Relative Income and Lottery
     Ticket Purchases." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 21(3), 283–295.

Haliassos, M., & Bertaut, C. C. (1995). "Why Do so Few Hold Stocks?" Economic Journal
     105(432), 1110–1129.

Hall, R. E. (1978). "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
     Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 86(6), 971–987.

Hamermesh, D. (1984). "Life-Cycle Effects on Consumption and Retirement." Journal of Labor
   Economics 2(3), 353–370.

Hastings, J. S., Hortaçsu, A., & Syverson, C. (2017). "Sales Force and Competition in Financial
     Product Markets: The Case of Mexico’s Social Security Privatization." Econometrica.

Hastings, J. S., Madrian, B. C., & Skimmyhorn, W. (2013). "Financial Literacy, Financial
     Education, and Economic Outcomes." Annual Review of Economics 5(1), 347–373.

Hastings, J. S., & Shapiro, J. M. (2013). "Fungibility and Consumer Choice: Evidence from
     Commodity Price Shocks." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), 1449–1498.

Hastings, J. S., & Washington, E. (2010). "The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior
     and Store Responses." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(2), 142–162.

Hastings, J., & Shapiro, J. M. (2018). "How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail
     Panel." Working Paper.

Heaton, J., & Lucas, D. (2000). "Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Background Risk."
    Economic Journal 110(460), 1–26.

Heidhues, P., & Kőszegi, B. (2015). "On the Welfare Costs of Naiveté in the US Credit-Card
    Market." Review of Industrial Organization 47(3), 341–354.

Heidhues, P., Kőszegi, B., & Murooka, T. (2016a). "Exploitative Innovation." American
    Economic Journal: Microeconomics 8(1), 1–23.

Heidhues, P., Kőszegi, B., & Murooka, T. (2016b). "Inferior Products and Profitable Deception."
    Working Paper.

Hilber, C. A. L., & Turner, T. (2014). "The Mortgage Interest Deduction and Its Impact on
     Homeownership Decisions." Review of Economics and Statistics 96(4), 618–637.

                                               98
Hilgert, M. A., Hogarth, J. M., & Beverly, S. G. (2003). "Household Financial Management: The
     Connection between Knowledge and Behavior." Federal Reserve Bulletin 89(7), 309–322.

Hines Jr., J. R., & Thaler, R. H. (1995). "Anomalies: The Flypaper Effect." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 9(4), 217–226.

Hogarth, R. M., & Kunreuther, H. (1995). "Decision-Making under Ignorance: Arguing With
    Yourself." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 10(1), 15–36.

Hong, H., Kubik, J. D., & Stein, J. (2004). "Social Interaction and Stock-Market Participation."
    Journal of Finance 59(1), 137–163.

Hong, H., Scheinkman, J., & Xiong, W. (2006). "Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles." Journal
    of Finance 61(3), 1073–1117.

Hortaçsu, A., & Syverson, C. (2004). "Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in
    the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 119(2), 403–456.

Hsieh, C.-T. (2003). "Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from the
    Alaska Permanent Fund." American Economic Review 93(1), 397–405.

Hu, W.-Y., & Scott, J. (2007). "Behavioral Obstacles in the Annuity Market." Financial Analysts
    Journal 63(6), 71–82.

Hubbard, R. G., Skinner, J., & Zeldes, S. P. (1994). "The Importance of Precautionary Motives
    in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
    Public Policy 40, 59–125.

Huberman, G. (2001). "Familiarity Breeds Investment." Review of Financial Studies 14(3), 659–
    680.

Huberman, G., & Jiang, W. (2006). "Offering versus Choice in 401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure
    and Number of Funds." Journal of Finance 61(2), 763–801.

Hung, A. A., Clancy, N., & Dominitz, J. (2011). "Investor Knowledge and Experience with
    Investment Advisers and Broker-Dealers." In: O. S. Mitchell, A. Lusardi (Eds.), Financial
    Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace (pp. 116–
    144), Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Hung, A. A., Parker, A., & Yoong, J. K. (2009). "Defining and Measuring Financial Literacy."
    RAND Labor and Population Working Paper 708.

Hurd, M. D. (1987). "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests." American Economic
    Review 77(3), 298–312.

Hurd, M. D. (1989). "Mortality Risk and Bequests." Econometrica 57(4), 779–813.


                                               99
Hurd, M. D., & Rohwedder, S. (2013). "Heterogeneity in Spending Change at Retirement."
    Journal of the Economics of Ageing 1–2, 60–71.

Hurd, M. D., Van Rooij, M., & Winter, J. (2011). "Stock Market Expectations of Dutch
    Households." Journal of Applied Econometrics 26(3), 416–436.

Huysentruyt, M., & Read, D. (2010). "How Do People Value Extended Warranties? Evidence
    from Two Field Surveys." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 40(3), 197–218.

Hvidkjaer, S. (2008). "Small Trades and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns." Review of
    Financial Studies 21(3), 1123–1151.

Inderst, R., & Ottaviani, M. (2009). "Misselling through Agents." American Economic Review
     99(3), 883–908.

Inderst, R., & Ottaviani, M. (2012a). "Financial Advice." Journal of Economic Literature 50(2),
     494–512.

Inderst, R., & Ottaviani, M. (2012b). "How (Not) to Pay for Advice: A Framework for Consumer
     Financial Protection." Journal of Financial Economics 105(2), 393–411.

Inderst, R., & Ottaviani, M. (2012c). "Competition through Commissions and Kickbacks."
     American Economic Review 102(2), 780–809.

Ingersoll, J. E., & Jin, L. J. (2013). "Realization Utility with Reference-Dependent Preferences."
     Review of Financial Studies.

Inkmann, J., Lopes, P., & Michaelides, A. (2011). "How Deep Is the Annuity Market
    Participation Puzzle?" Review of Financial Studies 24(1), 279–319.

Investment Company Institute (2017). "2017 Investment Company Fact Book: A Review of
     Trends and Activities in the Investment Company Industry." Investment Company Institute,
     Washington, D.C.

Ivković, Z., Sialm, C., & Weisbenner, S. (2008). "Portfolio Concentration and the Performance
    of Individual Investors." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43(3), 613–655.

Ivković, Z., & Weisbenner, S. (2005). "Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the
    Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments." Journal of Finance 60(1),
    267–306.

Jackson, A. (2003). "The Aggregate Behavior of Individual Investors." Working Paper, London
     Business School.

Jain, P. C., & Wu, J. (2000). "Truth in Mutual Fund Advertising: Evidence on Future
      Performance and Fund Flows." Journal of Finance 55(2), 937–958.

James, E., & Song, X. (2001). "Annuities Markets around the World: Money’s Worth and Risk

                                               100
     Intermediation." Center for Research on Pensions and Welfare Policies Working Paper No.
     16.

Jensen, M. C. (1968). "The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964." Journal of
     Finance 23(2), 389–416.

Johnson, D., Parker, J., & Souleles, N. S. (2006). "Household Expenditure and the Income Tax
    Rebates of 2001." American Economic Review 96(5), 1589–1610.

Johnson, E., Appelt, K., Knoll, M., & Westfall, J. (2016). "Preference Checklists: Selective and
    Effective Choice Architecture for Retirement Decisions." Research Dialogue No. 127,
    TIAA Institute, New York, NY.

Johnson, E., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., & Kunreuther, H. (1993). "Framing, Probability
    Distortions, and Insurance Decisions." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7(1), 35–51.

Johnson, R., Burman, L., & Kobes, D. (2004). "Annuitized Wealth at Older Ages: Evidence from
    the Health and Retirement Study." The Urban Institute, Washington, D.C.

Joint Committee on Taxation (2017). "Estimates Of Federal Tax Expenditures For Fiscal Years
     2016-2020." Prepared for the House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate
     Committee on Finance.

Jump$tart (2006). "Financial Literacy Shows Slight Improvement Among Nation’s High School
    Students." Jump$tart, Washington, D.C.

Kahneman, D., & Lovallo, D. (1993). "Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive
    Perspective on Risk Taking." Management Science 39(1), 17–31.

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk."
    Econometrica 47(2), 263–292.

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). "The Psychology of Preferences." Scientific American
    246, 160–173.

Kaniel, R., Liu, S., Saar, G., & Titman, S. (2012). "Individual Investor Trading and Return
    Patterns around Earnings Announcements." Journal of Finance 67(2), 639–680.

Kaniel, R., Saar, G., & Titman, S. (2008). "Individual Investor Trading and Stock Returns."
    Journal of Finance 63(1), 273–310.

Kaplan, G., & Violante, G. L. (2014). "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
    Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82(4), 1199–1239.

Kaplan, G., Violante, G. L., & Weidner, J. (2014). "The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth." Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 2014(1), 77–138.

Kast, F., Meier, S., & Pomeranz, D. (2016). "Saving More in Groups: Field Experimental

                                               101
     Evidence from Chile." Harvard Business School Working Paper 12-060.

Kaustia, M., & Knüpfer, S. (2012). "Peer Performance and Stock Market Entry." Journal of
    Financial Economics 104(2), 321–338.

Kearney, M. S., Tufano, P., Guryan, J., & Hurst, E. (2010). "Making Savers Winners: An
    Overview of Prize-Linked Savings Products." National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper 16433.

Kelley, E. K., & Tetlock, P. C. (2013). "How Wise Are Crowds? Insights from Retail Orders and
     Stock Returns." Journal of Finance 68(3), 1229–1265.

Kelly, M. (1995). "All Their Eggs in One Basket: Portfolio Diversification of US Households."
     Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27(1), 87–96.

Kennickell, A. B. (1998). "Multiple Imputation in the Survey of Consumer Finances." Statistical
    Journal of the IAOS 33(1), 143–151.

Kennickell, A. B. (2000). "Wealth Measurement in the Survey of Consumer Finances:
    Methodology and Directions for Future Research." Prepared for the May 2000 Annual
    Meetings of the American Association for Public Opinion Research, Portland, OR.

Kennickell, A. B., & Woodburn, R. L. (1999). "Consistent Weight Design for the 1989, 1992
    and 1995 SCFs, and the Distribution of Wealth." Review of Income and Wealth 45(2), 193–
    215.

Keynes, J. M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. MacMillan,
    London.

Keys, B. J., Pope, D. G., & Pope, J. C. (2016). "Failure to Refinance." Journal of Financial
    Economics.

Kézdi, G., & Willis, R. (2011). "Household Stock Market Beliefs and Learning." National
    Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17614.

Kim, H., Maurer, R., & Mitchell, O. S. (2016). "Time Is Money: Rational Life Cycle Inertia and
    the Delegation of Investment Management." Journal of Financial Economics 121(2), 427–
    447.

Kimball, M. S., & Shumway, T. (2006). "Investor Sophistication and the Participation, Home
   Bias, Diversification, and Employer Stock Puzzles." Unpublished Manuscript, University of
   Michigan.

Klee, E. (2008). "How People Pay: Evidence from Grocery Store Data." Journal of Monetary
    Economics 55(3), 526–541.

Koch, C., & Schmidt, C. (2010). "Disclosing Conflicts of Interest – Do Experience and
    Reputation Matter?" Accounting, Organizations and Society 35(1), 95–107.

                                               102
Koijen, R. S. J., Hemert, O. Van, & Nieuwerburgh, S. Van (2009). "Mortgage Timing." Journal
     of Financial Economics.

Koijen, R. S. J., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., & Yogo, M. (2016). "Health and Mortality Delta:
     Assessing the Welfare Cost of Household Insurance Choice." Journal of Finance 71(2),
     957–1010.

Kosowski, R. (2011). "Do Mutual Funds Perform When It Matters Most to Investors? US Mutual
    Fund Performance and Risk in Recessions and Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Finance
    1(3), 607–664.

Kőszegi, B., & Rabin, M. (2006). "A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 121(4), 1133–1165.

Kőszegi, B., & Rabin, M. (2007). "Reference-Dependent Risk Attitudes." American Economic
    Review 97(4), 1047–1073.

Kőszegi, B., & Rabin, M. (2009). "Reference-Dependent Consumption Plans." American
    Economic Review 99(3), 909–936.

Kotlikoff, L. J., & Spivak, A. (1981). "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market." Journal
     of Political Economy1 89(2), 372–391.

Kridel, D. J., Lehman, D. E., & Weisman, D. L. (1993). "Option Value, Telecommunications
    Demand, and Policy." Information Economics and Policy 5(2), 125–144.

Kuchler, T., & Pagel, M. (2017). "Sticking to Your Plan: The Role of Present Bias for Credit
    Card Paydown.".

Kuchler, T., & Zafar, B. (2016). "Personal Experiences and Expectations about Aggregate
    Outcomes." Working Paper.

Kueng, L. (2018). "Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers." The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics.

Kuhn, P., Kooreman, P., Soetevent, A., & Kapteyn, A. (2011). "The Effects of Lottery Prizes on
    Winners and Their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery." American
    Economic Review 101(5), 2226–2247.

Kuhnen, C. M., & Miu, A. C. (2017). "Socioeconomic Status and Learning from Financial
    Information." Journal of Financial Economics 124(2), 349–372.

Kunreuther, H., Ginsberg, R., Miller, L., Sagi, P., Slovic, P., Borkan, B., & Katz, N. (1978).
    Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.

Kunreuther, H., & Pauly, M. V. (2004). "Neglecting Disaster: Why Don’t People Insure Against
    Large Losses?" Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 28(1), 5–21.


                                              103
Kunreuther, H., Pauly, M. V., & McMorrow, S. (2013). Insurance and Behavioral Economics:
    Improving Decisions in the Most Misunderstood Industry. Cambridge University Press,
    New York, NY.

Kyle, A. S., & Wang, F. A. (1997). "Speculation Duopoly with Agreement to Disagree: Can
    Overconfidence Survive the Market Test?" Journal of Finance 52(5), 2073–2090.

Lacko, J. M., & Pappalardo, J. K. (2004). "The Effect of Mortgage Broker Compensation
    Disclosures on Consumers and Competition : A Controlled Experiment." Federal Trade
    Commission Bureau of Economics Staff Report.

Laibson, D. (1997). "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 112(2), 443–478.

Laibson, D. (2015). "Why Don’t Present-Biased Agents Make Commitments." American
    Economic Review 105(5), 267–72.

Laibson, D., Maxted, P., Repetto, A., & Tobacman, J. (2017). "Estimating Discount Functions
    with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle." National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper 13314.

Laibson, D., Repetto, A., & Tobacman, J. (1998). "Self-Control and Saving for Retirement."
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998(1), 91–196.

Laibson, D., Repetto, A., & Tobacman, J. (2003). "A Debt Puzzle." In: P. Aghion, R. Frydman,
    J. Stiglitz, M. Woodford (Eds.), Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern
    Economics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps. (pp. 228–266), Princeton University Press,
    Princeton, NJ.

Lambrecht, A., & Skiera, B. (2006). "Paying Too Much and Being Happy about It: Existence,
   Causes, and Consequences of Tariff-Choice Biases." Journal of Marketing Research 43(2),
   212–223.

Langer, E. (1975). "The Illusion of Control." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32(2),
    311–328.

Lefgren, L., & McIntyre, F. (2009). "Explaining the Puzzle of Cross-State Differences in
    Bankruptcy Rates." Journal of Law and Economics 52(2), 367–393.

Lehnert, A., & Maki, D. M. (2007). "Consumption, Debt and Portfolio Choice: Testing the
    Effect of Bankruptcy Law." In: S. Agarwal, B. W. Ambrose (Eds.), Household Credit
    Usage (pp. 55–76), Palgrave Macmillan, New York, NY.

Lerner, J. S., Li, Y., Valdesolo, P., & Kassam, K. S. (2015). "Emotion and Decision Making."
    Annual Review of Psychology 66(1), 799–823.

Liebman, J., & Luttmer, E. F. P. (2015). "Would People Behave Differently If They Better
    Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment." American Economic

                                              104
     Journal: Economic Policy 7(1), 275–299.

Linnainmaa, J. T., Melzer, B. T., & Previtero, A. (2016). "The Misguided Beliefs of Financial
    Advisors." Working Paper.

Livshits, I., MacGee, J., & Tertilt, M. (2010). "Accounting for the Rise in Consumer
    Bankruptcies." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2), 165–193.

Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). "Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and
    Task Motivation." American Psychologist 57(9), 705–717.

Lockwood, B. B. (2017). "Optimal Income Taxation with Present Bias.".

Lockwood, L. M. (2012). "Bequest Motives and the Annuity Puzzle." Review of Economic
    Dynamics 15(2), 226–243.

Loewenstein, G., Cain, D. M., & Sah, S. (2011). "The Limits of Transparency: Pitfalls and
    Potential of Disclosing Conflicts of Interest." American Economic Review: Papers &
    Proceedings 101(3), 423–428.

Loewenstein, G., Sunstein, C. R., & Golman, R. (2014). "Disclosure: Psychology Changes
    Everything." Annual Review of Economics 6(1), 391–419.

Lou, D. (2014). "Attracting Investor Attention through Advertising." Review of Financial
     Studies 27(6), 1797–1829.

Lusardi, A. (2004). "Saving and the Effectiveness of Financial Education." In: O. S. Mitchell, S.
    P. Utkus (Eds.), Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance (pp.
    157–184), Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Lusardi, A., Keller, P., & Keller, A. (2009). "New Ways to Make People Save: A Social
    Marketing Approach." In: A. Lusardi (Ed.), Overcoming the Saving Slump Univeristy of
    Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2007). "Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning: New
    Evidence from the Rand American Life Panel." University of Michigan Retirement
    Research Center Working Paper 157.

Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2011). "Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
    Retirement Well-Being." In: O. S. Mitchell, A. Lusardi (Eds.), Financial Literacy:
    Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace (pp. 17–39), Oxford
    University Press, New York, NY.

Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2014). "The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory
    and Evidence." Journal of Economic Literature 52(1), 5–44.

Lusardi, A., Samek, A. S., Kapteyn, A., Glinert, L., Hung, A. A., & Heinberg, A. (2014). "Visual
    Tools and Narratives: New Ways to Improve Financial Literacy." National Bureau of

                                               105
    Economic Research Working Paper 20229.

Lusardi, A., & Scheresberg, C. de B. (2013). "Financial Literacy and High-Cost Borrowing in
    the United States." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18969.

Lusardi, A., & Tufano, P. (2015). "Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and Overindebtedness."
    Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 14(4), 332–368.

Luttmer, E. F. P. (2005). "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 963–1002.

Madrian, B. C. (2013). "Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral
    Economics Perspective." In: Matching Contributions for Pensions: A Review of
    International Experience.

Madrian, B. C., & Shea, D. (2001). "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
    and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1149–1187.

Malkiel, B. G. (1995). "Returns from Investing in Equity Mutual Funds 1971 to 1991." Journal
    of Finance 50(2), 549–572.

Malmendier, U., & Nagel, S. (2011). "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences
    Affect Risk Taking?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373–416.

Malmendier, U., & Nagel, S. (2016). "Learning from Inflation Experiences." Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 131(1), 53–87.

Mandell, L. (2008). "Financial Literacy of High School Students." In: J. J. Xiao (Ed.), Handbook
   of Consumer Finance Research (pp. 163–83), Springer, New York, NY.

Mariger, R. (1987). "A Life-Cycle Consumption Model with Liquidity Constraints: Theory and
    Empirical Results." Econometrica 55(3), 533–557.

Massa, M., & Simonov, A. (2006). "Hedging, Familiarity and Portfolio Choice." Review of
    Financial Studies 19(2), 633–685.

Mastrobuoni, G., & Weinberg, M. (2009). "Heterogeneity in Intra-Monthly Consumption
    Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement." American Economic Journal: Economic
    Policy2 1(2).

Mayer, C., Pence, K., & Sherlund, S. M. (2009). "The Rise in Mortgage Defaults." Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 23(1), 27–50.

Mehra, R., & Prescott, E. C. (1985). "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle." Journal of Monetary
    Economics 15, 145–161.

Meier, S., & Sprenger, C. (2010). "Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing."
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1), 193–210.

                                              106
Melzer, B. T. (2011). "The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday Lending
    Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 517–555.

Meng, J., & Weng, X. (2016). "Can Prospect Theory Explain the Disposition Effect? A New
   Perspective on Reference Points." Working Paper, Peking University.

Mian, A., & Sufi, A. (2009). "The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
    the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1449–1496.

Michel-Kerjan, E., Lemoyne de Forges, S., & Kunreuther, H. (2012). "Policy Tenure Under the
    U.S. National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)." Risk Analysis 32(4), 644–658.

Milkman, K. L., & Beshears, J. (2009). "Mental Accounting and Small Windfalls: Evidence
    from an Online Grocer." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 71, 384–394.

Miravete, E. J. (2003). "Choosing the Wrong Calling Plan? Ignorance and Learning." American
    Economic Review 93(1), 297–310.

Mitchell, O. S., Poterba, J. M., Warshawsky, M. J., & Brown, J. (1999). "New Evidence on the
    Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities." American Economic Review 89(5), 1299–1318.

Mitchell, O. S., & Utkus, S. P. (2003). "The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution
    Plans." In: O. S. Mitchell, K. Smetters (Eds.), The Pension Challenge: Risk Transfers and
    Retirement Income Security (pp. 33–70), Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Mitton, T., & Vorkink, K. (2007). "Equilibrium Underdiversitication and the Preference for
     Skewness." Review of Financial Studies 20(4), 1255–1288.

Modigliani, F., & Brumberg, R. (1954). "Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
   Interpretation of Cross-Section Data." In: K. K. Kurihara (Ed.), Post Keynesian Economics
   (pp. 388–436), Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.

Monalto, C. P., & Sung, J. (1996). "Multiple Imputation in The 1992 Survey of Consumer
   Finances." Journal of Financial Counseling and Planning 7, 133–141.

Moore, D. L. (2003). "Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge, Behavior,
   Attitudes, and Experiences." Technical Report 03-39, Social and Economic Sciences
   Research Center, Washington State University, Pullman, WA.

Morgan, D., Strain, M. R., & Seblani, I. (2012). "How Payday Credit Access Affects Overdrafts
    and Other Outcomes." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44(2–3), 519–531.

Morse, A. (2011). "Payday Lenders: Heroes or Villains?" Journal of Financial Economics
    102(1), 28–44.

Morse, A., & Shive, S. (2011). "Patriotism in Your Portfolio." Journal of Financial Markets
    14(2), 411–440.


                                              107
Moskowitz, T. J. (2000). "Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into Stock-
   Picking Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses: Discussion." Journal of Finance
   55(4), 1695–1703.

Mullainathan, S., Noeth, M., & Schoar, A. (2012). "The Market for Financial Advice: An Audit
    Study." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17929.

Müller, S., & Weber, M. (2010). "Financial Literacy and Mutual Fund Investments: Who Buys
    Actively Managed Funds?" Schmalenbach Business Review 62, 126–153.

Munnell, A. H., & Sundén, A. (2002). "401(k)s and Company Stock: How Can We Encourage
   Diversification?." Issue in Brief 9, Center for Retirement Research in Boston College,
   Boston, MA.

Nunes, J. C. (2000). "A Cognitive Model of People’s Usage Estimations." Journal of Marketing
    Research 37(4), 397–409.

O’Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (1999). "Doing It Now or Later." American Economic Review
   89(1), 103–124.

Odean, T. (1998a). "Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit When All Traders Are above Average."
    Journal of Finance 53(6), 1887–1934.

Odean, T. (1998b). "Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?" Journal of Finance 53(5),
    1775–1798.

Odean, T. (1999). "Do Investors Trade Too Much?" American Economic Review 89(5), 1279–
    1298.

Olafsson, A., & Pagel, M. (2018). "The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle: New Evidence from
     Personal Finances." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24405.

Osili, U. O., & Paulson, A. (2014). "Crises and Confidence: Systemic Banking Crises and
     Depositor Behavior." Journal of Financial Economics.

Oster, E. (2002). "Dreaming Big: Why Do People Play the Powerball?." Unpublished Thesis,
     Harvard University.

Pagel, M. (2017). "A News-Utility Theory for Inattention and Delegation in Portfolio Choice."
    Working Paper, Columbia Business School.

Panis, C. W. A., & Brien, M. J. (2016). "Financial Asset Holdings of Households in the United
     States in 2013." Advanced Analytical Consulting Group Report.

Parker, J. (2017). "Why Don’t Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from a 25 Million
    Dollar Experiment." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(4), 153–83.

Parker, J., Souleles, N. S., Johnson, D., & McClelland, R. (2013). "Consumer Spending and the

                                              108
    Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008." American Economic Review 103(6), 2530–2553.

Pashchenko, S. (2013). "Accounting for Non-Annuitization." Journal of Public Economics 98,
    53–67.

Peijnenburg, K., Nijman, T., & Werker, B. J. M. (2017). "Health Cost Risk: A Potential Solution
     to the Annuity Puzzle." The Economic Journal (Early View), 1–28.

Pew Charitable Trusts (2012). "Who Borrows, Where They Borrow, and Why - Pew Center on
    the States." Payday Lending in America Report Series, Pew Charitable Trusts, Philadelphia,
    PA.

Phelps, E. S., & Pollak, R. A. (1968). "On Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium
    Growth." Review of Economic Studies 35(2), 185–199.

Polkovnichenko, V. (2005). "Household Portfolio Diversification: A Case for Rank-Dependent
    Preferences." Review of Financial Studies 18(4), 1467–1502.

Ponce, A., Seira, E., & Zamarripa, G. (2017). "Borrowing on the Wrong Credit Card? Evidence
    from Mexico." American Economic Review.

Poterba, J. M. (2003). "Employer Stock and 401(k) Plans." American Economic Review 93(2),
     398–404.

Poterba, J. M., Venti, S. F., & Wise, D. A. (1994). "Targeted Retirement Saving and the Net
     Worth of Elderly Americans." American Economic Review 84(2), 180–185.

Poterba, J. M., Venti, S. F., & Wise, D. A. (1995). "Do 401(k) Contributions Crowd out Other
     Personal Saving?" Journal of Public Economics 58(1), 1–32.

Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1998). "The Red and the Black: Mental Accounting of Savings
     and Debt." Marketing Science 17(1), 4–28.

Prelec, D., & Simester, D. (2001). "Always Leave Home Without It: A Further Investigation of
     the Credit-Card Effect on Willingness to Pay." Marketing Letters 12(1), 5–12.

Previtero, A. (2014). "Stock Market Returns and Annuitization." Journal of Financial Economics
     113(2), 202–214.

Rabin, M. (2000). "Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem."
    Econometrica 68(5), 1281–1292.

Reichling, F., & Smetters, K. (2015). "Optimal Annuitization with Stochastic Mortality and
    Correlated Medical Costs." American Economic Review 105(11), 3273–3320.

Reuter, J. (2015). "Revisiting the Performance of Broker-Sold Mutual Funds." Working Paper,
    Boston College.

Reuter, J., & Zitzewitz, E. (2006). "Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising and Bias in the
                                              109
    Financial Media." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 197–227.

Rigbi, O. (2013). "The Effects of Usury Laws: Evidence from the Online Loan Market." Review
    of Economics and Statistics 95(4), 1238–1248.

Roger, P., & Broihanne, M.-H. (2007). "Efficiency of Betting Markets and Rationality of
    Players: Evidence from the French 6/49 Lotto." Journal of Applied Statistics 34(6), 645–
    662.

Rogers, T., Milkman, K. L., John, L., & Norton, M. I. (2015). "Beyond Good Intentions:
    Prompting People to Make Plans Improves Follow-through on Important Tasks."
    Behavioral Science and Policy 1(2), 33–41.

Rottke, S., & Klos, A. (2016). "Savings and Consumption When Children Move Out." Review of
     Finance 20(6), 2349–2377.

Roussanov, N. (2010). "Diversification and Its Discontents: Idiosyncratic and Entrepreneurial
    Risk in the Quest for Social Status." Journal of Finance 65(5), 1755–1788.

Ru, H., & Schoar, A. (2017). "Do Credit Card Companies Screen for Behavioral Biases?."
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22360.

Saez, E. (2009). "Details Matter: The Impact of Presentation and Information on the Take-up of
    Financial Incentives for Retirement Saving." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
    1(1), 204–228.

Sah, S., & Loewenstein, G. (2014). "Nothing to Declare: Mandatory and Voluntary Disclosure
     Leads Advisors to Avoid Conflicts of Interest." Psychological Science 25(2), 575–584.

Sah, S., Loewenstein, G., & Cain, D. M. (2013). "The Burden of Disclosure: Increased
     Compliance With Distrusted Advice." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 104(2),
     289–304.

Salganik, M. J., Dodds, P. S., & Watts, D. J. (2006). "Experimental Study of Inequality and
     Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market." Science 311, 854–856.

Samuelson, W. F., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). "Status Quo Bias in Decision-Making." Journal of
   Risk and Uncertainty 1(1), 7–59.

Savov, A. (2014). "The Price of Skill: Performance Evaluation by Households." Journal of
    Financial Economics 112(2), 213–231.

Schade, C., Kunreuther, H., & Koellinger, P. (2012). "Protecting Against Low-Probability
    Disasters: The Role of Worry." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 25(5), 534–543.

Scheinkman, J., & Xiong, W. (2003). "Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles." Journal of
    Political Economy 111(6), 1183–1220.


                                              110
Schoemaker, P. J. H., & Kunreuther, H. (1979). "An Experimental Study of Insurance
    Decisions." Journal of Risk and Insurance 46(4), 603–618.

Scholz, J. K., Seshadri, A., & Khitatrakun, S. (2006). "Are Americans Saving “Optimally” for
    Retirement?" Journal of Political Economy 114(4), 607–643.

Schuh, S., & Stavins, J. (2010). "Why Are (Some) Consumers (Finally) Writing Fewer Checks?
    The Role of Payment Characteristics." Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 1745–1758.

Schuh, S., & Stavins, J. (2011). "How Consumers Pay: Adoption and Use of Payments." Federal
    Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No. 12-2.

Schuh, S., & Stavins, J. (2015). "How Do Speed and Security Influence Consumers’ Payment
    Behavior?" Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Current Policy Perspectives No. 15-1.

Seasholes, M. S., & Wu, G. (2007). "Predictable Behavior, Profits, and Attention." Journal of
    Empirical Finance 14(5), 590–610.

Seasholes, M. S., & Zhu, N. (2010). "Individual Investors and Local Bias." Journal of Finance
    65(5), 1987–2010.

Segal, U., & Spivak, A. (1990). "First Order versus Second Order Risk Aversion." Journal of
    Economic Theory 51(1), 111–125.

Shapira, Z., & Venezia, I. (2001). "Patterns of Behavior of Professionally Managed and
    Independent Investors." Journal of Banking and Finance 25(8), 1573–1587.

Shapiro, J. M. (2005). "Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp Nutrition
    Cycle." Journal of Public Economics 89, 303–325.

Shea, J. (1995). "Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis." American
    Economic Review 85(1), 186–200.

Shefrin, H. M., & Statman, M. (1985). "The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride
    Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Finance 40(3), 777–790.

Shefrin, H. M., & Thaler, R. H. (1988). "The Behavioral Life-Cycle Hypothesis." Economic
    Inquiry 26(4), 609–643.

Shoven, J. B., & Slavov, S. N. (2014). "Does It Pay to Delay Social Security?" Journal of
    Pension Economics and Finance 13(October), 1–24.

Simon, C., Warner, J. T., & Pleeter, S. (2015). "Discounting, Cognition, and Financial
    Awareness: New Evidence from a Change in the Military Retirement System." Economic
    Inquiry 53(1), 318–334.

Simon, J., Smith, K., & West, T. (2010). "Price Incentives and Consumer Payment Behaviour."
    Journal of Banking and Finance 34(8), 1759–1772.

                                              111
Sinclair, S. H., & Smetters, K. (2004). "Health Shocks and the Demand for Annuities."
     Congressional Budget Office Technical Paper Series 2004-09.

Sirri, E. R., & Tufano, P. (1998). "Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows." Journal of Finance
      53(5), 1589–1622.

Skiba, P. M., & Tobacman, J. (2011). "Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?." Vanderbilt
    University Law School Working Paper 11-13.

Skimmyhorn, W. (2016). "Assessing Financial Education: Evidence from Boot Camp."
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(2), 322–343.

Stango, V., & Zinman, J. (2008). "The Price Is Not Right (Not Even on Average): Exponential
    Growth Bias, Present-Biased Perceptions, and Household Finance." Working Paper,
    Dartmouth College.

Stango, V., & Zinman, J. (2009). "Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance." Journal of
    Finance 64(6), 2807–2849.

Stango, V., & Zinman, J. (2014). "Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from
    Shocks to the Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees." Review of Financial Studies 27(4), 990–
    1030.

Stango, V., & Zinman, J. (2016). "Borrowing High versus Borrowing Higher: Price Dispersion
    and Shopping Behavior in the U.S. Credit Card Market." Review of Financial Studies 29(4),
    979–1006.

Stavins, J. (2000). "Credit Card Borrowing, Delinquency, and Personal Bankruptcy." New
     England Economic Review 2000(July-August), 15–30.

Stephens Jr., M. (2001). "The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks." Review of
    Economics and Statistics 83(1), 28–36.

Stephens Jr., M. (2003). "“3rd of Tha Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
    Consumption Between Checks?" American Economic Review 93(1), 406–422.

Stephens Jr., M., & Toohey, D. (2017). "Changes in Nutrient Intake at Retirement." Working
    Paper.

Stephens Jr., M., & Unayama, T. (2011). "The Consumption Response to Seasonal Income:
    Evidence from Japanese Public Pension Benefits." American Economic Journal: Applied
    Economics 3(4), 86–118.

Stolper, O., & Walter, A. (2017). "Birds of a Feather: The Impact of Social Proximity on the
     Propensity to Follow Financial Advice." Working Paper.

Strotz, R. H. (1955). "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization." Review of
     Economic Studies 23(3), 165–180.

                                              112
Svenson, O. (1981). "Are We All Less Risky and More Skillful than Our Fellow Drivers?" Acta
    Psychologica 47, 143–148.

Sydnor, J. (2010). "(Over)Insuring Modest Risks." American Economic Journal: Applied
    Economics 2(4), 177–199.

Tapia, W., & Yermo, J. (2008). "Fees in Individual Account Pension Systems: A Cross-Country
    Comparison." OECD Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions 27.

Telyukova, I. A. (2013). "Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt Puzzle."
    Review of Economic Studies 80(3), 1148–1177.

Telyukova, I. A., & Wright, R. (2008). "A Model of Money and Credit, with Application to the
    Credit Card Debt Puzzle." Review of Economic Studies 75(2), 629–647.

Tesar, L. L., & Werner, I. M. (1995). "Home Bias and High Turnover." Journal of International
    Money and Finance 14(4), 467–492.

Thaler, R. H., & Benartzi, S. (2004). "Save More TomorrowTM: Using Behavioral Economics to
    Increase Employee Saving." Journal of Political Economy 112(S1), S164–S187.

Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). "An Economic Theory of Self-Control." Journal of
    Political Economy 89(2), 392–406.

Thaler, R. H., & Ziemba, W. T. (1988). "Anomalies : Parimutuel Betting Markets : Racetracks
    and Lotteries." Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2), 161–174.

Train, K. E., McFadden, D. L., & Ben-Akiva, M. (1987). "The Demand for Local Telephone
     Service: A Fully Discrete Model of Residential Calling Patterns and Service Choices."
     RAND Journal of Economics 18(1), 109–123.

Tufano, P. (2009). "Consumer Finance." Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, 227–247.

Turra, C. M., & Mitchell, O. S. (2008). "The Impact of Health Status and Out-of-Pocket Medical
    Expenditures on Annuity Valuation." In: J. Ameriks, O. S. Mitchell (Eds.), Recalibrating
    Retirement Spending and Saving (pp. 227–251), Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). "Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases."
    Science 185(4157), 1124–1131.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). "Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative
    Representation of Uncertainty." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5(4), 297–323.

U.S. Department of Defense (2006). "Report on Predatory Lending Practices Directed at
     Members of the Armed Forces and Their Dependents." U.S. Department of Defense,
     Arlington, VA.

U.S. Executive Office of the President (2016). "Social and Behavioral Sciences Team Annual

                                             113
     Report." Executive Office of the President and National Science and Technology Council,
     Washington, D.C.

Uppal, R., & Wang, T. (2003). "Model Misspecification and Underdiversification." Journal of
    Finance 58(6), 2465–2486.

Urban, C., Schmeiser, M., Michael Collins, J., & Brown, A. (2018). "The Effects of High School
    Personal Financial Education Policies on Financial Behavior." Economics of Education
    Review.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., & Veldkamp, L. (2009). "Information Immobility and the Home Bias
    Puzzle." Journal of Finance 64(3), 1187–1215.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., & Veldkamp, L. (2010). "Information Acquisition and Under-
    Diversification." Review of Economic Studies 77(2), 779–805.

Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., & Alessie, R. (2011). "Financial Literacy and Stock Market
    Participation." Journal of Financial Economics 101(2), 449–472.

Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., & Alessie, R. (2012). "Financial Literacy, Retirement Planning, and
    Household Wealth." Economic Journal 122(560), 449–478.

Vanguard (2017). "How America Saves 2017: Vanguard 2016 Defined Contribution Plan Data."
    Valley Forge, PA.

Venti, S. F., & Wise, D. A. (1990). "Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving? Evidence from
    Consumer Expenditure Surveys." Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3), 661–698.

Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2004). "Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does “Irrationality”
     Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions." In: M. Gertler, K.
     Rogoff (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 (pp. 139–194), MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA.

Von Gaudecker, H.-M. (2015). "How Does Household Portfolio Diversification Vary with
    Financial Literacy and Financial Advice?" Journal of Finance 70(2), 489–507.

Warner, J. T., & Pleeter, S. (2001). "The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
    Downsizing Programs." American Economic Review 91(1), 33–53.

Weber, E. U., Johnson, E. J., Milch, K. F., Chang, H., Brodscholl, J. C., & Goldstein, D. G.
   (2007). "Asymmetric Discounting in Intertemporal Choice: A Query-Theory Account:
   Research Article." Psychological Science 18(6), 516–523.

Weber, M., & Camerer, C. (1998). "The Disposition Effect in Securities Trading: An
   Experimental Analysis." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 33(2), 167–184.

White, K. (1975). "Consumer Choice and Use of Bank Credit Cards: A Model and Cross-Section
    Results." Journal of Consumer Research 2(1), 10–18.

                                               114
White, M. (1998). "Why Don’t More Households File for Bankruptcy?" Journal of Law,
    Economics, and Organization 14(2), 205–231.

Willis, L. (2011). "The Financial Education Fallacy." American Economic Review: Papers &
     Proceedings 101(3), 429–434.

Woodward, S. E., & Hall, R. E. (2012). "Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-Optimal
   Shopping Effort: Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence." American Economic Review
   102(7), 3249–3276.

Yaari, M. E. (1965). "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer."
    Review of Economic Studies 32(2), 137–150.

Zhang, S., Sabarwal, T., & Gan, L. (2015). "Strategic or Nonstrategic: The Role of Financial
    Benefit in Bankruptcy." Economic Inquiry 53(2), 1004–1018.

Zinman, J. (2007a). "Household Borrowing High and Lending Low under No-Arbitrage."
    Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

Zinman, J. (2007b). "Where Is the Missing Credit Card Debt? Clues and Implications." Working
    Paper, Dartmouth College.

Zinman, J. (2009a). "Debit or Credit?" Journal of Banking and Finance 33, 358–366.

Zinman, J. (2009b). "Where Is the Missing Credit Card Debt? Clues and Implications." Review
    of Income and Wealth 55(2), 249–265.

Zinman, J. (2010). "Restricting Consumer Credit Access: Household Survey Evidence on Effects
    around the Oregon Rate Cap." Journal of Banking and Finance 34(3), 546–556.

Zinman, J. (2015). "Household Debt: Facts, Puzzles, Theories, and Policies." Annual Review of
    Economics 7, 251–276.




                                              115
