NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE NIH FUND EDGE SCIENCE?
Mikko Packalen
Jay Bhattacharya
Working Paper 24860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24860

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2018

We thank Bruce Weinberg, Joel Blit, Jeremy Goldhaber-Fiebert, David Studdert, Partha
Bhattacharyya, Neesha Joseph, and Walter Schaeffer for discussions. We also thank seminar
participants at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of Illinois at Chicago Institute of
Government and Public Affairs, Stanford Medical School, and the National Bureau of Economic
Research working group on Invention in an Aging Society for helpful feedback. Finally, we thank
the National Institute of Aging for funding for this research through grant P01-AG039347. We
are solely responsible for the content and errors in the paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does the NIH Fund Edge Science?
Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 24860
July 2018
JEL No. I15,O31
ABSTRACT
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) plays a critical role in funding scientific endeavors in
biomedicine that would be difficult to finance via private sources. One important mandate of the
NIH is to fund innovative science that tries out new ideas, but many have questioned the NIH’s
ability to fulfill this aim. We examine whether the NIH succeeds in funding work that tries out
novel ideas. We find that novel science is more often NIH funded than is less innovative science
but this positive result comes with several caveats. First, despite the implementation of initiatives
to support edge science, the preference for funding novel science is mostly limited to work that
builds on novel basic science ideas; projects that build on novel clinical ideas are not favored by
the NIH over projects that build on well-established clinical knowledge. Second, NIH’s general
preference for funding work that builds on basic science ideas, regardless of its novelty or
application area, is a large contributor to the overall positive link between novelty and NIH
funding. If funding rates for work that builds on basic science ideas and work that builds on
clinical ideas had been equal, NIH’s funding rates for novel and traditional science would have
been the same. Third, NIH’s propensity to fund projects that build on the most recent advances
has declined over the last several decades. Thus, in this regard NIH funding has become more
conservative despite initiatives to increase funding for innovative projects.

Mikko Packalen
University of Waterloo
Department of Economics
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
Canada
packalen@uwaterloo.ca
Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) both supports and sets the agenda
of biomedical science. With an annual budget of over $37 billion, NIH funds the work of
300,000 researchers and scientists across the globe (National Institutes of Health, 2017a).
As such, the NIH plays a pivotal role in setting the incentives that biomedical scientists
have to try out novel ideas in their work, a vital aspect of fruitful scientific investigation
(Collins 2015; Sampat 2012).
The regular exercise of trying out new ideas, which we term edge science, is a key
contributor to the advance of scientific disciplines (e.g. Marshall 1929; Usher 1920; Kuhn
1962, 1977). The willingness of scientists in a field to try out new ideas generated by
others is at least as important as the generation of ideas. For when new ideas are first
born, they are often raw and poorly understood (Kuhn 1962, 1977). Hence, the attention
of many scientists is needed to help an idea develop from the germ of an idea to a
transformative idea. Extensive debate over a new idea is needed to develop it, to test its
validity, and to determine the areas where the new idea might be worthwhile. Ideas that
have been vetted at least partially are also more likely to be seen by fellow scientists as
likely to produce important results, and thus draw the attention of other scientists.
For scientists, however, edge science is inherently risky, since it can be difficult to
predict whether a new idea will produce fruitful results. Working scientists often point to
failure as a precursor to success, but there is no guarantee that a particular idea will work
(e.g. Livio 2013; Firestein 2015; Popovian 2016; Zaringhalam 2016). Public support for
edge science, even if failure is likely, can help establish appropriate incentives for novel
work in biomedical science.
Moreover, without explicit incentives to pursue edge science, there is too little novel
work in science due to the coordination problem that is inherent in the formation of
robust scientific communities to new areas of investigation (Besancenot and Vranceanu
2015; Packalen and Bhattacharya 2017). Thus, in effect, NIH support for the trying out of
new ideas in science can solve a failure in the market for the production of novel science.
While NIH strives to “foster fundamental creative discoveries [and] innovative
research strategies” (National Institutes of Health 2017b), some researchers have

1

questioned its ability to effectively recognize and cultivate truly groundbreaking science
(e.g. Cook-Deegan 1996; Nicholson and Ioannidis 2012; Kolata 2009). Based on the
types of research and researchers that the NIH funds, some have even concluded that the
NIH underfunds “discovery, creativity and innovation” (Cech 2015).
Both scientific and political considerations may lead the NIH to underfund the trying
out of new ideas. First, because the NIH visibly spends public money, it needs to show
discrete manifestations of improvements in health, as well as technological
breakthroughs, arising from its supported research (Hedge and Sampat 2015). This
consideration leads to preference to support ideas that have already shown promise rather
than edge science. Second, NIH scientific review panels, for reasons related to their
constitution, tend to reward projects that are evidently feasible over projects that are
novel (e.g. Langer 2012; Nicholson and Ioannidis 2012; Alberts et al. 2014; Geman and
Geman 2016). In addition, the changing demographics of biomedical scientists can
exacerbate potential gaps in support for novel work (e.g. Kaiser 2014; Daniels 2015;
Lauer et al. 2017; Levitt and Levitt 2017). To the extent that early-career scientists pursue
novel research paths more often than do experienced scholars, the graying of grant
recipients can lead to decreased support for novel science.
In this paper, we provide a quantitative assessment of whether NIH policies
encourage or impede the trying out of new ideas. We first determine the novelty of each
biomedical publication based on its textual content. We then compare the frequency of
NIH funding for novel papers against the frequency of NIH funding for papers that build
on well-established ideas. This comparison reveals to what extent NIH funding practices
reward the pursuit of edge science.
Our findings offer qualified support for NIH’s stated mission to support innovative
research. We find that novel contributions are more often NIH supported than are
contributions that only build on well-established ideas. But while this positive link
between novelty and NIH funding is present for contributions that build on novel basic
science ideas, it is absent from contributions that build on novel clinical ideas. Moreover,
once we account for the differences in funding rates across idea types (for example,
contributions that build on advances in genomics receive NIH support much more often
than do contributions that only build on clinical ideas), we find that novel science and

2

traditional science receive NIH support at about the same rate. This finding suggests that
typically the NIH is able to direct funds to innovative areas of investigation (such as both
basic and applied work on genomics) but the NIH is not able to direct funds to innovative
individual projects within fields. In addition to these substantive findings, our analysis
contributes by putting forward a systematic approach that can be used to quantify the
novelty preferences of any funding agency.
Despite the importance of NIH support of edge science, there has been surprisingly
little research quantifying its extent. Prior research has focused on measuring the effect of
NIH funding on the productivity of scientists as measured by publications, citation
counts, and patents (e.g. Murray et al. 2016; Jacob and Lefgren 2011a, 2011b; Azoulay et
al. 2011, 2017; Blume-Kohout 2012; Blume-Kohout et al. 2015; Li 2017; Li and Agha
2015; Li et al. 2017). Though these outputs are important, they are not quantifiable
measures of edge science.
The focus in citation analyses of NIH funding, for instance, has been on capturing
the production of high-impact science rather than what kind of science is being produced
– novel or more conventional. While work on identifying NIH support for such acts of
genius is important, from the perspective of optimal science policy it is also valuable to
understand whether NIH succeeds in its aim of favoring novel science. For, as argued
above, advances that later turn out to be transformative are often not well elaborated
when they are first born. Scientists who are willing to try out the new ideas as inputs to
their research thus play an important role in developing the ideas to mature advances. As
argued above, the NIH can serve a useful role by funding such edge science. It is thus
valuable to offer a quantitative assessment of NIH’s novelty preferences.
Our approach to identifying edge science follows Packalen (2018), which examines
how the tendency to pursue edge science varies across countries. This approach allows
each paper included in the analysis to contribute on multiple dimensions of knowledge,
and the novelty of an idea input is determined relative to application of other comparable
ideas in the same research area. This methodology extended the approach developed in
Packalen and Bhattacharya (2016, 2017).
The balance of the paper proceeds in the standard order: methods, results, discussion,
and conclusion.

3

2. Methods
Our analysis covers over 24 million research articles in the MEDLINE database.
MEDLINE is a comprehensive database of published biomedical research articles
published between 1950-2017. To determine the ideas upon which each paper builds, we
employ the Unified Medical Language System (“UMLS”) metathesaurus, which is a
curated and controlled vocabulary of over 5 million biomedical terms. For each paper in
the MEDLINE database, we determine which UMLS terms appear and what idea type
those terms represent. We determine the idea type based on the UMLS semantic category
of each term. There are 127 UMLS semantic categories for terms; among these categories
are “Gene and Genome”, “Neoplastic Process”, and “Quantitative Concept.”. In our
analysis, each UMLS semantic category represents one idea type. We determine the
research area of the paper based on the journal where the paper was published. Journal
category is assigned by the National Library of Medicine. There are 125 categories,
including “Cardiology”, “General Surgery” and “Molecular Biology.”
We conduct our analysis at a contribution level, where contribution is defined as a
link from a paper to an (idea type, research area) pair. The underlying assumption is that
each paper that is linked to an (idea type, research area) pair contributes to the scientific
debate of how the idea functions when applied to the specific research area. When a
paper is linked to multiple (idea type, research area) pairs, we assume that the paper
represents multiple contributions because the paper has the potential to contribute to
multiple research areas and idea types – it can enhance our understanding on multiple
dimensions.
To determine which contributions represent novel science, we determine the
vintage of each term based on the year that the term first appears in the MEDLINE
database. We refer to the year of first appearance of each idea as the cohort of the idea.
For each contribution we then determine the cohort of the newest idea input that is linked
to the contribution, which we refer to as idea input vintage. In our approach, we consider
contributions that build on at least one relatively recent idea to be novel, while
contributions that build on well-established ideas represent more traditional science.

4

This methodology for identifying novel contributions from the text of research
articles builds on several earlier analyses. The closest related analysis is Packalen (2018),
which introduced the contribution-level approach for identifying edge science. We refer
the reader to this earlier work for lists of examples of ideas captured by this approach as
well as descriptive statistics on the MEDLINE database in general and on the estimated
vintage of these ideas and on how often the ideas have been used in the biomedical
literature. A related previous analysis had employed a paper-level approach for
identifying novel ideas using the UMLS metathesaurus and the MEDLINE database
(Packalen and Bhattacharya 2017), which in turn built on Packalen and Bhattacharya
(2016) in which an n-gram approach was used to identify ideas and novel contributions
based on the text of articles in the MEDLINE database. This methodology identifies a
nearly complete history of the ideas of biomedicine (both important and obscure), going
back to the middle of the 20th century.
We identify the NIH funding status of each paper from the MEDLINE database.
A paper where any of its authors is reported to have acknowledged NIH funding for the
project is assigned “with NIH funding” status, and any paper where none of the authors is
reported to have acknowledged NIH funding for the project is assigned “without NIH
funding” status. The advantage of using paper-level NIH funding acknowledgements as
the source of NIH funding information, instead of data on funded NIH grant proposals, is
that the former gives information on projects that were actually completed with NIH
funding. This distinction matters because of a potential disconnect between funding
proposals and actual research. If a scientist agrees with the commonly held perception
that NIH review committees are conservative in funding decisions, but is inclined to
pursue novel work nevertheless, it may make sense to hide the novelty – at least to some
degree – in funding applications. In any case, the type of work scientists do is more
important – as far as the social benefits of science are concerned – than the work that
scientists promise to do when applying for funding. Grantmanship is an important topic
but is largely separate from the focus of the analysis pursued here.
We limit the analysis to papers which first author has a U.S. affiliation (for papers
published before 2014 MEDLINE mostly has affiliation information for the first author).
This restriction is important because scientists working in the U.S. are much more likely

5

to build on new ideas compared to the average across all countries in biomedicine
(Packalen 2018) and because the NIH disproportionately funds U.S. biomedical
scientists. Hence, if non-U.S. papers were included in the analysis, the results would
reflect also the relative scientific frontier position of U.S. scientists on average and the
NIH’s differential propensity to fund U.S. vs. non-U.S. scientists. By focusing only on
papers which first author is in the U.S., our results will reflect a comparison of the
vintage of ideas that NIH funded scientists tend to build on in their work (i.e. their
propensity to pursue edge science) and the vintage of the ideas that comparable scientists
without NIH funding tend to build on in their work.
3. Results
3.1 Aggregate Relationship Between Novelty and NIH Funding
We first examine how the share of NIH funded contributions varies by the idea input
vintage. Recall that idea input vintage captures the year that the newest idea that the
contribution builds upon was introduced in the literature. Our goal is to uncover whether
NIH funding is directed disproportionately to projects that try out ideas introduced to the
literature more recently, in line with the NIH’s goal of supporting innovative science. The
overall results for contributions across all idea types and research areas are shown in
Figure 1 for contributions published between 2010 and 2016. The figure depicts the
fraction of contributions that are in papers with NIH funding (the vertical axis) as a
function of the idea input vintage (the horizontal axis). The horizontal dashed line in
Figure 1 represents the average share of contributions funded by the NIH over all cohorts.
The results in Figure 1 suggest an inverted “U” shape to the relationship between
NIH funding and novelty of idea inputs. The share of research supported by the NIH is
the highest for papers that build on ideas that are relatively new but not too recent; there
appears to be a substantial time lag for funding work on a new idea. The NIH funding
rate is lower for contributions that build on the most recent ideas (post-2005 cohorts) than
it is for contributions that build on a bit more mature ideas (1990-2005 cohorts), but the
share of NIH support is lowest for contributions that only reference well-established

6

knowledge i.e. ideas introduced to the literature a long time ago (pre-1970 cohorts). Thus,
NIH funding practices seem to favor novel work with a 7 to 10-year delay. The
magnitude of these idea-vintage related NIH funding differences is also considerable: the
NIH funding rate is over 55% for contributions that make use of 10 to 25-year-old ideas,
whereas it is only about 45% for contributions that either build on only well-established
knowledge or build on some very recent ideas.

Figure 1: Share of NIH Funding by Novelty of Idea Inputs (2010-2016): All Idea Types.
Calculated based on 1,478,475 biomedical research papers published during 2010-2016.
The horizontal axis captures the idea input vintage (the cohort of a contribution is the year
when the newest idea input used in the contribution was introduced to the literature). Later
(earlier) cohort years represent more novel (more conventional) science. The vertical axis
captures the rate of NIH funding. The markers capture the mean NIH funding rate for each
idea input vintage. The solid line represents a non-parametric regression line estimate. The
dashed line represents the average funding rate across all cohorts.

Figure 2 shows the same relationship for two earlier decades, namely 1990s (top left
panel) and 2000s (top right panel), as well as for two sub-periods of the current decade,

7

namely years 2010-2014 (bottom left panel) and 2015-2016 (bottom right panel). The
results in Figure 2 show that also during the earlier decades the NIH funded novel science
at higher rates than it funded traditional science. However, unlike in the 2010s, in the
1990s the NIH funded even contributions that built on the most recent ideas at a higher
rate than it funded contributions that only built on well-established ideas. That is, the
funding penalty for the most novel work appears to be a recent phenomenon – in the
1990s there was no delay in funding brand new ideas. Thus, in this regard the NIH
appears to have become more conservative in its support for edge science over time.

Figure 2: Share of NIH Funding by Novelty of Idea Inputs: for 1990s (top left), 2000s (top
left), 2010-2014 (bottom left) and 2015-2016 (bottom right). Results in these panels are
calculated based on 1,651,429 (1,049,553) [1,093,170] {385,305} biomedical research
papers published during 1990-1999 (2000-2009) [2014-2015] {2015-2016}. In each panel,
the horizontal axis captures the idea input vintage, with later (earlier) cohort years
representing more novel (more conventional) science, and the vertical axis captures the
rate of NIH funding. The markers capture the mean NIH funding rate for each idea input
vintage. The solid line represents a non-parametric regression line estimate. The dashed
line represents the average funding rate across all cohorts.

8

3.2 Link Between Novelty and NIH Funding by Idea Type and Research Area
Figure 3 shows the relationship between novelty and NIH funding separately for four
idea types: Genes and Genome (top left panel), Amino Acid, Peptide, or Proteins (top
right panel), Neoplastic Process (bottom right panel), and Pharmacologic Substance
(bottom left panel). Like in Figure 1, these results are for papers published between 2010
and 2016. The dashed line in each panel indicates that average level of NIH support for
contributions that build on an idea from the idea type.

Figure 3: Share of NIH Funding by Novelty of Idea Inputs for Four Examples of Idea
Types: Genes and Genome (top left), Amino Acid, Peptide, or Proteins (top right),
Neoplastic Process (bottom right), and Pharmacologic Substance (bottom left). Calculated
based on biomedical research papers published during 2010-2016. In each panel, the
horizontal axis captures the idea input vintage, with later (earlier) cohort years representing
more novel (more conventional) science, and the vertical axis captures the rate of NIH
funding. The markers capture the mean NIH funding rate for every idea input vintage. The
solid line represents a non-parametric regression line estimate. The dashed line represents
the average funding rate across all cohorts.

9

The results in Figure 3 show that NIH funding practices reward novelty for work on
some idea types but not for other idea types. The top panels of Figure 3 show that work
that references genes or proteins is more likely to receive funding when the it mentions a
relatively new gene or protein compared to work that only mentions genes or proteins
first introduced to the literature a long time ago. Bottom right panel of Figure 3 shows
that papers that reference ideas in the neoplastic process category are somewhat less
likely to receive funding when they build on an idea in this category that is of a more
recent vintage. Bottom left panel of Figure 3 shows a similar finding for drugs: papers
that mention a new drug are much less likely to be NIH funded than are papers that only
mention older drugs. This last finding likely reflects a decision by the NIH to focus on
funding research on drugs that are no longer under patent as pharmaceutical companies
have a reduced incentive to investigate the properties of such drugs.
The results in Figure 3 thus indicate that NIH overall preference for novel work is
heterogeneous across idea types. This, together with the variance in average funding rates
across idea types (as indicated by dashed lines in each panel of Figure 3), raises the
prospect that the link between novelty and NIH funding (as shown in Figure 1) is driven
by NIH’s preference for funding certain idea types and research areas where a lot of
progress is taking place, rather than by NIH’s preference for funding novel work within
idea types and research areas. Perhaps, for example, the results are driven by the fact that
NIH is very favorable to any research that makes use of either novel or well-established
advances in genomics (this fact is evident by the high average funding rate indicated by
the dashed line in Panel A of Figure 3).
To investigate this possibility, we calculated the NIH funding rate by cohort of the
newest idea while holding the average funding rate the same across all (idea type,
research area) pairs. In this calculation, we allow the funding rate to vary only across
cohorts within each (idea type, research area) pair. To achieve this objective, we first
determine for each (idea type, research area) pair how often papers linked to it receive
NIH support across all cohorts. We then determine, for each cohort, how much NIH
funding papers linked to that cohort receive relative to the average among all cohorts
linked to the same (idea type, research area) pair. We use this ratio to adjust the number
of observed NIH funded papers accordingly for each (idea type, research area) pair. This

10

way, an NIH funded contribution linked to an (idea type, research area) pair where
contributions receive funding, say, 80% of the time across all cohorts is only counted as
half a contribution relative to a contribution linked to an (idea type, research area) pair
where contributions receive funding 40% of the time across all cohorts. As a result, the
funding rate for an (idea type, research area) pair is above the average funding rate only
for those cohorts for which the funding rate of the cohort is above the average funding
rate for that (idea type, research area) pair across all cohorts. The results for this
calculation, which in effect controls for differences in NIH funding rates across idea
types and research areas, are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Share of NIH Funding by Novelty of Idea Inputs: If Funding Rates Were
Constant Across Idea Types and Research Areas. Calculated based on 1,478,475
biomedical research papers published during 2010-2016. The horizontal axis captures the
idea input vintage, with later (earlier) cohort years representing more novel (more
conventional) science. The vertical axis captures the rate of NIH funding. The markers
capture the mean NIH funding rate for each idea input vintage. The solid line represents a
non-parametric regression line estimate. The dashed line represents the average funding
rate across all cohorts.

11

The results shown in Figure 4 still indicate an inverted U-shaped relationship
between novelty of idea inputs and NIH funding, but quantitatively the results are now
quite different. The highest NIH funding rate for novel work is now only a little above
the funding rate for contributions that build on well-established ideas, and the funding
rate for work that builds on the most recent ideas is now significantly below the average
funding rate across all cohorts. Together with the unadjusted results shown in Figure 1,
this result suggests that while the NIH has been successful in funding innovative science,
this success has been due to its differential support for certain idea types where many
ideas are relatively novel (such as genomics). Conversely, the results imply that within
research areas and idea types the NIH has not been able to funnel resources to the most
innovative projects.
Table 1 summarizes the results for 28 largest categories of the 127 idea types
represented by the UMLS semantic type taxonomy (by contrast with Figure 3 which
showed idea type specific results for four idea types). The average of the results for the
remaining 99 idea types are summarized in the last row. Columns 1a and 1b, respectively,
list the idea type and whether the idea type represents basic science ideas, clinical ideas
or miscellaneous ideas. Columns 2a-2d report descriptive statistics: the number of
contributions linked to the idea type regardless of the cohort the contribution (column
2a), the share of contributions with NIH funding (column 2b), the number of novel
contributions linked to the idea type (column 2c), and the share of novel contributions
with NIH funding (column 2d). For these calculations, a novel contribution is defined as
a contribution that builds on an idea that is at most 15 years old at the beginning of the
sample period (idea cohorts 1995-2016 for the 2010-2016 sample period). The numbers
across the rows in column 2b indicate that there is a lot of variation in NIH’s propensity
to fund ideas depending on the idea type, and that this propensity is generally higher for
basic science idea types than it is for clinical idea types. The heterogeneity in NIH
support across idea types also implies that our main results cannot be simply explained by
the mechanical delay induced by the grant review process.
Column 3 reports the main result: a summary statistic that captures NIH’s relative
propensity to fund novel work. We refer to this statistic as the edge funding ratio. We
calculate the edge funding ratio by dividing the share of novel contributions with funding

12

by the share of non-novel contributions with NIH funding. Here a novel contribution is
defined as discussed above (i.e. a contribution that builds on an idea that is at most 15
years old), and a non-novel contribution is defined as a contribution that builds only on
ideas introduced to the literature in the year 1970 or earlier. An edge funding ratio of 1.10
(0.90) means that the NIH’s propensity to fund novel science is 10% higher (10% lower)
than is the NIH’s propensity to fund traditional science. We color each cell based on the
relative propensity: red indicates an edge funding ratio above 1.20 (NIH’s funding
practices strongly favor novel work), orange indicates an edge funding ratio between 1.10
and 1.20 (NIH’s funding practices are favorable to novel work), and blue indicates an
edge funding ratio below 0.90 (NIH’s funding practices favor traditional science).
The results in column 3 show that among work linked to basic science idea types, the
NIH generally funds work that builds on novel ideas considerably more often than it
funds traditional science. This link between novel work and NIH funding is not present
for clinical idea types (with the exception of the Laboratory Procedure category) but the
link appears to be present for some miscellaneous idea types including the category
Quantitative Concept. These findings reinforce the findings drawn earlier based on Figure
3. The NIH’s propensity to fund innovative science varies considerably across idea types,
and while its propensity to fund novel science is robust for basic science idea types (most
notably genetics and proteomics) it is not present for most clinical idea types.
Column 4a reports adjusted estimates from a specification which controls for
differences in funding rates across idea types. The results correspond to the hypothetical
scenario that NIH funding rates were equal across all idea types but may vary across
research areas and across idea cohorts. The cells for individual idea types are empty
because the results are the same as in the baseline specification (column 3) when only
one idea type is included in the analysis. Column 4b reports estimates from a
specification which controls for differences in funding rates across research areas
(identified from journal categories). The results correspond to the hypothetical case that
NIH funding rates were equal across research areas but might vary across idea types and
across idea cohorts. Column 4c reports estimates from a specification which controls for
differences in funding rates across idea types and research areas, similar to the approach
employed in the analysis reported in Figure 4. The results correspond to the hypothetical

13

scenario that funding rates are equal for all (idea type, research area) pairs but may vary
across idea cohorts within each (idea type, research area pair).
Together with the result in the first row of column 3, the results in the first row of
columns 4a, 4b and 4c imply that the overall positive link between novelty and NIH
funding rates is largely driven by funding difference across idea types, rather than
funding differences across research areas or funding differences within specific idea
types or research areas. For controlling for only differences across idea types decreases
the edge funding ratio from 1.26 to 1.05, controlling for only differences across idea
types decreases the edge funding ratio from 1.26 to 1.14, and controlling on both
dimensions decreases the edge funding ratio to 1.04. Controlling for differences across
idea types thus has the largest impact. Quantitatively, the fact that the edge funding ratio
is only 1.04 after controlling for differences in funding rates across idea types and
research areas implies that, on average in biomedicine the NIH’s ability to direct
resources to innovative projects within idea types and research areas is at best only
modest. A comparison of the results in the other rows of column 3 against the results in
the corresponding row of column 4b further demonstrates that controlling for funding rate
differences across research areas has only a modest impact on the edge funding ratio.
Columns 5a-5d report results for four time periods: 1990s, 2000s, 2010-2014, and
2015-2016. For most idea types, the results are relatively stable over time, indicating that
variation across idea types reflects systematic differences in NIH’s propensity to fund
novel work rather than random variations.
Table 2 reports the edge funding ratio for different (idea type, research area) pairs,
with idea type on the vertical axis and research area on the horizontal axis. By contrast,
Table 1 showed edge funding ratios by idea type. The columns of Table 2 report the edge
funding ratio for each of the 22 largest research areas, as determined by the number of
contributions linked to each journal category; the last column summarizes the result for
the 103 remaining research areas. The cells are left empty for those (idea type, research
area) combinations for which there are less than 100 novel contributions linked to it. The
results in the first and last row, as well as the rows for the three idea types with the most
novel contributions linked to them (genes, proteins, and drugs) show little variation
across research areas.

14

This result reinforces the earlier finding that most of the variation in the novelty-NIH
funding link is driven by differences across idea types rather than by differences across
research areas. For other idea types, there is a bit more variation across research areas
(and also many more empty cells) but this likely mostly reflects random variations due to
the small number of novel contributions based on which the estimates for many such cells
are calculated rather than systematic variations in the link between novelty and NIH
funding across research areas.
4. Discussion
Taken together, our results show that, while the NIH continues to provide support for
work on new ideas in biomedicine, its support for the most novel ideas has waned in
recent decades. Furthermore, much of NIH’s support for novelty stems from fieldspecific funding priorities, with fields that are more likely to have featured fast progress
in recent decades (such as genomics) receiving greater NIH support compared to fields
that have not experienced as fast a rate of scientific progress in recent decades. Less
positively, our results show that within fields, the NIH generally does not discriminate in
its support between newer and older ideas.
Our results provide indirect support for the idea that the NIH review committees are
risk-averse: within given fields, biomedical research contributions that build on brand
new ideas report having NIH support less often than do contributions that build on ideas
that are relatively new but have had some opportunity to mature. A plausible explanation
for this pattern is that contributions in the former category – the most novel projects – are
the most likely to be seen as infeasible or too risky.
However, our evidence also suggests that there is considerably heterogeneity in the
NIH’s attitude toward novelty depending on the type of the idea that a project builds
upon. Projects that build on a novel basic science idea (especially a recently discovered
gene or protein) are more likely to be funded than are projects that build on comparable
older ideas. By contrast, the novelty-NIH funding link is not present for clinical ideas.
Thus, while we find consistent NIH support for edge science linked to genomics and
concepts in subcellular biology more generally, other types of edge science in

15

biomedicine are generally less likely to be NIH supported than are comparable projects
that build on more traditional ideas.
Our analysis does not reveal the mechanisms behind this heterogeneity. It is well
known that NIH has provided generous support for research linked to genomics in recent
decades (e.g. Joyner et al. 2016). But this preference to fund genomics related work does
not explain the positive link between novelty and frequency of NIH support among
projects that build on advances in genomics. Hence, further research on the mechanisms
that determine the presence of a link between NIH support and edge science is warranted.
The fact that, after controlling variations in in funding rates across idea types and
research areas, there is no link between novelty and NIH funding suggests, taken as a
whole, NIH review panels are either unwilling to reward novelty or are not able to
discern which research projects are more novel. This is true despite the fact that
innovation is one of the main criteria that review panels are asked to use in evaluating
grant applications. To the extent that rewarding novelty within idea types and research
areas is infeasible, it may be that the only feasible approach for directing funds to novel
work is to provide ample funding to entire scientific fields that are thought to be
advancing at a faster rate than others. For example, current funding rates for genomics
related work – which are significantly higher than funding rates are in general – could be
justified by the fact that in recent decades this area has advanced at a faster rate than have
other areas.
There are, of course, inherent risks in directing a disproportionate share of funds to
certain scientific fields. Many of these risks have been discussed in the context of
examining the desirability of projects that exemplify “big science” and “big biology”
(e.g. Rosbash 2011; Alberts 2012; Petsko 2009; Vermeulen et al. 2010; Peifer 2017;
Joyner et al. 2016). When a top-down approach to research resource allocation is
adopted, the funds may end up being directed to areas that turn out to be less fruitful than
expected, at the expense of funding a more diverse and thus less risky portfolio of
research projects. Moreover, inertia in funding decisions will likely keep some areas
well-funded long past the eventual stagnation of these fields. It is also questionable
whether funding agencies or anyone can know in advance which discipline or organism
holds the key to the next important development in biomedicine.

16

These risks of a less diversified funding portfolio must be weighed against the
benefits. Our finding that the novelty-NIH funding link is at best fragile when comparing
contributions within idea types and research areas suggest that the alternative to top-down
research resource allocation – letting individual scientists choose research directions
more freely and trying to direct funds to innovative projects rather than innovative fields
– may not be any better an approach in terms of facilitating vibrant scientific
communities that have strong incentives to pursue also novel research paths.
There are at least two potential explanations for our finding that over the last three
decades NIH has become more conservative in its support for work that builds on the
very latest ideas. First, it may be that review committees have become more cautious in
terms of funding very novel work. This is consistent with related recent results that have
indicated that biomedical researchers themselves have become more conservative in their
research choices (Rzhetzky et al. 2015). Second, perhaps the newest ideas that scientists
have generated in the 2000s have not been as widely and rapidly accepted by the
scientific community as the newest ideas that were generated during 1990s. This second
explanation is consistent with concerns about stagnation in technological progress during
the 2000s in general, and in medicine more specifically (e.g. Le Fanu 2011), a hypothesis
that is supported by empirical evidence showing that health advances have become less
common and harder to achieve in recent decades (Bloom et al. 2017).
We cannot tell which of these explanations is correct (or if either are correct) from
the results we present in the paper, though our results contribute to this discussion.
However, if researchers and funding agencies have become more conservative at the
same time as biomedical research has stagnated, it is that much more important to
identify ways to incentivize researchers and funding agencies to pursue and support novel
work that builds on new ideas. The approach employed in this paper is useful for this
purpose as it demonstrates how to identify innovative research based on research texts
and how to use that as a basis for evaluating which funding agencies and funding
practices reward innovative research projects.

17

5. Conclusion
The trying out of new ideas is a fundamental feature of healthy scientific disciplines;
scientific progress depends upon a scientific community being open to trying out new
ideas continuously and systematically. Absent the attention of many scientists, promising
new ideas cannot be effectively evaluated, developed, and tested for unexpected
applications. Yet, for an individual scientist the decision to try out a new idea is risky.
Work that builds on well-established ideas is often the safer choice, as the results the
latter be more predictable and materialize sooner, even as innovative work that builds on
newer ideas may ultimately prove to have a higher impact.
The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) has played a pivotal role in
advancing public health and medical research in the past several decades. As the world’s
largest source of medical research funding, it has supported the development of numerous
groundbreaking medical technologies and pharmaceuticals that are in common use today.
One of the primary goals of NIH funding is to support innovative biomedical
research, including work that tries out new ideas, which we term edge science. But
because the NIH faces pressure to deliver short-term successes and because identifying
successful novel projects may be more difficult, many have questioned the NIH’s ability
to fund innovative science. At the same time, quantitative analyses of whether NIH
actually achieves this important mission have been scarce in the published literature.
Our analysis of published biomedical research articles in the comprehensive
MEDLINE database finds strong support for the preference that the NIH has for
innovative work. Those contributions that build on relatively recent ideas are
substantially more likely to have been funded by the NIH compared to contributions that
only rely on older, well-established, ideas. On average, the NIH thus succeeds in
providing support for edge science.
Despite this rosy evaluation, our findings suggest that there is room for the NIH to
do more to promote innovative science. We find that in the current funding environment,
there is a time lag for NIH funding of papers that rely on new ideas: work that builds on
brand new ideas is funded at a lower rate than is work that builds on ideas that have had a
chance to mature at least 5-10 years. One reason for this may be that NIH review

18

committees are risk averse; they are less likely to support projects that rely on brand new
ideas (which may be the riskiest) than ideas that have had some opportunity to mature
(which properties have thus become a bit better understood).
This pattern has not always been true of NIH funded papers. In the 1990s, papers
that relied on brand new ideas were the most likely to have received NIH funding. NIH
review committees and funding decisions have thus have become more conservative and
risk-averse over time, despite a variety of policies that the NIH has implemented in the
past two decades to reward innovative and high-risk project proposals (e.g. Larkin 2003;
Steinbrook 2009; Avorn and Kesselheim 2011; Woodward 2011).
We also find that NIH’s ability to fund innovative science is driven mostly due to
its decision to fund rapidly advancing areas of investigation such as genomics and its
applications. By contrast, our findings imply that the NIH’s ability to direct funding to
novel projects over comparable more traditional projects within the same area of
investigation is quite limited. An important implication of this finding is that a move to a
more egalitarian funding model – one that doesn’t favor some areas of investigation as
much as the current model does – would likely lead to a significant decrease in novelty of
NIH supported research, unless such a funding policy change is accompanied by a drastic
shift in funding review procedures. The shift in review policies would have to render the
process much more favorable to novel work within each area of investigation. Hence, the
decision regarding the level of funding to each area of investigation should not be
separated from the decision regarding how to arrange the review process within each area
of investigation.
Our text-based approach for identifying innovative research suggests a fruitful
agenda for the quantitative analysis of funding agencies. Constructively, the quantitative
measurement of new idea adoption can help the NIH better understand the impact that its
review practices and funding decisions have on the scientific enterprise. The
methodology that we introduce in this paper can help design policies to counteract the
long-term trend that we identify in the funding of work that builds on brand new ideas,
and thus potentially speed scientific advance. Our methods could also be applied to NIH
grant application data – especially applications that have just missed the funding
threshold – to gain insights into what an increase in the NIH budget would yield in terms

19

of increased pursuit of innovative science. While we have focused on work that is novel
in the sense that it builds on new ideas, the analysis could be extended to capture also
work that tries out novel combinations of old ideas. Finally, the methodology we have put
forward in this paper for evaluating the novelty preferences of a funding agency can also
be applied to agencies such as the National Science Foundation that operate on scientific
fields outside of biomedicine.

20

References
Alberts, B. (2012) “The End of Small Science?” Science 338: 171.
Alberts, B., Kirschner, M.W., Tilghman, S. and H. Varmus (2014) “Rescuing US
Biomedical Research from Its Systemic Flaws,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111(16): 5773-5777.
Avorn, K. and A. S. Kesselheim (2011) “The NIH translational research center might
trade public risk for private reward,” Nature Medicine 17(10): 1176.
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J. S., Li, D. and B. N. Sampat (2017) “Public R&D Investments
and Private-sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules,” NBER Working
Paper No. 20889.
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J. S. and G. Manso (2011) “Incentives and creativity: evidence
from the academic life sciences,” RAND Journal of Economics 42(3): 527-554.
Besancenot, Damien, and Vranceanu, Radu (2015) “Fear of Novelty: A Model of
Strategic Discovery with Strategic Uncertainty,” Economic Inquiry 53(2): 11321139.
Blume-Kohout, M. (2012) “Does Targeted, Disease Specific Public Research Funding
Influence Pharmaceutical Innovation?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
31(3): 641-660.
Blume-Kohout, M., Kumar, K. B. and N. Sood (2015) “University R&D Funding
Strategies in a Changing Federal Funding Environment,” Science and Public Policy
42: 355-368.
Cech, T. R. (2005) “Fostering Innovation and Discovery in Biomedical Research,”
JAMA 294(11): 1390-1393.
Collins, F. R. (2015) “Exceptional Opportunities in Medical Science: A View from the
National Institutes of Health,” JAMA 313(2): 131–132.
Cook-Deegan, R. M. (1996) “Does NIH need a DARPA?” Issues in Science and
Technology 13(2): 25-28.
Daniels, R. J. (2015) “A Generation at Risk: Young Investigators and the Future of the
Biomedical Workforce,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(2):
313-318.
Firestein, S. (2015) Failure: Why Science is So Successful. Oxford University Press.
Geman, D. and S. Geman (2016) “Science in the Age of Selfies,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 113(34): 9384-9387.
Hegde, D. and B. N. Sampat (2015) “Can Private Money Buy Public Science? Disease
Group Lobbying and Federal Funding for Biomedical Research,” Management
Science 61(10): 2281-2298.
21

Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren (2011a) “The impact of NIH postdoctoral training grants on
scientific productivity,” Research Policy 40(6): 864-874.
Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren (2011b) “The Impact of Research Grant Funding on
Scientific Productivity,” Journal of Public Economics 95(9-10): 1168-1177.
Joyner, M. J., Paneth, N. and J. P. A. Ioannidis (2016) “What Happens When
Underperforming Big Ideas Become Entrenced?” JAMA, 316(13): 1355-1356.
Kaiser, J. (2014) “A Call for NIH Youth Movement,” Science 346(6206): 150.
Bloom, N., Jones, C. I., Van Reenen, J. and M. Webb (2018) “Are Ideas Getting Harder
to Find?” Manuscript.
Kolata, G. (2009) “Grant System Leads Cancer Researchers to Play It Safe,” New York
Times, 28 June.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago University Press,
Chicago.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977) Objectivity, Value Judgment and Theory Choice; in Thomas S. Kuhn,
ed., The Essential Tension, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 320-339.
Langer, J. S. (2012) “Enabling Scientific Innovation,” Science 338: 171.
Larkin, M. (2003) “Can Zerhouni create a bold, risk-taking NIH?” Lancet 362: 1382–
1383.
Lauer, M., Tabak, L. and F. Collins (2017) “The Next Generation Researchers Initiative
at NIH,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(45): 11801-11803.
Le Fanu, J. (2010) “Science’s Dead End,” Prospect, August 10.
Levitt, M. and J. M. Levitt (2017) “Future of Fundamental Biomedical Discovery in US
Biomedical Research,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(25):
6498-6503.
Li, D. (2017) “Expertise versus Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9(2): 60-92.
Li, D. and L. Agha (2015) “Big Names or Big Ideas? Do Peer-Review Panels Select the
Best Science Proposals?” Science 348(6233): 343-348.
Livio, M. (2013) Brilliant Blunders: From Darwin to Einstein – Colossal Mistakes by
Great Scientists that Changed Our Understanding of Life and Universe. Simon &
Schuster.
Marshall, A. (1920) Principles of Economics. Macmillan and Co., London.
Murray, M., Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M. Koev, J. and S. Stern (2016) “Of Mice and
Academics: Examining the Effect of Openness on Innovation” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 8(1): 212-52.

22

National Institutes of Health (2017a) “Budget” (https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-wedo/budget; accessed December 5, 2017).
National Institutes of Health (2017b) “Mission and Goals” (https://www.nih.gov/aboutnih/what-we-do/mission-goals; accessed 5, December 2017).
Nicholson, J. M. and J. P. A. Ioannidis (2012) “Conform and Be Funded,” Science 492:
34-36.
Packalen, M. (2018) “Edge Factors: Scientific Frontier Positions of Nations,”
Manuscript.
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya (2016) “Age and the Trying Out of New Ideas,”
Journal of Human Capital, forthcoming.
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya (2017) “Neophilia Ranking of Scientific Journals,”
Scientometrics 110: 43-64.
Petsko, G. (2009) “Big Science, Little Science,” EMBO Reports 10(12).
Peifer, M. (2017) “The Argument for Diversifying NIH Grant Portfolio,” Molecular
Biology of the Cell 28: 2935-2940.
Popovian, R. (2016) “Dedicated Scientists Driven to Discover Cures” Morning Consult
(https://morningconsult.com/opinions/dedicated-scientists-driven-to-discovercures/?source=acsh.org; accessed December 5, 2017).
Rosbash, M. (2011) “A Threat to Medical Innovation,” Science 333: 136.
Rzhetzky, A., Foster, J. G., Foster, I. T., and J. A. Evans (2015) “Choosing experiments
to accelerate collective discovery,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112: 14569–14574.
Sampat, B. N. (2012) “Mission-Oriented Biomedical Research at the NIH” Research
Policy 41(10): 1729-1741.
Steinbrook, R. (2009) “Opportunities and Challenges for the NIH -- An Interview with
Francis Collins.” New England Journal of Medicine 361(14): 1321-1323.
Usher, A. P., 1929, A History of Mechanical Inventions. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Vermeulen, N., Parker, J. N., and B. Penders (2010) “Big, small or mezzo?” EMBO
Reports 11(6).
Woodward, C. (2011) “National Institutes of Health seek to speed up therapeutic
innovations,” Canadian Medical Association Journal 183(2): E91-E92.
Zaringhalam, M. (2016) “Failure in Science Is Frequent and Inevitable--and We Should
Talk More about It,” Scientific American Blog (https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/
guest-blog/failure-in-science-is-frequent-and-inevitable-and-we-should-talk-moreabout-it; accessed December 5, 2017).

23

Table 1: Edge Funding Ratios by Idea Type and Time Period.

Notes to Table 1: Numbers in Columns 2a-2d, 3 and 4-4c are calculated based on biomedical research articles published during 2010-2016. Please see the main text for explanations and
interpretations of each column.

Table 2: Edge Funding Ratios by Research Area.

Notes to Table 2: Numbers in all columns are calculated based on biomedical research articles published during 2010-2016. Please see the main text for explanations and interpretations of
each column.

