                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  LOCATION AS AN ASSET

                                         Adrien Bilal
                                    Esteban Rossi-Hansberg

                                      Working Paper 24867
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24867


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2018




We thank Pablo Fajgelbaum, Eduardo Morales, Yasusada Murata, Diego Puga, Steve Redding,
Matt Turner and numerous seminar participants for useful comments. None of the authors had
any financial relationship that affected the work or conclusions of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Adrien Bilal and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Location as an Asset
Adrien Bilal and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
NBER Working Paper No. 24867
July 2018
JEL No. D14,E21,J61,J62,R13,R23,R30

                                           ABSTRACT

The location of individuals determines their job opportunities, living amenities, and housing
costs. We argue that it is useful to conceptualize the location choice of individuals as a decision
to invest in a ‘location asset.’ This asset has a cost equal to the location's rent, and a payoff
through better job opportunities and, potentially, more human capital for the individual and her
children. As with any asset, savers in the location asset transfer resources into the future by going
to expensive locations with good future opportunities. In contrast, borrowers transfer resources to
the present by going to cheap locations that offer few other advantages. As in a standard portfolio
problem, holdings of this asset depend on the comparison of its rate of return with that of other
assets. Differently from other assets, the location asset is not subject to borrowing constraints, so
it is used by individuals with little or no wealth that want to borrow. We provide an analytical
model to make this idea precise and to derive a number of related implications, including an
agent's mobility choices after experiencing negative income shocks. The model can rationalize
why low wealth individuals locate in low income regions with low opportunities even in the
absence of mobility costs. We document the investment dimension of location, and confirm the
core predictions of our theory with French individual panel data from tax returns.


Adrien Bilal
Princeton University
abilal@princeton.edu

Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Princeton University
Department of Economics
289 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
erossi@princeton.edu
                                          Location as an Asset

                                Adrien Bilal                   Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
                            Princeton University                Princeton University


                                                    July 19, 2018


                                                       Abstract
          The location of individuals determines their job opportunities, living amenities, and housing costs.
      We argue that it is useful to conceptualize the location choice of individuals as a decision to invest in
      a ‘location asset’. This asset has a cost equal to the location’s rent, and a payo¤ through better job
      opportunities and, potentially, more human capital for the individual and her children. As with any
      asset, savers in the location asset transfer resources into the future by going to expensive locations with
      good future opportunities. In contrast, borrowers transfer resources to the present by going to cheap
      locations that o¤er few other advantages. As in a standard portfolio problem, holdings of this asset
      depend on the comparison of its rate of return with that of other assets. Di¤erently from other assets, the
      location asset is not subject to borrowing constraints, so it is used by individuals with little or no wealth
      that want to borrow. We provide an analytical model to make this idea precise and to derive a number
      of related implications, including an agent’s mobility choices after experiencing negative income shocks.
      The model can rationalize why low wealth individuals locate in low income regions with low opportunities
      even in the absence of mobility costs. We document the investment dimension of location, and con…rm
      the core predictions of our theory with French individual panel data from tax returns.


1    Introduction
Few decisions shape an individual’s life more than the location decision. It determines job opportunities,
social interactions, schooling and entertainment options, as well as a number of other less central charac-
teristics of someone’s life. The location decision is essential particularly because of the large heterogeneity
in location characteristics, even within a country, a state, a region, or a city. Living in Soho in Manhattan
is quite di¤erent than living in Queens, and a world apart from living in parts of Newark or Camden, New
Jersey. These spatial di¤erences are enormous. Life prospects for a kid growing in Palo Alto are staggeringly
di¤erent than those for someone growing in central Detroit, even if they come from similar backgrounds and
    Bilal: abilal@princeton.edu. Rossi-Hansberg: erossi@princeton.edu. We thank Pablo Fajgelbaum, Eduardo Morales, Yasu-
sada Murata, Diego Puga, Steve Redding, Matt Turner and numerous seminar participants for useful comments.


                                                           1
both go to local public schools. The obvious question that arises is then, why do people remain in some of
these locations? Why do we fail to see people go to the locations that o¤er the best prospects for them and
for their families?
    Three main answers have been o¤ered to these questions in the economics literature. The …rst one
relies on the presence of large migration costs that make moving to better locations not worth the cost.1
The second one argues that local living costs, as re‡ected in housing and other local prices, compensate
for other local bene…ts over the residency period. The third one simply argues that agents ‘cannot a¤ord’
to live in some places perhaps due to indivisibilities in housing. The problem with the …rst explanation is
that it is hard to imagine that moving costs are su¢ cient to bridge the gap between the best and worse
neighborhoods in virtually all regions of the world. These largely unobserved costs seem to be just a stand-in
for another mechanism. As for the other two explanations, although housing and other local costs can di¤er
substantially across regions, adjusting the size of one’s apartment, commuting from cheaper locations, and
buying in big-boxed stores and other national retailers are e¤ective strategies to deal with local prices.2
Something is missing from this basic notion of static spatial equilibrium where similar marginal movers
equalize utility across locations adjusted for moving costs.
    In this paper we propose a di¤erent way of conceptualizing the location decision of agents. We argue that
the location decision can be understood as an asset investment decision. Buying more of the asset involves
moving to better locations that cost more today but give better returns tomorrow, while selling the asset
implies moving to cheaper locations with little opportunities. The ‘location as an asset’ view can explain
why agents prefer locations that seem undesirable from a static spatial equilibrium perspective even in the
absence of moving costs. It can also explain why local living costs compensate the bene…ts from desirable
locations for some agents but not for others, even in the absence of non-homotheticities or di¤erences in
preferences. The ‘location asset’ should not be confused with ‘an asset at a location’, like a house. The
location asset is used by all agents, including renters and owners, when they make location choices.3
    The location asset has some speci…c features that make it di¤erent than other assets and determine
their use. As any other asset, unconstrained agents own it only to the extent that the return from doing so
dominates that of other assets, in particular risk free bonds. The unique characteristic of the location asset
is that it is not subject to borrowing constraints. Agents can always borrow, namely, transfer resources
from the future to the present, by going to cheaper location with worse opportunities. If an agent is not in
the worst possible location already, she can keep transferring resources from the future to the present by
‘selling’the location asset. The other unique characteristic of this asset is that the amount of the asset that
   1
      Kennan and Walker (2011) estimate that moving costs as large as $380 thousand 2010 dollars (for young movers, 312
thousand for average ones) are needed to account for observed migration ‡ows using a state-of-the-art model of location
decisions. Diamond, McQuade, and Qian (2017) using a policy that implements rent-controls in the San Francisco area …nd a
smaller but still large …xed cost of around $40 thousand.
    2
      Another potential reason for these location choices are non-homotheticities in preferences: the less wealthy simply like
certain amenities better and the locations that have them are the ones with worse opportunities.
    3
      We view housing wealth as …nancial wealth that is perhaps less liquid. So borrowers will run it down completely before
they become …nancially constrained and start using the location asset to transfer resources intertemporally.



                                                              2
an agent can hold is limited by the housing needs, labor supply, fertility decisions and other choices that
determine the current cost and the future bene…ts of living in a particular location. As such, the asset has
heterogenous returns depending on the holder of the asset.
   Conceptualizing location decisions as buying and selling a ‘location asset’is useful to understand mobility
decisions. Consider an agent with little or no wealth that receives a front-loaded income shock. For
example, a blue-collar worker in the automobile industry in Detroit that gets …red. Where will she go? A
good neighborhood with excellent schools for her children and plenty of job opportunities or a run-down
neighborhood in Saint Louis? Think …rst about the consumption-savings decision of this agent. The front-
loaded shock makes her want to transfer consumption from the future to the present. In the absence of
accumulated wealth, smoothing consumption requires borrowing. The absence of collateral, however, implies
that she will be constrained to borrow using standard …nancial assets. What is left is to borrow using the
location asset and downgrade to a cheaper location with worse opportunities. Hence, constrained agents
that receive bad shocks will have a higher demand for locations that o¤er few opportunities at minimal cost.
Similarly, front-loaded positive shocks will make constrained individuals upgrade location so as to save using
the location asset.
   Multiple implications follow. For example, changes in the rewards for particular occupations will result
in front-loaded shocks for dynastic families, since heads-of-households have already invested in an occupation
while their descendants have yet to choose. Hence, these changes in rewards will lead to spatial segregation
as auto workers who borrow locate in Detroit and computer programmers and Yoga teachers who save locate
in Palo Alto. Our view also implies that low rates of return in …nancial market (e.g. low interest rates)
result in low rates of return of the ‘location asset’ and therefore larger price di¤erentials across locations,
reminiscent of the low interest rate period after the 2008 …nancial crisis where some of the di¤erentials in
house prices increased. Finally, our view underscores that place-based policies may hurt the currently poor
as they reduce the supply of cheap locations where those individuals may prefer to locate.
   To make precise our conceptualization of the location decision as an asset that does not face borrow-
ing constraints, we start by proposing a simple two period economy where agents have heterogenous asset
holdings, incomes, and levels of skills. Agents have access to a risk free bond but face a standard bor-
rowing constraint that prevents them from borrowing beyond an exogenous amount. Individuals choose a
consumption pro…le and a location, which in turn determines their current rent and income next period as
a function of their skill. There is a continuum of locations that di¤er in the marginal return of a unit of
skill. In equilibrium wealthy agents locate in their ideal city conditional on their skill, while constrained
individuals, either because they have low assets levels or back-loaded incomes, locate in cities that pay less
but where rents are lower. Namely, they borrow using the location asset. Back and front-loaded shocks
have the e¤ects described above.
   We then present a fully-‡edged in…nite horizon dynamic model with similar characteristics in order to
generalize our …ndings and provide a framework that is potentially closer to quantitative analysis. Agents
now face an idiosyncratic income process. The main advantage of this framework relative to our simple


                                                      3
two-period framework is that wealth is now endogenous and we can compute an invariant wealth distrib-
ution, and, perhaps more importantly, that we can use it to understand the reaction of constrained and
unconstrained dynasties to transitory and permanent income shocks over multiple periods. The drawback
of this more complex framework is that our analysis is based on numerical simulations only. As a result
of an idiosyncratic temporary income shock, unconstrained individuals …rst run down their …nancial assets
until they are at the borrowing constraint. Once there, they start borrowing using the location asset and so
downgrade their location in order to minimize ‡uctuations in their level of consumption. This downgrading
of location continues until individuals reach the worse location they are willing to go to, or the income shock
reverts to the high value. Once the temporary shock has reverted, individuals go back to the initial location
progressively.4
    The implications of the ‘location as an asset’ view are sharp. Negative (positive) front-loaded shocks
should make constrained individuals downgrade (upgrade) location, while unconstrained agents should not
change their location. To contrast these predictions with empirical evidence we use detailed individual panel
data from France. We use a longitudinal 4% panel of workers which allows us to track the same individual
over several years. The dataset provides us with the wage of employed individuals together with their
location and a number of other characteristics. Consistent with our model, we order locations according to
the average income of local residents to obtain a ranking of locations.
    We …rst document that moving to locations with a higher rank pays o¤ gradually over time. We …nd
that the returns to moving to the best location relative to moving to the worst double after 7 years for
observationally equivalent individuals. Comparing similar individuals, movers to the best location relative
to movers to the worst location receive wages that are 10% higher upon moving, but that gap widens to
20% after 7 years. These …ndings support the view that moving to better locations pays o¤ gradually over
time, thus underscoring the importance of the investment aspect of location.5
    We then proceed to study empirically the location decisions of individuals that experience unemployment
spells. We track how the rank of an individual’s location changes when they …nd a new job. The results are
stark, individuals that start at the bottom quintile of the distribution of income in their location (and so are
presumably more …nancially constrained) downgrade their location by about 5 percentile points relative to
    4
      Our in…nite horizon model shares many features with dynamic portfolio problems with investors who face a credit constraint
on risk-free bonds. Thus, we build a Huggett (1993) economy with a second asset: the ‘location asset’. In particular, our model
could be viewed as one in which possibly constrained entrepreneurs choose in which project to invest (the location), subject to
a collateral constraint. Related work includes but is not limited to Angeletos (2007) and Moll (2014). Our framework is distinct
from those in two dimensions. First, we model both risk-aversion and idiosyncratic additive income shocks on the investor side,
leading individuals to use the location asset to smooth consumption when they are close to the constraint. Second, individuals
in our model always wish to hold a convex combination of both assets, due to the endogenously nonlinear returns of the ‘location
asset’.
    5
      Glaeser and Mare (2001) …nd some evidence in the U.S. for dynamic gains from migrating to larger cities. Also in the
U.S. Baum-Snow and Pavan (2012) show in a structural model that di¤erences in initial wages are important drivers of pay
di¤erentials between small cities, while di¤erences in wage growth explain a large part of pay di¤erentials between larger cities.
De La Roca and Puga (2017) use Spanish administrative data to show that the returns to mobility between cities of di¤erent
sizes accrue partly over time. Although our ranking of locations is di¤erent since it relies on income rather than size, they obtain
similar magnitudes.



                                                                 4
individuals at the top quintile. Conditional on moving, the location rank falls by as much as 15 percentile
points. These results are robust to a battery of municipality, occupation, industry, birthplace and age …xed
e¤ect. Our theory also predicts that individuals sort positively across places based partly on their income.
Therefore, we expect selection to bias our estimates downwards. Consistently, after an unemployment spell,
the relative location rank of an individual falls by 35 percentile points when controlling for past wages. Of
course, the relative downgrading of an individual’s location might potentially be the result of obtaining a job
that pays lower wages after their unemployment spells, consuming di¤erent amounts of local amenities, or
adjusting commuting, and this might be related to their origin wage percentile. However, when we control for
post-unemployment wages, commuting distance and local amenities, our results are essentially unchanged.
This indicates that the downgrading of location is not simply re‡ecting the static choice to consume less
amenities.6
    The empirical analysis described so far uses an individual’s location in her municipality’s income distrib-
ution as a proxy for the likelihood of being …nancial constrained. Of course, although this proxy is justi…ed
by our theory, it is not a direct measure of assets. We do not observe an individual’s …nancial assets, but
we can leverage the longitudinal dimension of our data and construct a measure of assets by accumulating
savings derived from observed wage pro…les and a simple model of intertemporal consumption choices. As
with our previous measure, constrained individuals downgrade their location as a result of an unemployment
shock. Given its construction, there can be measurement error in this measure of assets, which would bias
the relative downgrading e¤ect towards zero. Nevertheless, we estimate that after an unemployment spell
individuals at the bottom of the local asset distribution downgrade 8 percentile points relative to agents at
the top. As expected, when we allow this e¤ect to vary by a location rank’s decile, we …nd that individuals
use the ‘location asset’more in poorer places. These facts are, as far we know, unknown to the literature
and can be estimated precisely given the large number of observations in our data.
    There is a large literature documenting the large variation in income levels and other outcomes across
locations.7 Kennan and Walker (2011) argue forcefully that inter-state migration decisions are made based
on income prospects, but are also in‡uenced importantly by geographic di¤erences. In fact, Diamond
(2016) and Giannone (2017) show that the U.S. has experienced increasing skill segregation, indicating that
spatial gaps are not diminishing. Kaplan and Schulholfer-Whol (2017) show that mobility in the U.S. is
declining.8 Going one step further, Fogli and Guerrieri (2018) argue that spatial segregation is related to
income inequality because it a¤ects the returns to human capital and therefore o¤spring’s education.
    Most equilibrium analysis of individual location choices is either cast in partial equilibrium and so does
   6
      Note that downgrading location due to a simple static choice to consume less urban amenities as a result of the non-
employment spell is not consistent with our results. The reason is that, absent …nancial constraints, if two individuals live
in the same location but have di¤erent incomes, the high income individual is the one that loses more at impact from non-
employment and for whom location is more elastic. Hence, if anything, the high income individual necessarily downgrades more.
We prove this result formally in Appendix B.2.
    7
      See Wilson (1987), Denton and Massey (1993), Cutler and Glaeser (1997), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), Altonji and
Mans…eld (2014), and Hsieh and Moretti (2018) among many other.
    8
      Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) link the decline in U.S. mobility to falling wage di¤erentials within occupations.



                                                             5
not consider the valuation side of the ‘location as an asset’view (like Kennan and Walker, 2011, or Diamond,
2016) or static and based on a simple spatial equilibrium condition that does not include the investment
aspect of location decisions (like Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2013, Allen and Arkolakis, 2014, Redding,
2016, or Caliendo et al., 2018). Giannone (2017) and Desmet, Nagy and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) do provide
dynamic general equilibrium setups with costly migration, but migration decisions only provide static gains
or losses. In Caliendo, Dvorkin and Parro (2017) agents solve forward looking problems in deciding their
location but they simply consume their income and so do not solve a consumption-savings decision or
accumulate wealth.
    The view of investment as an asset was hinted at initially by Sjaastad (1962). Lucas (2004), Morten
(2017) and Calvacanti-Ferreira et al. (2016) also present evidence and arguments to view migration as a
stepping-stone or a form of self-insurance.9 Some of the most detailed studies of mobility for low income,
and likely constrained individuals, are consistent with the ‘location as an asset’view. For example, in the
“Moving to Opportunity” randomized experiment, conditioning aid on upgrading location reduced the use
of housing vouchers by about a third (21 percentage points). Furthermore, while the literature using this
experiment initially found that economic outcomes were not a¤ected by an upgrade in location (Duncan et
al., 2013), the most recent studies have found strong evidence that the outcomes for children that moved
when young are positive (Chetty, et al., 2016, and Davis et al., 2017), consistent with our emphasis on the
investment dimension of location decisions rather than on the current bene…ts. Using tax records, Chetty
and Hendren (2017) found a trade-o¤ between child future earnings and rents. They estimate that a 1%
increase in a child’s future earnings can be achieved by moving to a location with a median rent that is $176
higher. The ‘location as an asset’view argues that constrained agents might not want to take what seems
like a good bargain, since they are constrained and want to borrow not invest further.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section, Section 2, introduces the simplest model
necessary to make precise our notion of location decisions as investment decisions. This simple two period
model is then extended to an in…nite horizon model in Section 3. In that section we present examples of
the implied dynamic consumption, asset, and location paths of individuals. Section 4 presents our empirical
analysis using the French individual level panel to show that agent’s location decision respond to non-
employment spells as our theory predicts. Section 5 concludes. An Appendix includes the technical proofs,
additional robustness tests, and detailed data descriptions.


2        A Simple Model
We aim to provide the simplest setup in which our ‘location as an asset’view can be made precise. Because
we need location to be an investment, we need a model with at least two periods. Hence, we model an
economy over periods 0 and 1. The economy consists of a unit mass of individuals that di¤er in their
skill, s 2 [s; s], and their income in period 0 and 1, fyt g1t=0 2 [y t ; y t ]: The income of the individual in
    9
        Fernandez and Rogerson (1998) and Fogli and Guerreri (2018) discuss the trade-o¤ between location and children education.


                                                                 6
period 0 includes her labor income plus any wealth she is initially endowed with. In sum, an individual is
characterized by a triplet (y0 ; y1 ; s). We denote the joint probability density function over these outcomes
by f and the cumulative distribution by F:
    There is a continuum of locations or ‘cities’. We classi…ed cities according to the complementarity of the
returns from living in them with the skills of individuals. We denote locations by an index z 2 [z; z] with
z     0: The density of cities with characteristic z is given by h with cumulative density H. The skill of an
individual determines the bene…ts from locating in cities. We assume that the returns for an individual of
skill s to living in city z are given by zs: Agents can move freely across locations. Hence, the supermodularity
of this function will lead to positive assortative matching conditional on other individual characteristics, as
we describe below.
    The population density, L (z) ; of individuals living in cities of type z, as well as land rents, q (z) ; in
those cities are determined endogenously. We assume that the cost of supplying housing increases with
population size due to some form of decreasing returns. Hence,

                                             q(z) = Q(L(z)) for z 2 [z; z]

where Q(0) = 0 and Q strictly increasing. That is, housing is free in locations without population and rents
are strictly increasing in city size.
    Individuals have access to a risk free bond with gross interest R > 1. We assume that this world interest
rate is exogenous and determined in world markets.10 Agents are subject to a standard borrowing constraint
that limits their asset holdings between period 0 and 1, a, to be above some level a. Hence, if, for example
a = 0, agents can only save but not borrow with the …nancial asset.

2.1     Asset and Location Choices
Households maximize lifetime utility with a discount factor given by                1. For simplicity we specify the
period utility function as u (c) = log c but virtually all our results go through for any concave utility function
that satis…es Inada conditions. The problem of a household is then to choose consumption in each period,
purchases of the risk free bond, and location in period 1, to solve

                                             V (y0 ; y1 ; s) = max log c0 +   log c1                                (1)
                                                            c0 ;c1 ;a;z
                                        s:t: c0 + a + q(z) = y0 ;
                                             c1 = zs + y1 + Ra;
                                             a   a:

    That is, individuals maximize utility subject to budget constraints each period, as well as the borrowing
   10
      Technically, we only need R > 0, which we can allow without loss of generality. In addition, it would be simple to
endogenize the interest rate R through an asset market clearing condition without changing any of our core results.



                                                            7
constraint. In period zero, an agent’s income includes anything he earns today and all of his wealth. Note
that we have abstracted from any returns from the complementarity between an agent’s skill and the city
where she starts (say, z0 s). We think of this term as also being embedded in y0 . Not explicitly recognizing
this term explicitly avoids carrying z0 as a state variable in the consumer problem. This is without loss of
generality given that free mobility implies that current location only a¤ects an agent’s decisions through
current income.
    Note also that we make the agent pay rent one period in advance. So land rent for their chosen z
location, q(z); enters the left-hand-side of the period 0 budget constraint only. Rent paid for living in
location z0 in period 0 is not modeled and would simply be included in the resulting period 0 income.
Making household pay rent one period in advance underscores the investment nature of the location choice.
Namely, it recognizes that the good jobs, amenities, or education associated with living in a good location
are enjoyed over time and not necessarily immediately after arriving there. Furthermore, although we do not
incorporate other current urban costs as commuting, congestion, or crime, or urban bene…ts as amenities,
all of them can be thought of as included in the net current price of location q (z) :
    The problem above abstracts from a ‡exible housing demand choice since it makes anyone living in
location z pay the same cost q (z) : We decided not to incorporate this margin explicitly because, absent
adjustment costs, the housing demand choice is a static choice that does not eliminate or prevent the use
of the location asset (although it can a¤ect its return).11 The problem in (1) also abstracts from income
risk. In the next section we write a multi-period extension with uncertainty about the realization of the
income process. However, in this simple model without uncertainty, the location asset is used to transfer
consumption across time, but not across states of nature or for precautionary purposes. Of course, in a
richer environment the location asset could also be used for these alternative purposes.
    The …rst-order conditions of the problem in (1) imply the standard ‘Financial Euler equation’

                                          c1 (y0 ; y1 ; s)
                                                               R for all (y0 ; y1 ; s);                                 (2)
                                           c0 (y0 ; y1 ; s)

with equality if and only if the borrowing constraint is not binding, namely a (y0 ; y1 ; s) > a: We denote all
individual optimal choices with an asterisk ( ).
    Absent borrowing constraints, the desired asset holdings of an individual (y0 ; y1 ; s); denoted by a
                                                                                                        ~(y0 ; y1 ; s),
are given by their income net of rents in period zero (y0                q(z)) minus permanent consumption, which is
                  y1 +z s
given by y0 +        R      q(z ) = (1 +     ) :12   Namely,

                                                                       y1 +z (y0 ;y1 ;s)s
                                                                y0 +          R             q(z (y0 ; y1 ; s))
                    a
                    ~(y0 ; y1 ; s) = y0   q(z (y0 ; y1 ; s))                                                     :
                                                                                    1+
  11
      In Appendix B.1 we develop an extension where agents can choose the size of their house and pay a prize q (z) + p` for
renting ` units of housing in location z:
   12
      Whenever it is clear by the context we abbreviate optimal choices and do not write the dependence on the agent’s type.
Namely, we might write z instead of z (y0 ; y1 ; s) :



                                                                8
Thus, actual savings in the …nancial asset are given by

                                                  a (y0 ; y1 ; s) = max f~
                                                                         a(y0 ; y1 ; s) ; ag :

     Free mobility implies that individuals are never constrained in the ‘location asset’. Hence, for all agents,
the location decision yields a ‘Mobility Euler equation’given by

                                                           c1 (y0 ; y1 ; s)          s
                                                                             = 0                  ;                                                 (3)
                                                            c0 (y0 ; y1 ; s)  q (z (y0 ; y1 ; s))

for all (y0 ; y1 ; s):
     Hence agents can optimize their intertemporal consumption path by choosing their holdings of …nancial
assets and what we have dubbed the ‘location asset’. To make the analogy with a standard asset more
precise, we can propose two interpretations. First, one in which each location z constitutes an asset, and
agents moving to location z buy the asset, and the ones moving out sell it. How much of it they buy is
limited by their housing demand and labor supply. Here, for simplicity, we have limited labor supply and
housing demand to be equal to one. The return of the asset depends on the skill of the individual, s, and
is given by the right-hand-side of equation (3), namely, s=q 0 (z ).
     An alternative interpretation is to consider only a single asset with unit cost. The quantity purchased
of the asset is equal to the housing costs, q, and returns of the asset depend both on the quantity purchased
and the skill of the individual. Again, those returns are given by s=q 0 (z ). Under both these interpretations,
the individual’s problem (1) can be seen as a standard portfolio choice problem in which the risk-free bond
is subject to a borrowing constraint, and the return to the ‘location asset’ is endogenously nonlinear and
speci…c the individual’s skill.
     We are ready to de…ne a competitive equilibrium in our economy.

De…nition 1 Given a distribution F of triplets (y0 ; y1 ; s) 2 [y 0 ; y 0 ]                               [y 1 ; y 1 ]    [s; s] and an interest rate
R, an equilibrium is a set of individual decision functions c0 ; c1 ; a : [y 0 ; y 0 ]                                   [y 1 ; y 1 ]   [s; s] ! R+ and
z : [y 0 ; y 0 ]   [y 1 ; y 1 ]     [s; s] ! [z; z]; and rent and population functions q; L : [z; z] ! R+ such that

        individuals solve the problem in (1) and

        land rents are such that q(z) = Q(L(z)) for z 2 [z; z] where city population L (z) satis…es
                      Z      z                    Z   y0   Z   y1   Z   s
                                 L (z) H (dz) =                             1 [z (y0 ; y1 ; s)   z] F (dy0 ; dy1 ; ds) for all z 2 [z; z]           (4)
                         z                        y0         y1     s


        and 1 denotes the indicator function.

     Condition (4) guarantees that the number of people in locations worse that z (the left-hand-side of the
condition) is equal to the number of people that choose to live in those locations (the right-hand-side of

                                                                                   9
the condition). Note that Condition (4) has to hold for all z 2 [z; z] and so it implicitly determines the
population density function L (z) :

2.2    Equilibrium Allocation and House Rents
In order to understand agent’s location choices, consider a city z in which an unconstrained individual
(y0 ; y1 ; s) lives. Because a (y0 ; y1 ; s) > a; equation (2) holds with equality and so the returns she faces on
the …nancial and the location asset need to be equal. That is,

                                                               s
                                                R=                          :
                                                      q 0 (z (y0 ; y1 ; s))

This implies that unconstrained individuals sort into cities on the basis of their skill component s only.
Then, if q ( ) is a strictly increasing function (something we show below), there exists a matching function
Z U (s) = z (y0 ; y1 ; s) for unconstrained individuals, such that

                                                                 s
                                                    R=                   :
                                                         q 0 (Z U (s))

Furthermore, when q ( ) is convex (which we also show below), Z U (s) is strictly increasing. Of course,
whether individuals are constrained on the …nancial asset depends on their income path and skill, and the
resulting location choice. For example, a ‡at income path with y0 high relative to the values of future
income, y1 ; and skill, s, implies that the individual is not constrained.
    Now consider an individual with the same y1 and s but low enough y00 < y0 such that she is constrained.
This individual has a larger marginal rate of substitution than the interest rate, so the Financial Euler
equation (2) holds with strict inequality. Since the agent can still use the location asset, and so (3) holds, this
implies that s=q 0 (Z U (s)) = R < s=q 0 (Z C (y00 ; y1 ; s)) where Z C (y00 ; y1 ; s) is the constrained agent’s location
choice. Note that the constrained agent’s location choice depends on all the individual characteristics, not
just s. Hence, for q ( ) strictly increasing, Z U (s) > Z C (y00 ; y1 ; s). Constrained individuals locate in cities with
lower land rents and lower returns to skill than unconstrained individuals with the same skills. The reason
is that they use the location asset rather than the …nancial asset to adjust their intertemporal consumption
path. More speci…cally, they borrow using the location asset to transfer resources to the present, something
…nancial markets do not allow them to do.
    Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s) is increasing in y0 and in fact will converge to Z U (s) as we increase y0 . In contrast, it is
decreasing in y1 , since larger future income results in larger need to borrow from the future and therefore
more use of the location asset to do so. Finally, more skilled individuals locate in better cities, whether
constrained or unconstrained, due to the skill complementary we introduce in individual earnings. Note that
the reason the individual location choice is always uniquely determined is our setup is the supermodular
income in z and s. In contrast, if agents had identical skills, they would be indi¤erent about where to locate
when unconstrained, but their use of the location asset to transfer consumption to the present would still


                                                            10
determine their location choice when constrained. We formalize this discussion in the following lemma that
characterizes the location decision of agents.

Lemma 1 There exists a pair of matching functions Z U (s ) and Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s ) such that individual (y0 ; y1 ; s)
                                                                                 +                +    +
chooses city

        z (y0 ; y1 ; s) = Z U (s) if y0      Y0 (y1 ; s); so she is unconstrained, and

        z (y0 ; y1 ; s) = Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s) < Z U (s) if y0 < Y0 (y1 ; s), so she is constrained,

     where

                                   Y0 (y1 ; s ) = fy0 ja (y0 ; y1 ; s) > a g
                                       + +

                                                                      1                       y1 + sZ U (s)
                                                     = (1 +               )a + q(Z U (s)) +
                                                                                                    R

     and Z U and Z C are determined by a system of ordinary di¤ erential equations described in Appendix
A.1.

Proof. See Appendix A.1.
     Lemma 1 characterizes the threshold for current income y0 that determines whether an individual is
constrained using the function Y0 (y1 ; s): Because the rent function is increasing in z as we show below,
and since Z U (s) is increasing in s, this threshold is increasing in both arguments. More future income
makes unconstrained individuals want to consume more in the present and therefore makes the constraint
on borrowing more binding. Similarly, more skilled individuals will earn more in the future and will live in
more expensive cities, making the constraint more binding.
     Of course, given the monotonicity of Z U (s) and Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s) in s; we can de…ne the inverse as S U (z) =
ZU     1 (z)   and S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) = Z C   1 (y
                                                    0 ; y1 ; z):   These functions then tell us the skill of the set of constrained
and unconstrained individuals that live in a given city z: In equilibrium, unconstrained individuals always
locate in better cities than constrained ones, hence there exists a threshold z^ such that for z < z^ all
individuals in the city are constrained and above that we have a mixed of constrained and unconstrained
individuals. The best city, z, is an exception and has no constrained agents. The following corollary states
these results formally.

Corollary 2 There exists a threshold z^ such that individuals in city z                               z^ are either

        unconstrained with skill s = S U (z ) and y0                      Y0 (y1 ; S U (z)); or
                                                     +




                                                                            11
        constrained with s = S C (y0 ; y1 ; z ) > S U (z), and
                                           + +


                                         Y0 (y1 ; S U (z)) > y0                                                        (5)
                                                                         S U (z)(y+ Ra)
                                                                                     1
                                          S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) =                                                          (6)
                                                                  R (y0     a   q(z)) zS U (z)

                                                                                            q 0 (z)(y1 +Ra)
   In cities z < z^, all individuals are constrained, and S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) =            (y0 a q(z)) zq 0 (z)   .

Proof. Direct corollary of Lemma 1.
   Figure 1 represents these results graphically. We have discussed all the elements in the …gure except for
z~ that represents the lowest city that has non-negative housing rents. Namely, z~ is implicitly de…ned by
q (~
   z ) = 0. If q (z) is strictly increasing in z, any city with z < z~ is not feasible. Note that the upper bound
of the correspondence of skills that live in the city is given by S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) evaluated at the lowest current
income (denoted by y0 ) and highest future income (y1 ). Namely, the most constrained individual in the
city, which is the highest skilled individual using the location asset the most. Note that below z^ the city
has only constrained individuals, and only the lowest skilled individuals locate in the worst city z~ (as long
as z is low enough).
   We can also represent graphically the set of current income levels, y0 , of individuals that locate in a given
city. Of course, current income and initial wealth are indistinguishable in our two-period setup. We do so in
Figure 2. In city z, all individuals with incomes y0               Y0 (y1 ; S U (z)) are unconstrained and locate according
to their skill level only. Other individuals that locate in those cities are constrained and have low income,
and either high skills, high future income or both. Because lower current income leads individuals to choose
worse cities, it must be that the lowest income present in a given city z is the income of the individual with
the highest incentives to save in the location asset. Namely, the highest skill agent with the lowest future
income present in the city. This lower bound, denoted by Y 0 (z) in the …gure, can be found by evaluating
the expression for S C in equation 6 in Corollary 2 at s and the lowest future income y 1 :
   We …nish the discussion of an equilibrium in our simple two-period economy with a characterization of
the house rent schedule. As we alluded already above, land rents are increasing in z since higher z cities
yield higher income for individuals of all skills. Furthermore, the complementarity between z and s implies
that the highest skilled unconstrained individuals locate there, which implies that rents grow more than
proportionally with city type, as does the income of its unconstrained residents. Hence, rents are convex.
Figure 3 illustrates such a rent function for two values of the interest rate, R.13
   In cities with unconstrained individuals the slope of the rent function is given by the S U (z)=R. Namely,
the slope of the rent function is determined by the skill of unconstrained individuals in the city and is
inversely proportional to the interest rate. Thus, a low interest rate implies that the house rent schedule is
steeper. Since the return of the location asset for an unconstrained individual with skill s is s=q 0 Z U (s) ,
  13
       The thresholds z~ and z^ in the …gure refer to the high R case.



                                                                 12
                                                  Figure 1: Allocation of skills to cities


this naturally also implies a lower return of the competing location asset by no-arbitrage. That is, lower
returns in the …nancial market result in steeper rents that reduce the return of the location asset (see Figure
3). Furthermore, a lower interest rate R implies that more agents wish to borrow and hence are constrained.
This implies more downgrading and segregation. So the model predicts that periods of low interest rates
should be periods of increasing rent di¤erentials across cities and more segregation, reminiscent of the pre
and post- 2008 crisis housing markets around the world. We formalize these results in the following lemma.

Lemma 3 The equilibrium house rent function has the following properties:

     q (z) is increasing and convex,
                                  S U (z)
     for z        z^, q 0 (z) =     R ,     and
      @q 0 (z)
       @R        < 0 for z        z^ if s    s is su¢ ciently small.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.
   Note that our results on the use of the location asset do not require either skill heterogeneity or the
assumed supermodularity between s and z. Consider the case in which there is only one skill, say s0 ; and

                                                                    13
                               Figure 2: Allocation of income groups to cities


so everyone obtains the same bene…t from living in a given city. In this case, there is complete spatial
segregation between constrained and unconstrained individuals. Namely, there is a threshold location z^,
so that all unconstrained individuals are indi¤erent between locations z       z^, and constrained individuals
locate in places z < z^, where the return to the location asset is higher than the interest rate.

2.3   Optimal Allocation
The equilibrium allocation of the model described above is ine¢ cient due to the presence of borrowing
constraints. The ine¢ ciency is re‡ected in the use of the location asset by constrained individuals. Their
use of the location asset ameliorates the e¤ect of the …nancial constraint. However, because it reduces total
output in the second period by driving agents to locations where they earn less, the resulting allocation is
still ine¢ cient relative to an economy without …nancial constraints.
   Finding an e¢ cient allocation can be broken down in two parts. First, the problem of allocating indi-
viduals across locations to maximize discounted second period output net of housing costs, and second the
allocation of consumption in both periods across individuals of di¤erent types. We focus on the solution of
the …rst part of the planner’s problem. The second part is a redistribution problem that depends on the



                                                      14
                                       Figure 3: House rents across cities


chosen social welfare function and for any standard welfare function the solution is increasing in the total
output generated by the allocation of agents across locations.
   Given the assumed supermodularity between s and z, the planner allocation necessarily involves a one-
to-one increasing matching function. Namely, the solution exhibits positive assortative matching. Hence, in
contrast to the equilibrium allocation, only one type of agent locates in a given city. We show this rigorously
in the following lemma.

Lemma 4 Consider the problem of a planner in a small open economy that does not face credit constraints
and has access to an asset with exogenous return R. Then:

      the planner allocates individuals according to an increasing matching function Z SP (s), and

      the decentralized allocation yield strictly less (i) present value of output, and (ii) present value of output
      net of housing costs

Proof. See Appendix A.3.

2.4   Placed-Based Policies
The equilibrium described above determines the distribution of population across cities, L(z), for all z 2 [z; z]
with L(z) > 0 for z 2 [~
                       z ; z]. In the equilibrium allocation, agents with low values of s that are constrained

                                                        15
decide to locate in the lower range of cities because they use the location asset to borrow. We now want to
consider the e¤ect that place based-policies might have on welfare for the di¤erent types of agents. Place-
based policies aim to improve the characteristics of some of the worse locations in the economy. This is
naturally costly, and implies taxing other locations. Therefore, as a stylized representation of these policies,
consider policies that shrink the range of characteristics of equilibrium cities [~
                                                                                  z ; z] to a singleton fz0 g, keeping
the mass of cities constant: We choose z0 to guarantee that the average income that individuals derive from
cities stays unchanged, namely, E[sz] = z0 E[s].14 Thus, this policy captures the essential elements of place-
based policies if they are implemented without generating any aggregate loss of resources. Note also that
positive sorting between skills and city types implies that

                                                               s
                                               z0 = E z            > E[z]:
                                                              E[s]

That is, the targeted city type is better than the average.
    To explain our general result below it is useful to start with an example where s = 0. Namely, the
lowest skilled individuals in the economy have zero skill and, therefore, derive no bene…ts from living in
better cities. These individuals in equilibrium locate in the worst cities in the economy, z~, and pay zero
rent q (~
        z ) = 0. Naturally, such individuals will be worse o¤ if we implement our place-based policy. In the
equilibrium with place-based policies rents are positive and identical in all cities, but for the lowest skilled
individuals the bene…ts of locating in the improved cities are still zero. Hence, anyone with s = 0 necessary
losses from the policy. By continuity, there is a range of individuals with s > 0 that are also worse o¤ after
the policy. If they have some skills, they bene…t in terms of future income, but the increase in rents still
dominates. Or, in other words, the policy prevents them from borrowing with the location asset. Something
they would like to do.
    As long as s = 0, the logic above applies for any policy that reduces the range of cities at the bottom of
the distribution. Namely, any policy that improves the worst city that agents have access to (and therefore
increases its equilibrium rents). Of course, this logic also relies on keeping the mass of cities constant. This
is intuitive, place-based policies that improve the worse cities in the equilibrium allocation but that allow
for the creation of new low-z cities would achieve little.
    The logic described above for the case of s = 0 can be extended to a more general setting with s > 0,
when Q(L(z)) = L with           < 1.15 In this case we can characterize the set of individuals that lose using the
matching functions. The individuals that are guaranteed to lose are the ones between the lowest skill, and
the skill of the individuals that locate, in the original equilibrium, in the average city. The reason is, again,
that up to that point the convexity of housing prices implies that the increase in rents associated with the
  14
      The expectation on the left-hand-side is taken with respect to the equilibrium allocation in space in the competitive
equilibrium with di¤erent cities, before the policy change. The expectation on the right-hand-side involves only the exogenous
marginal distribution of skill.
   15
      This is a natural assumption that holds, for example, in the standard circular monocentric city model with a central
business district and commuting (as in Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2013). In that case, = 1=2:



                                                             16
policy does not compensate the future gain in income for these agents. That is, these agents get low returns
for the location asset, so they like to use it to borrow, not to save. This is particularly true for constrained
individuals, so the set of skills of constrained individuals that lose is larger than the set of unconstrained
individuals that lose from the policy. The next lemma presents the formal result.

Lemma 5 Suppose house rents are concave in population, i.e. Q(L(z)) = L with                < 1. Then a place-based
policy that makes all cities have characteristic z0 makes

      all unconstrained agents with s 2 s; S U (E[z]) worse o¤ and

      all constrained agents (y0 ; y1 ; s) with s 2 s; S C (y0 ; y1 ; E[z]) worse o¤ .

    Since S C (y0 ; y1 ; E[z]) > S U (E[z]) ; the set of skills of constrained individuals that are worse o¤ is larger.

Proof. See Appendix A.4.

2.5    The Location E¤ect of Front and Back-Loaded Shocks
The results above can also be used to describe how agents react to shocks of di¤erent types. We are
particularly interested in income shocks that a¤ect the relative slope of an individual’s income path. Namely,
shocks that a¤ect income today, y0 , relative to income tomorrow, y1 + sz: These shocks will induce agents
to adjust their savings using the …nancial and location assets. In Section 4 we study how workers in France
reallocate across regions as a result of an unemployment spell. An unemployment spell is a front-loaded
shock for individuals that receive little or no severance pay, since it reduces income today relative to income
tomorrow. So we can contrast the model’s predictions with our observations for France. Other front-loaded
shocks include declines in the compensation of particular occupations or particular industries. The shock
is front-loaded because individuals and their descendants can adjust their future occupation and industry,
but are stuck in the short run.
    Consider an individual (y0 ; y1 ; s) that experiences an idiosyncratic negative front-loaded shock that de-
creases y0 to y00 < y0 but increases y1 to y10   y1 : Because the shock is idiosyncratic, it does not a¤ect the equi-
librium matching function or rent schedule. The results in Lemma 1 imply that agents that are constrained
will use the location asset more and will downgrade their location, since Z C (y00 ; y10 ; s) < Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s):
Unconstrained individuals that become constrained due to the shock also downgrade their location, since
Z C (y00 ; y10 ; s) < Z U (s). In contrast, unconstrained individuals that remain unconstrained (individuals such
that y0 > y00 > Y0 (y10 ; s)   Y0 (y1 ; s)) stay where they are, since Z U (s) is independent of the income path.
Hence, constrained individuals, or those that become constrained, borrow more using the location asset,
while unconstrained individuals use the …nancial asset to transfer consumption to the present. Of course,
since what matters for the argument is the slope of the income path, a positive back-loaded shock has a
similar e¤ect on location choices and the use of the location asset.


                                                          17
      A positive front-loaded shock or a negative back-loaded shock has exactly the reverse e¤ect. Constrained
individuals, or individuals that become unconstrained, save with the location asset and upgrade location.
Individuals that were, and remain, unconstrained use the …nancial market to save and do not change their
use of the location asset.
      Note that permanent adverse (or positive) shocks can imply a change in the slope of the income pro…le.
For example a permanent adverse shock that increases both y0 and y1 induces borrowing if y00              y10 = R <
y0     y1 = R: Such a shock then generates the same qualitative e¤ects on the use of the location asset as a
front-loaded negative shock. In contrast, if y00     y10 = R > y0   y1 = R, the shock induces extra savings and
so has a similar qualitative e¤ect than a back-loaded negative shock. Of course, if y00    y10 = R = y0    y1 = R,
locations remain unchanged.
      As a last possibility consider an individual that acquires more skill, namely, an increase in s. Because
s increases income in the future, some of the implications of the increase in s are similar to those of a
back-loaded positive shock. On top of this, an increase in s increases the return of the location asset relative
to the …nancial asset which implies that agents want to save more using the location asset. Hence, they
want to upgrade their city. Lemma 1 tells us that the the second e¤ect always dominates, given that both
Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s) and Z U (s) are increasing in s.
      In the context of our simple model and the results described above, we can think of a worker losing
her job as changing current income from y0 to y00 . Once the worker …nd a new job next period she again
earns y1 : If the worker receives unemployment bene…ts that are, say, a fraction     < 1 of her last salary, then
y00   = y0   and the shock is a front-loaded negative shock that makes individuals downgrade if constrained
and not relocate if unconstrained. If in contrast the worker receives, say, a severance pay that makes the
current payment larger than when employed, y00 =        (y0 ) y0 > y0 (perhaps at the cost of a lower y1 when she
…nds a job), then the shock is a front-loaded positive shock that will make constrained individuals upgrade.
Now, if the generosity of severance pay depends on the level of income (e.g.       (y0 ) is increasing), then high
income individuals that are constrained upgrade location when they lose their job while low income ones
downgrade. Overall, however, since high income individuals are less constrained than low income ones, we
expect the use of the location asset to be more pronounced among people in the latter group. We contrast
this exact implications with French data in Section 4.


3      In…nite Horizon Model
In this section we extend our model to an in…nite horizon economy. The key di¤erences with the model
presented in the previous section, is that now agents live forever and receive an idiosyncratic income stream
yt . Depending on their skill, location, asset holdings, and income, they make consumption and savings
decisions. To do so they use the …nancial market subject to a borrowing constraint and the location asset
by choosing where to live. As before, cities di¤er in their return to skill and their rent. Also as before, one
can view individuals as solving a two-asset portfolio choice problem subject to a borrowing constraint on


                                                        18
the risk-free bond. In contrast to the two period model, the in…nite horizon version determines the invariant
distribution of wealth in the population and therefore the wealth composition of cities as well.
    In any period t, in…nitely-lived individuals receive an idiosyncratic income shock yt , which follows a
…rst-order Markov chain with states y1 ; :::; yN and a given transition matrix,                                 . Throughout we assume
that individuals have a permanent skill             s.16     In period t, an individual in location zt with an asset level at ,
chooses how much to consume ct , how much to save at+1 in a one period risk-free bond with interest rate
R, and where to live next period, zt+1 . Agents can move freely across locations. Their income in period t
is yt + szt . To go to location zt+1 , they need to pay the rent q(zt+1 ) one period in advance, i.e. in period t.
Finally, we assume that the risk-free bond is subject to a standard credit constraint at+1                               a.
    Given an increasing and concave ‡ow utility function u satisfying Inada conditions, and a discount factor
  < 1, individuals maximize
                                                                                     "   1
                                                                                                            #
                                                                                         X
                                                                                               t
                                    V (at ; zt ; yt ; s) =        max           E0                 u(ct )                          (7)
                                                             fat+1 ;zt+1 g1
                                                                          t=0            t=0

                                                 s:t: ct + at+1 + q(zt+1 ) = yt + szt + Rat ;
                                                       at+1        a:

If we denote optimal choices with an asterisk, as in the two period model the solution to this dynamic
optimization problem yields a …nancial Euler equation

                                                        u0 (ct (at ; zt ; yt ; s))
                                                                                                      R
                                                Et [u0 (ct+1 (at+1 ; zt+1 ; yt+1 ; s))]

that holds with equality if and only if at+1 (at ; zt ; yt ; s) > a. Also similarly, free mobility implies a mobility
Euler equation given by

                                           u0 (ct (at ; zt ; yt ; s))                 s
                                         0
                                                                           = 0
                                    Et [u (ct+1 (at+1 ; zt+1 ; yt+1 ; s))]  q (zt+1 (at ; zt ; yt ; s))

which implies that
                                                                  s
                                                                                           R                                       (8)
                                                      q 0 (zt+1 (at ; zt ; yt ; s))
with equality if and only if at+1 (at ; zt ; yt ; s) > a: Note that, again we have that, for non-constrained indi-
viduals, city choice zt+1 (at ; zt ; yt ; s) only depends on skill s.
    Denote by Ft the joint distribution of the four-tuple (at ; zt ; yt ; s) in period t: Then the distribution of
  16
       It is feasible to relax this restriction and introduce idiosyncratic skill shocks, although at some computational cost.




                                                                        19
people across cities, Lt (z) is given by

              Z    z                     N Z
                                         X         1Z z   Z   s
                       Lt (z) H (dz) =                            1 [z (a; z; yi ; s)   z] Ft (da; dz; ds) for all z 2 [z; z]
               z                         i=1   a     z    s


and rents are given by q (z) = Q (L (z)). This economy converges to a steady state where the distribution
Ft is constant over time.
    An equilibrium of the model above can be computed numerically. We do so for a CRRA utility function,
for a uniform distribution of cities, and for a particular house rent schedule.17 We choose reasonable
parameters values that allow us to illustrate the main forces at work. The exact values, speci…cations, and
solution method are described in Appendix C.
    Figure 4 presents the results of a simulation of this model. We focus on the reaction of a particular
individual to a transitory income shock. The …gure presents …ve panels, each of them displaying a di¤erent
variable. For comparison purposes we present the behavior of an individual that can move (solid dark lines),
and therefore use the location asset, and the behavior of an individual that cannot move from her preferred
location when unconstrained, Z U (s) (dashed light lines). The di¤erence between these two cases represents
the way in which the location asset helps the individual deal with the transitory income shock. We plot the
e¤ects for a particular individual with a …xed skill level.
    The …rst panel in Figure 4 simply plots the income shock over time. The agent can be in two income
states: high, yH = 0:2; and low, yL = 0:05:18 In period zero, the agent transitions from the high to the
low income level. It stays there until the eighth period when he transitions back to the high income. This
income process is identical for both scenarios, with and without mobility.
    The second panel plots the level of …nancial assets. We start the individual at assets that are 150% of
the transitory income level in the high state (also equal to 60% of the level of the maximum accumulated
…nancial assets for the agent that cannot move). The individual also receives an income proportional to her
skill and the city where she lived, zt s. This additional income represents most of the individual’s income.
The transitory path represents between 15 and 30% of the agent’s total income. As a result of the shock,
the agent consumes part of her …nancial assets and therefore the asset balance declines until it hits zero,
which is the level of the …nancial constraint. That is, individuals cannot borrow at all in …nancial markets.
This decline in …nancial assets happens a bit faster when individuals can use the location asset, since in
that case they know that when they hit the …nancial constraint they will be able to smooth consumption by
moving. In period 4, the agent that cannot move hits the borrowing constraint and stays there for several
periods. The agent that can use the location asset hits the borrowing constraint one period earlier. When
   17
      In principle, specifying a given house rent schedule is without loss of generality, because we can …nd a skill distribution that
would lead to this particular house rent schedule as an equilibrium outcome. Of course, endogenizing the house rent schedule is
essential to perform aggregate counterfactual simulations. In the exercises below, we only consider counterfactuals that change
the state of a particular individual and therefore do not a¤ect the aggregate equilibrium allocation and prices.
   18
      We could think of the low state as unemployment, and the high state as employment. Our calibration of the transition
matrix then implies a steady-state unemployment rate of about 14%.



                                                                          20
Figure 4: Dynamic reaction to a temporary income shock




                         21
the income shock reverses in period 10, without the location asset, the agent immediately starts saving and
building a …nancial asset stock. In contrast, because at that point the location asset pays a higher return
than the …nancial asset, the individual that can use the location asset, uses it to save. Such an individual
stays stuck at the constraint for an extra two periods while it moves to better locations. Eventually, she
reaches her desired location, the return she perceives on the location asset goes down, and she starts saving
with the …nancial asset. Note that the presence of the location makes the individual stay longer at the
…nancial constraint!
    The third panel plots the location of the agent over time. The ideal unconstrained location of the agent
is at city Z U (s) = 0:99: The agent that cannot move simply stays there throughout. The one that can stays
there until …nancial assets hit the …nancial constraint. Once she runs down …nancial assets to zero, she
starts borrowing using the location asset. That is, she starts downgrading her location progressively. In this
case the total downgrade is about 40%, similar in magnitude to the largest e¤ects we calculate for France
in the next section. This downgrading continues until the agent either reaches the minimum location she is
willing to live in, or the shock reverses. In the plot it continues throughout the 10 periods where the agent
obtains a low income. After the shock reverses to the high income state, the agent starts upgrading her
location progressively. The last period where she is …nancially constrained, she reaches her unconstrained
preferred city and starts saving with the …nancial asset only. Throughout the transition, the change in the
city component of income due to the use of the location asset reaches 0.28, which is of the same order of
magnitude than the high idiosyncratic income state.
    The fourth panel in Figure 4 shows the share of housing expenditure in total income. The average share
lies between 20% and 40%, similar to the data (Davis and Ortalo-Magne, 2011). At impact, the share of
housing expenditure jumps up due to the fall in income. It starts falling from that peak since agents pay
rents one period in advance. It keeps falling as the agents borrow with the location asset and downgrade
their location. It falls even more as the income shock reverts to the high state and then starts increasing
when the agent starts saving with the location asset. It overshoots the desired unconstrained level with high
income due to the need to pay rents in advance, but eventually stabilizes at the same level as the immobile
agent.
    The bottom panel in the …gure shows the agent consumption path with and without mobility. As we
have underscored, the use of the location asset allows the agent to smooth consumption better since it can
borrow even when she is at the …nancial constraint. The result is a consumption path that declines more
slowly than without the location asset. Because borrowing with the location asset involves sacri…cing future
income, the total fall in consumption is also eventually somewhat larger. Once the shock reverses, the path
out of the consumption slump is also smoother for agents that can use the location asset. Overall, these
dynamic patterns of behavior vary substantially with and without the location asset.
    The ability to use the location asset results in expected welfare gains for the agent.19 The presence of
  19
    The gains from using the location asset for one particular path of realizations can be either negative or positive. For
example, in Figure 4, the negative shock lasts for several periods. This increases the set of periods where agents that use the



                                                              22
some gains is obvious given that the location asset provides a way of relaxing the friction imposed by the
…nancial constraint and the agent can always decide not to move. In Figure 5 we present the percentage
gain in consumption, and in consumption equivalent welfare from using the location asset. The values are
calculated starting from the ideal city for unconstrained individuals, Z U (s), and we keep the skill of the
individual …xed, as in Figure 4. Figure 5 then plots the relative consumption and welfare from using the
location asset as a function of the starting asset level. It presents the gains for agents with a current high or
low income realization. Clearly, because we are not estimating the parameters of the model for a particular
circumstance, the level of the gains provides only a rough indication of what is at stake from using the
location asset. In contrast, the qualitative patterns are more interesting. Most consumption gains happen
close to the constraint for low-income individuals who are dissaving. These consumption gains quickly fade
away as we consider individuals with higher levels of assets. However, because those consumption gains
occur precisely in the high marginal utility states, they translate into welfare gains of almost 2% close to
the constraint.20 The …gure also shows that agents in the low income state bene…t more than agents in the
high income state, as they are the most likely to use the ‘location asset’.




                  Figure 5: Consumption and welfare gains from the use of the Location Asset

    Of course, because we have assumed that there is no cost of mobility at all, in our model agents optimize
location asset obtain less consumption. However, this particular path is relatively unlikely. Other paths with shorter duration
of the negative transitory shock yield larger bene…ts from the use of the location asset, and are more likely. In expectation,
there are gains since the agent has a larger more ‡exible choice set.
   20
      Gains in ‡ow consumption can be as high as 18% for low-income individuals close to the constraint that live in their
unconstrained preferred location. These gains are larger than the ones depicted in Figure 4. This is the case because individuals
usually start downgrading location one period before they hit the constraint. Note also that the small kinks in the consumption
gains are due to kinks in the consumption policy functions, when individuals hit the constraint next period.


                                                               23
their location every period. Small moving costs would make adjustments to the agents’ location, and
therefore borrowing and saving with the location asset, more infrequent (although still bene…cial). In
addition, because the borrowing constraint generates a concave value function in wealth, small moving costs
would reduce the frequency of moves more for low-wealth individuals relative to high-wealth individuals.
Together with shocks to skill this would help explain jointly the sorting patterns across space and mobility
patterns across income groups. We now explore some of the implications of our view of location choices
using French individual location histories.


4        Location Choices in France
We have discussed in detail several implications of our view of location decisions as investing in a location
asset. The main one of them is that constrained individuals will downgrade their location as a result of a
negative front-loaded income shock. In contrast, unconstrained individuals will not react to these shocks. In
this section we want to contrast this prediction with individual level data. We do so using data for France
for the period 1994-2007. We use employer tax return data from a 4% longitudinal panel representative of all
workers in the French economy from 1994 to 2007. We observe a worker identi…er, the worker’s wages, the
start and end dates of all her employment spells, residence and workplace municipality, as well as a number
of worker characteristics like age, gender, occupation and birthplace. There are 36569 municipalities in
France, with an average area of 15 squared kilometers and 435 inhabitants.
     Our data is very detailed, however, contrasting it with our theoretical predictions involves several choices.
First, since the data does not have direct information on assets or the extent to which workers are ‘con-
strained’to borrow in …nancial markets, we need to take a stand on what are the worker’s characteristics
that make them more likely to be constrained. Furthermore, we do not have the worker’s skill or her level
of education.
     Finally, we do not have a location characteristics that tells us which locations are more complementary
with skill, or more attractive. To address these challenges we use our theoretical model. First, the positive
assortative matching implication links a worker’s skill with her earnings which we observe. Furthermore, as
implied by the model in Section 2, residents of cities with higher z will have higher average incomes. Hence,
we can determine the z rank of cities using the rank of their average income21 (see Figure 1). Finally, the
model tells us that the highest income individuals in any city are the ones that are not constrained. Hence
we can look at the percentile of an individual in the income distribution of her residence municipality to
obtain an index of the likelihood that the individual is constrained (see Figure 2). In a second exercise,
we go further and compute a local asset rank from wage data using a perpetual inventory method that
leverages the longitudinal dimension of our data. Armed with these choices we are ready to explore the
mobility choices of individuals and contrast them with the implications of our ‘location as an asset’view.
    21
    In the main text, we present results when we use the rank of every municipality it the 2002 distribution. In the Appendix,
we show that our results are virtually unchanged when we use the rank in the current year’s distribution instead.



                                                             24
4.1    The Impact of Location on Wages
We start by verifying that our measure of z is robust to controlling for house prices and selection. Figure 11 in
Appendix D.2 displays mean log daily real wages22 across deciles of z-rank. It also plots the average residual
wages from a standard Mincer regression with a full set of gender, age, occupation and industry …xed e¤ects.
In both cases, real wages are increasing in z: Observed real wages are 40% higher in the best municipality
in France, relative to the worst. Residual real wages are only 20% higher. Hence, while important, selection
on observables explains only half of pay di¤erential across locations indexed by our measure z: To control
for selection on unobservables, we also include worker …xed e¤ects in our Mincer regression, and plot mean
residual wages from the …xed-e¤ect regression. Residual wages remain monotonically and signi…cantly
increasing with our measure of z, although di¤erences between the bottom and top location decile reduce
to about 2.5%.
    In order for location to resemble an investment decision, it is essential that some of the bene…ts (or costs)
of living in a given location accrue over time. The ideal experiment to test if the returns of moving to a
better municipality increase over time would randomly allocate identical workers across di¤erent locations,
and would compare wages over time of workers who were allocated to good locations relative to those who
were allocated to bad locations. In practice, however, …nding instruments that achieve such a random spatial
allocation is di¢ cult. Therefore, we turn to a di¤erence-in-di¤erence speci…cation in which we control for
as many observable characteristics as possible. We isolate movers and estimate

                                           wit
                                    log         =   it   +   t log wi; 1   +   t P (zi0 )   + "it ;                                (9)
                                          wi; 1

where P (zi0 ) is the percentile of the municipality where individuals migrated in t = 0: The dependent
variable log wwi;it 1 denotes wage growth between the period just before the move (period                           1) and period t:
The di¤erence speci…cation controls for any time-invariant worker characteristic (a worker …xed e¤ect).                              it
controls non-parametrically for age, gender, year, 2-digit origin occupation, 2-digit origin industry, and origin
municipality …xed e¤ects interacted with the year since the move t. Occupation, industry, and municipality
are measured before the move at t =           1: We also control for the wage before the move log wi;                    1   to control
for individual-speci…c trends in wage        growth.23       Finally, estimating this equation on movers only avoids
picking up unobserved heterogeneity between movers and stayers.
    The investment dimension of mobility is captured by the di¤erence                                   24
                                                                                              t       0.     The identifying assump-
tion that lends a causal interpretation to this estimate is that there are no unobserved shocks that are
systematically correlated with mobility decisions and wage growth between 0 and t and orthogonal to our
  22
      We de‡ate wages using a house price index at the département-year level, to control for di¤erences in local prices. There
are 96 départements in mainland France.
   23
      If wage growth has a systematic individual component, then the pre-move wage must partly re‡ect it. Thus, controlling
for the pre-move wage nets out any individual-speci…c wage growth rates and so it plays a similar role than individual …xed
e¤ects in the wage growth regression.
   24
      The initial e¤ect, 0    1 ; could capture, on top of the immediate e¤ect from moving, a short term investment component
that is not realized immediately but takes less than 2 years to be re‡ected in wages.


                                                               25
controls. Hence, if individuals receive an idiosyncratic worker-level shock at t                                     1 that makes their wage
grow systematically faster in better municipalities, in a way that is orthogonal to worker …xed e¤ects, the
non-parametric trends, and pre-move wages, then we would not be able to interpret                                           t   0   in a causal
way.25
                                   .3
              Conditional real wage gains from mobility
                 0               .1-.1          .2




                                                          -4     -3      -2   -1   0      1        2     3   4   5      6       7
                                                                                       Year since move
                                                          Mean and 90% CIs.

Figure 6: Plot of the t        1 coe¢ cients, for t = 4:::7, and observed daily real wages. t = 0 is the
…rst move of a worker and is the instantaneous e¤ect of location. Standard errors clustered at the origin
municipality level. Using the 4% long panel. The dots show the point estimate, and vertical bars are the
90% con…dence intervals.

    Figure 6 shows the estimation results. It displays the point estimates relative to period                                       1, together
with 90% con…dence intervals. The estimate for t = 0 reveals that moving to the best location in France
conditional on our controls leads to about 12% higher wages than moving to the worst location. Comparing
the estimate at t = 7 to the estimate at t = 0 shows that the return to migration almost doubles after 7
years: wages are then 21% higher. The Appendix shows that our result that the incremental gains from
mobility accrue partly over time, and reach about 10% after 7 years, is robust to dropping all our controls or
  25
     One way to alleviate this concern would be to include worker-speci…c trends in the estimation. The drawback is that it
would probably absorb too much of the e¤ect of mobility. For instance, Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) show that structural
estimates of worker and …rm heterogeneity in wage determination attribute much less variation to worker characteristics than
typical …xed e¤ects estimates as in Abowd et al. (1999) (40% instead of 80%). Bonhomme et al. (2018) show that one way
to get around this issue is to cluster observations in broader categories before estimating the …xed e¤ects. This is akin to our
approach that bins wage growth at the worker level in 2-digit occupation x industry x municipality categories and adds the
pre-move wage control.


                                                                                         26
the non-parametric trends            26
                                 it :     We conclude that location in fact has a payment structure that resembles
an intertemporal asset.

4.2    Moving Decisions after Non-Employment Shocks
The previous subsection showed that location can be viewed as an asset. We now turn to explore if agents
actively use this asset. We study the changes in residential locations as a result of an unemployment spell.
We see the location of an individual in a particular job. As a result of job termination the individual
disappears from the dataset and we see the individual appear again when she …nd another job. We select
individuals that have at least one unemployment spell of at least 40 days, that had employment before and
after for at least 90 days, and that switch employer after the unemployment spell. This selection guarantees
that the shock is signi…cant in magnitude and avoids people that have unstable temporary employment.
After an individual …nd a new job, we can look at the average income rank of the new residential location
and compare it with the original rank.27
    Figure 7 provides some basic statistics for our dataset. The top panel plots the number of labor market
transitions involving unemployment spells. Our data includes more than two hundred thousand transitions
with one and two quarter long unemployment, and about hundred thousand where unemployment lasts three
quarters. For comparison purposes, there are about seventy …ve thousand transitions in which individuals
change jobs without an unemployment spell in between. So there is plenty of data to study the type of
transitions we are interested in. The bottom panel presents the fraction of agents that change location as a
function of the length of the unemployment spell. It distinguishes between agents in the bottom quintiles
of the income distribution, top quintile, and all agents. The fraction of movers that are unemployed for
one quarter or change jobs without going through unemployment is above 20%. The fraction increases with
the length of the unemployment spell, and between the top and bottom income quintile, although it is not
monotone in income for all unemployment spell lengths. Thus, the number of agents that see a change in
employment and move is substantial, particularly if they go through a long unemployment spell.28
    The main implication of our model is that individuals with a low income rank in their original location
(and therefore presumably …nancially constrained according to our theory) should downgrade their location
relative to individuals in the same location who are at the top of the location’s income distribution.29
  26
      In Appendix D.3, Figure 12 presents a simple comparison of observed wages for movers, binned into quintiles of their
destination. Figure 13 shows the results for a version of regression (9) without the …xed e¤ects it : In both cases the results
are similar.
   27
      Section D.1 contains a thorough description of the data and the construction of the sample.
   28
      Long unemployment spells are also less likely to re‡ect voluntary vacation periods between jobs.
   29
      Figure 7 reveals that there is not much mobility di¤erences across income groups. Note that the mobility implications of
our view depend on the types of shocks individuals experience. When income declines as the result of a regional shock that
a¤ects an entire municipality, and local rents decline, borrowing using the ‘location asset’ may imply staying in the declining
region rather than moving away.




                                                              27
                                                    150000
                            Number of transitions
                                                    100000
                                                    50,000
                                                    0




                                                                      1                  2                   3
                                                                          Non-employment duration (Quarters)
                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                   EUE
                                                    .3
                            Fraction of movers
                                                    .2
                                                    .1
                                                    0




                                                                      1               2                  3
                                                                       Non-employment duration (Quarters)
                                                                    EE, Q1                EE, average                 EE, Q5
                                                                    EUE, Q1               EUE, average                EUE, Q5



         Figure 7: Total number of transitions (top panel) and fraction of movers (bottom panel)


Therefore we …rst estimate the following regression,

                       P (z1it )                             P (z0it ) =     z0   +   t   +    I   +     wP   (wit ; z0it ) + Xit + "it ;               (10)

where P (z1it ) is the percentile of the origin municipality in the separation year, P (z0it ) is the percentile of
the destination municipality in the job …nding year,                                          z0   denotes département …xed e¤ects,         t   denotes year


                                                                                          28
…xed e¤ects,    I   denotes a set of worker characteristics …xed e¤ects (e.g. age, gender, birthplace, occupation),
P (w0it ; z0it ) is individual i’s income percentile in municipality z0it , Xit is a vector of various worker-level
controls that we describe below, and "it is a mean zero error term that we assume has the standard mean
independence properties. We are particularly interested in the value of           w.   The theory predicts that agents
that are lower in the income rank of their origin municipality should downgrade relative to others as a result
of the unemployment spell. So our ‘location as an asset’view implies that              w   > 0: Below, we also construct
a measure of asset holdings using a perpetual inventory method and verify that our results are robust to
replacing local wage percentiles P (wit ; z0it ) by local asset percentiles P (ait ; z0it ).
    Table 1 presents the results for      w   when we select the sample to agents that move as a result of (or
concurrently to) the unemployment shock. As implied by our view, the estimated coe¢ cient on the origin
wage percentile is positive and signi…cant. The magnitude varies between 0.100 and 0.148 depending on the
set of …xed e¤ects we use in the regression. All standard errors are clustered at the département level. The
coe¢ cient increases as we add a more and more complete set of individual characteristic …xed e¤ects. The
interpretation is simple, using our preferred estimate in column four, a job termination implies that agents
in the bottom percentile of their location’s income distribution downgrade to a location 14.8 percentile
points worse than the highest-income agents in their original location. This is a large e¤ect that indicates
very di¤erent mobility patterns across individuals. The results in column four should be interpreted as the
average e¤ect (across all municipalities) for workers within the same period and d·
                                                                                  epartement, and with the
same age, gender, birthplace, and pre-separation 2-digit occupation and industry.
    Comparing columns one to three with column four, it is clear that industry and occupation …xed e¤ects
increase the magnitude of the coe¢ cients signi…cantly. This is probably related to the fact that occupations
and industries are clustered in space. As a result, in the data individuals in the same occupation and
industry with very di¤erent incomes tend to move to the same location due to the spatial concentration
of labor demand in speci…c industries and occupations. Our focus is on the e¤ect of …nancial constraints
on consumption smoothing through …nancial and location assets, so adding these …xed e¤ects is preferable.
Similarly, life cycle e¤ects and historical ties to certain locations might a¤ect the choices of individuals
beyond the forces in our model. Hence, adding these …xed e¤ects is probably important as well, although in
practice this addition does not change the estimates much. Independently of the speci…cation chosen, our
main hypothesis is clearly not falsi…ed by these results.
    Figure 8 presents the change in location percentile for agents at the bottom quintile, relative to all
other quintiles, and 90% con…dence intervals. It shows our estimates when we estimate e¤ects separately for
agents that exhibit di¤erent unemployment spell lengths. The top panel presents the e¤ect for all individuals,
including movers and non-movers, while the bottom panel presents the e¤ects of movers. The graph shows
that the main e¤ects of unemployment on location are larger as time spent non-employed increases (we limit
the non-employment spells to 3 quarters since beyond that length the number of transitions in the data is
relatively small). The e¤ects are monotone in the agent’s income quintile in the original location, as can be
determined by the shifting down of the curves as we compare with higher quintiles. This is exactly what we


                                                           29
                                                           Table 1: Unemployment spells and location decisions
                                                                                           Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.100                0.100              0.119         0.148        0.354              0.345       0.343     0.341     0.730
                                                        (0.005)              (0.005)            (0.004)       (0.006)      (0.018)            (0.018)     (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.051)
Controls
 Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                         -0.084             -0.087      -0.087    -0.088    -0.083
                                                                                                                           (0.004)            (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
  Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                          0.023       0.022     0.020     0.024
                                                                                                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
  Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                               0.010     0.001     0.001
                                                                                                                                                          (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
  Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                         0.290     0.289
  (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                        (0.013)   (0.013)
  OWP * W0                                                                                                                                                                    -0.094
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.010)
  Constant                                              -0.044
                                                        (0.009)
Fixed e¤ ects
 Origin Département & Year                                                        X                   X            X            X                     X      X         X         X
 Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X            X            X                     X      X         X         X
 2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                        X            X                     X      X         X         X
Obs.                                                      292489              292489              292431       292428        292428            292428      270351    269914    269914
R2                                                         0.008               0.060               0.072        0.075         0.088             0.090       0.093     0.154     0.157
W.-R2                                                                          0.008               0.009        0.010         0.024             0.026       0.029     0.095     0.098
2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
   p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.
E ¤e c t o f O W P a t m e d ia n W 0 in la st c o lu m n = 0 .7 3 0 - 0 .0 9 4 * 3 .5 1 2 = 0 .4 0 0 . A t P 1 0 = 0 .4 9 6 . A t P 9 0 = 0 .3 3 4




 would expect if initial income percentile makes borrowing constraints more binding.
         Our interpretation of the results above as evidence for the use of the location asset can be threatened
 by other potentially relevant mechanisms. First, the level of an individual’s permanent income is not a
 direct motivation to borrow or save. This is why we look at the local wage percentile. However, individuals
 with di¤erent earning potentials sort in space. Therefore, the extent to which individuals at the same local
 wage percentile are …nancially constrained depends on these individual characteristics.30 For example, in
 a low-ranked location individuals with a given skill can be unconstrained while these same individuals will
 be constrained in a better location. This form of selection tends to bias the coe¢ cient of the origin wage
 percentile towards zero if we do not control for an agent’s earning potential. Hence, in columns 5 to 9 of
 Table 1 we control for selection by adding the individual’s pre-unemployment wage.
         Second, although we would hypothesize that most wage changes will be related to the agent’s location
 choice, we recognize that workers might obtain wage o¤ers that are particularly high or low for idiosyncratic
 reasons, and that workers may have advance information regarding the future idiosyncratic component
 of wages. Because wages are mean-reverting, workers who anticipate a particularly high wage after the
 unemployment shock will expect to then face a downward-sloping income stream. Thus, these workers want
 to save using the ‘location asset’. Hence, a particularly good realization of the idiosyncratic component of
 wages should be accompanied by location upgrading, while a particularly bad one should come with location
      30
           Captured by the range of s located in a given city in Figure 1.


                                                                                                              30
                                                                                    All individuals




                                 0
                     Change in residence rank
                      -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02
                                 -.1




                                                0                              1                   2                   3
                                                                               Quarters non-employed

                                                                           Relative to Q2             Relative to Q3
                                                                           Relative to Q4             Relative to Q5
                                                Coefficient and 90% CIs.



                                                                                     Movers only
                                 0
                     Change in residence rank
                      -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02
                                 -.1




                                                0                              1                   2                   3
                                                                               Quarters non-employed

                                                                           Relative to Q2             Relative to Q3
                                                                           Relative to Q4             Relative to Q5
                                                Coefficient and 90% CIs.




                 Figure 8: Change in residence percentile and unemployment spell length


downgrading. To alleviate this concern, we also control for post-unemployment wages in columns 6 to 9 of
Table 1. Notice that even though post-unemployment variables are likely to be endogenous, adding them
in our regressions helps us assess the robustness of our results. In Appendix D.5, we show comparable
regressions where we control for wage growth instead of both wages separately. Results are similar.
   Third, it could be that location decisions are the result of a static trade-o¤ rather than a dynamic



                                                                                      31
investment choice. In particular, one may be concerned that di¤erences in the chosen consumption of local
amenities drive our results. Note that it is di¢ cult to rationalize our results arguing that the relative
downgrading of location by movers that become non-employed and are at the bottom of a location’s income
distribution simply re‡ects their desire to consume relatively less location amenities. The reason is that
the income shock associated with non-employment is in general at least as large for high earners, and these
agents are the ones for whom location is more elastic. The location decisions of high earners most necessarily
be more elastic than that of low earners since otherwise we would not observe them in the same location in
equilibrium. Appendix B.2 formalizes this logic using a general version of our model, but without …nancial
constraints, where location choices are the result of the amenities consumption decision only. Nonetheless,
we include …ve measures of local amenities31 for the destination municipality as controls in columns 8 and
9 of Table 1 to con…rm our argument.
    Finally, to guarantee that our results are not driven by an increase in worker’s commuting time in
response to unemployment shocks, we control for commuting distance32 after the unemployment spell in
columns 6 to 9 of Table 1. Thus, we are comparing mobility patterns of individuals holding constant
commuting distance.
    The results in columns 5 to 9 of Table 1 reveal that there is a substantial amount of selection across
space in the data.33 When we include pre-unemployment wages as a control, the e¤ect of local wage rank
rises more than twofold to 0.354. This means that individuals at the bottom of the local wage distribution
downgrade 35.4 percentile points more than individuals at the top in response to an unemployment shock
controlling for selection in space. The coe¢ cient on pre-unemployment wage is negative and signi…cant:
initially high-wage movers tend to move up less than low-wage earners, re‡ecting mean-reversion in the
data due to positive sorting in space. Controlling for post-unemployment variables (wage, amenities and
commuting) leaves the point estimate on OWP essentially unchanged, supporting the view that di¤erences in
amenities consumption or commuting do not challenge the ‘location as an asset’hypothesis. Unsurprisingly,
both post-unemployment wages and amenities are positively associated with location rank
    The last column in Table 1 adds an interaction between pre-move wages and local wage ranks. We
expect high-earners to react less to unemployment shocks because they are less constrained, and therefore
the coe¢ cient on the interaction to be negative. We estimate a large and signi…cant value. To interpret
its magnitude, note that it implies that individuals at the 10th percentile of the wage distribution have an
OWP coe¢ cient of 0.496, while individuals at the 90th percentile have an OWP coe¢ cient of 0.334. Table
   31
      To compute amenities at the residence municipality level, we use data from the Base Permamente des Equipements 2007
- the closest year available - on the number of 136 types of establishments in health services (e.g. hospitals), education services
(e.g. pre-schools), public services (e.g. police stations), and commercial services (e.g. perfumeries). We …rst compute the
number of these establishments per capita in each municipality. Then, we extract the …rst …ve principal components of the
corresponding correlation matrix. For each municipality, we obtain the loading on each of these …ve principal components. We
choose the sign of the principal component such that the loadings correlate positively with our measure of z. Finally, we rank
these loadings between 0 and 1.
   32
      To construct a measure of commuting distance, we simply compute the geodesic distance between centroids of residence
and workplace municipalities.
   33
      We expect strong selection because our measure of z is constructed directly from average wages in a location.


                                                                32
22 in Appendix D.5, we reproduce all the previous results with city ranks computed annually instead of
being …xed at their 2002 values. The results are extremely similar, and, if anything, slightly larger.
    So far our estimates pool observations from municipalities where most individuals are poor and hence
expected to be relatively sensitive to unemployment shocks, and municipalities where most individuals are
rich and thus expected to be relatively less sensitive to unemployment shocks. Similarly to the negative
interaction of OWP and W0, we expect individuals in poor municipalities to use the ‘location asset’more
because more of them are constrained, or close to constrained, and so have a larger marginal rate of intertem-
poral substitution. Thus, they should have a larger OWP coe¢ cient. We can estimate this heterogenous
e¤ects non-parametrically by decile of the pre-unemployment municipality rank. We include decile …xed
e¤ects in our regression in order to account for other sources of di¤erences in mobility patterns across mu-
nicipalities with di¤erent ranks.34 Note that, since part of the mechanism we propose is captured by the
e¤ect on location patterns of variation in the extent to which individuals are …nancially constrained across
municipalities, adding location rank decile …xed e¤ects to our speci…cation will understate the use of the
location asset.
    Figure 9 displays our results graphically. It shows the e¤ect of OWP by municipality decile, using two
sets of controls: a full set of …xed e¤ects (dashed blue line) and, in addition, a full set of worker-level
controls (solid red line). Consistent with the ‘location as an asset’ view, in both cases the e¤ect of OWP
is monotonically decreasing with the municipality rank. The point estimate is 0.077 and signi…cant at the
bottom decile with the full set of worker-level controls, while it is not statistically signi…cant at the top decile.
Individuals in the best locations do not use the ‘location asset’at all because none of them are constrained,
while individuals in the worst locations use it much more. As expected, the estimates are smaller than in
our initial speci…cations because any between-decile variation has been absorbed by the decile …xed e¤ects.
Table 14 in Appendix D.5 displays the corresponding coe¢ cients with a linear interaction.
    As the results above illustrate, part of the average e¤ect of local wage percentile on the location choices
of non-employed movers is accounted for by di¤erential e¤ects across municipalities within a département.
Although some of this variation illustrates the di¤erential use across municipalities of the location asset
that arises from spatial segregation, it naturally raises the concern that unobserved variation between
municipalities could drive all of our results. To address this potential concern, we reproduce the results
of Tables 1 in Table 2, when we include pre-unemployment municipality …xed e¤ects. These …xed e¤ects
absorb any systematic di¤erences in location decisions after an unemployment shock between municipalities.
Given that there is strong spatial sorting, we expect the e¤ect of OWP estimated o¤ residual variation only
to be smaller in magnitude. Hence, this speci…cation constitutes the strictest test (perhaps too strict) of our
theory so far. We con…rm the implications of the ‘location as an asset’ view, with statistically signi…cant
  34
     For example, if moves occur for idiosyncratic reasons, workers in bottom deciles can only move up, while individuals in
the top decile can only move down. If the local wage rank variable OWP happens to be correlated with some of these mobility
shocks, the bias is likely to be strongest at the extremes of the municipality distribution. To circumvent this possible concern,
we include decile …xed e¤ects in our regression. They absorb any systematic mobility patterns by decile, and the coe¢ cient on
OWP is identi…ed o¤ within-decile variation.



                                                               33
              Effect of OWP on mobility of unemployed
                 0              .05                .1




                                                        1          2         3           4         5           6        7         8        9   10
                                                                                                 Municipality decile

                                                                                   Fixed effects controls
                                                                                   Fixed effects, wage, commuting and amenities controls

                                                        Coefficient and 90% CIs.

Figure 9: Non-parametric estimates and 90% con…dence intervals, of the e¤ect of OWP by origin municipality
deciles. Movers only. Controlling for département, year, age, birthplace, gender, 2-digit occupation, industry,
decile …xed e¤ects (dashed blue line), and pre- and post-move wage, commuting distance and amenities (solid
red line).


point estimates of the residual OWP coe¢ cient ranging from 0.02 to 0.06, consistent with the magnitudes
we obtained with decile …xed e¤ects.
    The reduction in the magnitude of the estimates between Table 1 and 2 could also be the result of a
stronger attenuation bias when we include municipality …xed e¤ects. Undoubtedly, in the 4% sample in Table
2, individual local wage percentiles are necessarily measured with error. To account for this possibility, we
run the same speci…cations using repeated 2-year panels with the universe of French workers35 . The results,
presented in Tables 7 and 8 in Appendix D.4, indicate that the estimates are similar when we include
département …xed e¤ects. However, as expected, they are larger when we include municipality …xed e¤ect.
Using the universe of workers and municipality …xed e¤ects the coe¢ cient on OWP is always above 0.06
without individual-level controls and remains above 0.144 when including individual-level controls. In all
speci…cations the coe¢ cient on OWP is statistically signi…cant at the 0.1% level.
    One additional concern with our exercise is that transitions into non-employment might be voluntary and
  35
     For consistency, we use the 4% sample throughout the main text given that several of our exercises require the longitudinal
dimension, which is missing from the dataset with the universe of workers. The results that can be reproduced with this
alternative dataset are similar and presented in Appendix D.4.



                                                                                                     34
                               Table 2: Unemployment spells and location decisions within municipalities
                                                                                      Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
   Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.100                0.063              0.066            0.035     0.044     0.026     0.022     0.019
                                                           (0.005)              (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.004)
   Controls
    Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                         -0.003    -0.007    -0.006    -0.007
                                                                                                                              (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
        Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                              0.034     0.033     0.032
                                                                                                                                        (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
        Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                 0.008     -0.001
                                                                                                                                                  (0.001)   (0.001)
        Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                           0.308
        (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                          (0.012)
        Constant                                           -0.044
                                                           (0.009)
   Fixed e¤ ects
    Origin Municipality & Year                                                       X                   X             X         X         X         X         X
    Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X             X         X         X         X         X
    2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                         X         X         X         X         X
   Obs.                                                      292489              287453              287394         287391    287391     287391    265056    264604
   R2                                                         0.008               0.455               0.463          0.466     0.466      0.470     0.474     0.530
   W.-R2                                                                          0.005               0.005          0.001     0.001      0.009     0.012     0.117
   2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
        p < 0:05,        p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




therefore can select the group of individuals in our empirical exercise. To address this potential concern, we
restrict our sample to individuals who were initially located in municipalities where employment contracted
signi…cantly, akin to the displaced worker literature. Those individuals are thus more likely to have lost their
job for exogenous reasons. As a cuto¤, we chose the 10th percentile of the municipality annual employment
growth distribution, which is -5.2%. Tables 9 and 10 in Appendix D.4 reproduce the results of Tables 1 and
2, and show that the coe¢ cients all remain statistically signi…cant and of very similar magnitudes.36 These
results suggest that voluntary non-employment transitions do not select the sample in a way that noticeably
a¤ects the use of the ‘location asset’.
    One …nal potential concern with the results above is that individuals at the bottom of the income
distribution in their original location tend to go to lower ranked locations relative to other individuals for
reasons unrelated to the unemployment shock. For example, they could be progressively optimizing their
location by correcting past location mistakes. That is, the results above could be simply capturing some
form of mean reversion in the data that controlling for the variety of …xed e¤ects and worker-level variables
in Table 1 does not eliminate. To address this potential concern, ideally we would need a comparison
group that moves but does not have an incentive to use the location asset to borrow. Finding such a
comparison group is hard because the desire to borrow depends on the whole future expected income path.
   36
     This strict selection criterion reduces drastically the number of observations, so Tables 9 and 10 in Appendix D.4 use data
from the repeated 2-year panels with the universe of French workers. Note that, since there is less selection across municipalities
in the sample restricted to contracting places, the coe¢ cient on OWP does not increase as much after the inclusion of individual
controls in the speci…cation with municipality …xed e¤ects.



                                                                                                               35
This expectation is likely a¤ected by any job transition or move. We make an attempt to …nd a suitable,
although not perfect, comparison by pulling all employment to employment transitions that generate moves,
together with all transitions through non-employment. We use non-employment transitions that last over
one year to eliminate non-employment spells that capture voluntary vacations between jobs.37 We then
estimate in the di¤erential e¤ect of origin wage percentile for workers that go through an unemployment
spell.

                Table 3: Location decisions of unemployed (1 year +) relative to job switchers
                       Movers only. EUE transitions (1 year + ) relative to EE transitions. Fixed City Rank.
               1[Long EUE] * OWP                          0.020       0.054       0.065        0.064      0.035
                                                          (0.005)     (0.013)     (0.014)      (0.015)    (0.016)
               OWP                                        0.136       0.311       0.291        0.291      0.316
                                                          (0.008)     (0.021)     (0.020)      (0.020)    (0.021)
               Controls
                 Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                               -0.080      -0.074       -0.075     -0.085
                                                                      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.006)
                 1[Long EUE] * W0                                     -0.006      -0.016       -0.014     -0.006
                                                                      (0.002)     (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)
                 Post-Move Log Wage (W1)                                          0.019        0.017      0.012
                                                                                  (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)
                 1[Long EUE] * W1                                                 0.007        0.008      0.013
                                                                                  (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)
                 Post-Move Log Comm. Dist. (C1)                                                0.012      0.002
                                                                                               (0.003)    (0.002)
                 1[Long EUE] * C1                                                              -0.003     -0.002
                                                                                               (0.002)    (0.002)
                 Post-Move Amenities Percentile                                                           0.322
                 (A1, First PC, other 4 unreported)                                                       (0.017)
                 1[Long EUE] * A1                                                                         -0.041
                 (other 4 interactions unreported)                                                        (0.012)
               Fixed E¤ ects
                 Origin Département & Year                   X           X           X            X            X
                 Age, Birthplace & Gender                    X           X           X            X            X
                 2-Digit Origin Occupation & Industry        X           X           X            X            X
               Obs.                                        204037      204037      204037       188111     187801
               R2                                           0.075       0.088       0.091        0.093      0.153
               W.-R2                                        0.011       0.025       0.028        0.031      0.095
               22,180 Origin Municipalities; 2002-2007. Standard errors in parenthesis
                 p < 0:05,   p < 0:01,     p < 0:001. SEs clustered at the départment level.


    The results are presented in Table 3. The second row indicates the overall e¤ect of origin wage percentile,
while the …rst row indicates the di¤erential e¤ect when individuals go through an unemployment spell. We
expect the di¤erential e¤ect to be positive and signi…cant. This is the case for all combinations of …xed e¤ects
presented in the table. In our preferred speci…cation in column two, the di¤erential e¤ect is a downgrade of
5.4 percentage points for individuals at the bottom of the origin wage percentile (relative to those at the
top) that go through an unemployment spell longer than a year, relative to those that go through a job-to-
job transition. The …nding in the …rst row that the e¤ect of origin wage percentile is large and signi…cant
  37
     We present results with all non-employment transitions (as de…ned in the rest of the exercises) in Appendix D.5. The
results are similar.


                                                                 36
indicates that agents in this sub-sample downgrade more if they have relatively low wages in their location.
This might be the result of the cost involved in moves or job switches, or the bene…t of the job switch in
terms of higher wage growth in the future (which makes individuals want to borrow with the location asset
even in job-to-job transitions that increase wages). Table 11 in Appendix D.4 shows that our results are
very similar when using the universe of workers, except that the coe¢ cient on the interaction in the last
column remains high (0.076) and signi…cant at the 0.1% level.
    We reproduce can also reproduce this exercise restricting our sample to job switches in expanding
municipalities, and non-employment spells in contracting municipalities. The rational is clear: Individuals
who switch jobs in booming municipalities are less likely to do so because they were or expected to be
…red, while individuals who separate in contracting municipalities are more likely to do so because they
lost their job. This stricter selection criterion should improve the quality of the comparison and, therefore,
the e¤ect of non-employment on the use of the location asset. This is exactly what Table 12 in Appendix
D.4 reveals. The marginal e¤ect of OWP of going through non-employment in a contracting municipality,
relative to switching jobs in an expanding municipality, increases two- to threefold (0.135) relative to our
baseline exercise and is always statistically signi…cant at the 0.1% level.

4.3    Using Imputed Assets
So far, following our theory, we have used the local wage percentile to proxy for the relative asset position
of an individual. Of course, the map between the local wage percentile and likelihood of being …nancially
constrained implied by the theory is unlikely to hold exactly in the data. Thus, here we propose an
alternative approach to identify …nancially constrained individuals. We leverage the longitudinal 4% sample
to construct assets from wage data using a perpetual inventory method. We then replace our measure of
local wage rank, OWP, by a measure of local asset holdings percentile, OAP. The advantage of this approach
is that it relaxes the underlying assumption of a strong positive correlation between relative wages rank and
relative asset holdings. However, it comes at the additional cost of making another set of assumptions to
construct savings. Therefore, we view both exercises as complementary.
    To construct our measure of assets we …rst solve a standard consumption-savings model with quadratic
utility and without credit constraints.38 Under standard assumptions detailed in Appendix D.6, it is well
known that savings, st , in this model have a simple expression as a function of current and expected
permanent income fyt g, namely,
                                                             " T                       #
                                                     R 1      X
                                                                            (s t)
                                        st = yt           Et      R                 yt+s ;
                                                    R R T     s=t
   38
      To construct assets, the ideal method would be to express savings as a function of wages in a model with credit constraints,
compute savings from the data, and …nally cumulate savings to obtain assets. However, models with credit constraints do not
typically yield closed-form expressions of savings as a function of income. Therefore, any savings function we would obtain from
a model with …nancial constraints would inevitably rely on the particular parameters chosen to simulate the model, an any
sensitivity analysis with respect to those parameters would require to solve the model numerically again.


                                                               37
where Et denotes the expectation operator and the gross interest rate, R, is assumed …xed. We posit that
savings in this model approximate savings in a model with credit constraints. We then make two alternative
assumptions regarding how individuals construct expectations of their future income stream, and report
results for both cases.
    First, we assume that individuals believe that wage growth follows an AR(1) process which we estimate
in the data. Under some technical assumptions detailed in Appendix D.6, savings are given by a simple
policy rule that depends only on current income and past income growth. Namely,

                                                      yt             yt
                                               st =        1                ;
                                                      R             yt 1

where    is the autocorrelation of the AR(1) process for wage growth, which we estimate to be -0.36 annually.
We refer to this approach as the forecasting method.
    Second, we alternatively assume that individuals have perfect foresight and thus perfectly anticipate
their future wages, which we can directly read o¤ from the data. This approach does not require us to take
a stand on a particular statistical process for income but it assume that individuals can perfectly anticipate
the future. We compute permanent income from wages in the 1994-2007 data.39
    In both instances, we then cumulate savings starting at zero assets when we …rst observe individuals in the
data, and rank assets in each municipality, as we did for wages, to obtain a local asset percentile, OAP. Note
that, although both methods are expected to approximate assets, they are very distinct empirical measures:
the forecasting method only uses current and past wages to infer savings, while the perfect foresight method
only uses current and future wages. Therefore, obtaining similar results with both methods lends additional
support to our methodology and hypothesis.
    Table 4 …rst shows our results for the forecasting method, when we regress mobility decisions on our
asset-based measure, OAP, instead of our wage-based measure OWP. The results are qualitatively similar to
those with the OWP measure. The coe¢ cient on the local asset percentile is always statistically signi…cant
and ranges from 0.067 to 0.09 depending on the speci…cation, implying that the poorest individuals in a
location downgrade location between 6.7 and 9 percentile points more than the wealthiest individuals in a
location when going through unemployment. Table 23 in Appendix D.8, we reproduce the previous results
with city ranks computed annually instead of being …xed at their 2002 values. The results are extremely
similar, and, if anything, slightly larger. In all cases, the values of the coe¢ cient on OAP are smaller than
when using local wage ranks OWP. This is likely the result of classical measurement error on the right-
hand-side which biases our coe¢ cient of interest towards zero. Indeed, because we impute assets from wage
data, we inevitably introduce a substantial amount of noise.40 To address the potential attenuation bias, we
  39
      Since we do not have data beyond 2007, our calculation implicitly assumes that in any given year, agents expect their
income after 2007 to be constant at the average income between the current year and 2007.
   40
      The second reason could be a combination of static amenities demand and selection on unobserved heterogeneity that is
not captured by our wage and amenities controls. If high earners in poor places expect high wages in the future, they want to
upgrade location, irrespectively of the unemployment shock, in order to consume more amenities. If the coe¢ cient on OWP
captures this e¤ect, we would expect it to be larger than the one on OAP, since accumulated assets do not determine static


                                                               38
      Table 4: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Local Asset Percentile measure: OLS
                                                                    Movers only. Fixed city rank. Forecasting method.
    Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                0.077                0.067              0.071         0.073     0.090     0.084     0.084     0.080
                                                            (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.005)       (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)
    Controls
     Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                      -0.014    -0.019    -0.019    -0.020
                                                                                                                            (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                              0.027     0.026     0.024
                                                                                                                                      (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                 0.011     0.001
                                                                                                                                                (0.001)   (0.001)
      Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                           0.289
      (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                          (0.013)
      Constant                                              -0.041
                                                            (0.012)
    Fixed E¤ ects
     Origin Département & Year                                                        X                   X          X         X         X         X         X
     Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X          X         X         X         X         X
     2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                      X         X         X         X         X
    Obs.                                                      292489              292489              292431      292428     292428    292428    270351    269914
    R2                                                         0.004               0.055               0.066       0.068      0.069     0.072     0.075     0.136
    W.-R2                                                                          0.003               0.003       0.003      0.004     0.007     0.010     0.075
    2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
       p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d é p a rtm e nt le ve l.




recognize that our theory identi…es OWP as a valid instrument for OAP. Therefore, in Table 16 in Appendix
D.7 we reproduce the exercise from Table 4, but instrumenting OAP with OWP. The coe¢ cients on OAP
increases in all speci…cations once we instrument using OWP.41 The magnitudes become even larger than
in our results using directly OWP. Put together, these patterns are consistent with statistical measurement
error in OAP. Furthermore, since through the lens of the ‘location as an asset’perspective, OWP contains
measurement error when used to predict mobility decisions, it is natural that the instrumented coe¢ cient on
OAP is larger than the coe¢ cient on OWP. We report the corresponding results using the perfect foresight
method in Table 17 in Appendix D.7. The results are very similar, which is encouraging.
    Once we adjust our estimation strategy to account for the attenuation bias using the instrumental variable
approach, we can perform the stricter test of our theory where we measure the heterogenous e¤ect of local
asset percentile by decile. In Figure 10, we estimate non-parametrically the e¤ect of OAP by municipality
decile when instrumenting with OWP, as in Figure 9. We observe that the results are qualitatively similar
to using OWP, although a bit larger. The e¤ect is monotonically declining up to a statistical zero at the
top. In Table 18 in Appendix D.7, we report the corresponding results with a linear interaction.
    As a …nal test of our theory, we investigate the e¤ect of local asset percentile on location choices after
an unemployment shock controlling for municipality …xed e¤ects. As before, these …xed e¤ects absorb
any systematic mobility patterns by origin municipality. Thus, we are now identifying the e¤ect of OAP
only from within-municipality deviations from the mean. We again instrument using OWP to correct for
amenities demand. The instrumental variable results below falsify this hypothesis.
  41
     The F-statistics of the …rst stage (unreported) are all well above the Stock-Yogo (2005) critical values.



                                                                                                            39
               Effect of OAP on mobility of unemployed (IV)
               0         .05     .1          .15      .2




                                                              1          2         3           4         5           6        7         8        9   10
                                                                                                       Municipality decile

                                                                                         Fixed effects controls
                                                                                         Fixed effects, wage, commuting and amenities controls

                                                              Coefficient and 90% CIs.

Figure 10: Non-parametric estimates and 90% con…dence intervals, of the e¤ect of OAP by origin municipal-
ity deciles. Movers only. Using OWP as instrument and controlling for département, year, age, birthplace,
gender, 2-digit occupation, industry, decile …xed e¤ects (dashed blue line), and pre- and post-move wage,
commuting distance and amenities (solid red line). Forecasting method.


attenuation bias. The results are reported in Table 5. The e¤ect of OAP is statistically signi…cant in all
speci…cations, ranging from 0.06 to 0.13, thus supporting the ‘location as an asset’ perspective. This is
perhaps the most stringent test of our theory and the e¤ects remain quite large and signi…cant. We report
very similar results in Table 19 in Appendix D.7 when we use the perfect foresight method.42


5        Conclusions
This paper provides an alternative view of individual location decisions. We have argued that we can
understand location decisions as an investment that allows individuals to transfer resources across periods
even when they are constrained in …nancial markets. Individuals that are constrained to borrow in the
…nancial markets use the location asset to borrow and live in locations that o¤er relatively bad work and
educational opportunities but are cheap in terms of housing costs and other local expenses. Hence, our view
    42
     We also obtain similar results in Tables 20 and 21 in Appendix D.7, where we restrict the sample to declining municipalities.
However, because we can only construct assets in the 4% sample, for this exercise we restrict the sample to municipalities in
which employment growth is below the 25th percentile (-0.4%). This allows us to maintain a large enough number of observations
and include all our controls.


                                                                                                           40
       Table 5: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Local Asset Percentile measure: IV
                                                Movers only. Fixed city rank. Forecasting method. Instrumental variables.
    Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                0.160                0.099              0.117         0.068     0.131     0.081     0.068     0.059
                                                            (0.010)              (0.005)            (0.004)       (0.005)   (0.013)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.014)
    Controls
     Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                      -0.013    -0.012    -0.011    -0.011
                                                                                                                            (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
      Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                              0.033     0.032     0.030
                                                                                                                                      (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)

      Post-move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                 0.008     -0.001
                                                                                                                                                (0.001)   (0.001)
      Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                           0.308
      (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                          (0.012)
      Constant                                              -0.089
                                                            (0.007)
    Fixed e¤ ects
     Origin Municipality & Year                                                       X                   X          X         X         X         X         X
     Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X          X         X         X         X         X
     2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                      X         X         X         X         X
    Obs.                                                      292489              287453             287394       287391     287391    287391    265056    264604
    2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
       p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




of location choices underscores the importance of the incentives to smooth consumption and the extent to
which individuals face …nancial constraints as essential to understand where they live.
   We show that the implications of our model can rationalize the moving choices observed in France
when individuals go through unemployment spells. More generally, our view can help explain why some
individual locate in areas that seem so undesirable otherwise. The fact that many individuals choose to
live in such locations, rather than in areas that o¤er more opportunities, might seem puzzling from a static
perspective, but is a perfectly reasonable choice through the lens of our dynamic theory. In most cases the
previous literature has relied on unobserved, and implausibly large, migration costs to explain these choices.
In contrast, our view can rationalize this behavior even when migration is perfectly free. The change in
perspective is relevant for policy. As we have argued, using place-based policies to improve some of the
worse locations can harm some of the less skilled agents in the economy.
   Of course, the ‘location as an asset’view is more general than the particular model we put forward in
this paper and can be contrasted more fully with the data. For example, modelling location choices in an
overlapping generations model with multiple locations could help us understand the implications of our view
for life-cycle patterns and investment in the skills of descendants. Modelling location choices as changing the
properties of an agents income process (by, for example, a¤ecting the likelihood of becoming unemployed)
would allow us to study the value of the location asset to manage risk. In addition, in general equilibrium, the
agents that decide to locate in a particular region determine, at least partly, the characteristic of the region.
Incorporating this form of external e¤ects could lead to interesting insights for policy. Finally, embedding
this type of consumption-savings decision with borrowing constraints in a fully-‡edged quantitative spatial



                                                                                                            41
model with skill complementarities, factor price determination, mobility and trade could help decompose
the role of the location asset in determining net mobility patterns relative to other forces. It could also help
us understand how the use of location as an asset a¤ects the evaluation of global phenomena that a¤ect
factor rewards in particular locations, occupations, and industries.




                                                      42
References
 [1] J. M. Abowd, F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis. High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms. Economet-
    rica, 67(2):251–333.

 [2] T. Allen and C. Arkolakis. Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy. Working Paper 19181,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2013.

 [3] J. Altonji and R. Mans…eld. The Role of Family, School, and Community Characteristics in Inequality
    in Education and Labor-Market Outcomes. Technical report, 2011.

 [4] G.-M. Angeletos. Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and Aggregate Saving. Review of Economic
    Dynamics, 10(1):1 –30, 2007.

 [5] N. Baum-Snow and R. Pavan. Understanding the City Size Wage Gap. The Review of Economic
    Studies, 79(1):88–127, 2012.

 [6] S. Bonhomme, T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa. A Distributional Framework for Matched Employer
    Employee Data. Technical report, 2015.

 [7] L. Caliendo, M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro. Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General Equilibrium
    Analysis of the China Trade Shock. Working Papers 2015-9, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, May
    2015.

 [8] L. Caliendo, L. D. Opromolla, F. Parro, and A. Sforza. Goods and Factor Market Integration: A
    Quantitative Assessment of the EU Enlargement. Working Paper 23695, National Bureau of Economic
    Research, August 2017.

 [9] C. D. Carroll. The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic Optimization
    Problems. Economics Letters, 91(3):312 –320, 2006.

[10] P. Cavalcanti-Ferreira, A. Monge-Naranjo, and L. T. de Mello Pereira. Of Cities and Slums. Technical
    report, 2018.

[11] R. Chetty and N. Hendren. The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood
    Exposure E¤ects. Working Paper 23001, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2016.

[12] R. Chetty, N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz. The E¤ects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children:
    New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic Review, 106(4):855–
    902, April 2016.

[13] D. M. Cutler and E. L. Glaeser. Are Ghettos Good or Bad? The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    112(3):827–872, 1997.


                                                   43
[14] M. A. Davis, J. Gregory, D. A. Hartley, and K. Tan. Neighborhood Choices, Neighborhood E¤ects and
    Housing Vouchers. FRB of Chicago Working Paper No. WP-2017-2, 2015.

[15] M. A. Davis and F. Ortalo-Magne. Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents. Review of Economic
    Dynamics, 14(2):248 –261, 2011.

[16] J. De La Roca and D. Puga. Learning by Working in Big Cities. The Review of Economic Studies,
    84(1):106–142, 2017.

[17] N. A. Denton and D. S. Massey. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass.
    Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.

[18] K. Desmet, D. Nagy, and E. Rossi-Hansberg. The Geography of Development. Journal of Political
    Economy, 2018.

[19] K. Desmet and E. Rossi-Hansberg. Urban Accounting and Welfare. American Economic Review,
    103(6):2296–2327, October 2013.

[20] K. Desmet and E. Rossi-Hansberg. On the Spatial Economic Impact of Global Warming. Journal of
    Urban Economics, 88:16 –37, 2015.

[21] R. Diamond. The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’Diverging Location Choices
    by Skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review, 106(3):479–524, March 2016.

[22] R. Diamond, T. McQuade, and F. Qian. The E¤ects of Rent Control Expansion on Tenants, Landlords,
    and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco. Working Paper 24181, National Bureau of Economic
    Research, January 2018.

[23] G. J. Duncan, J. Ludwig, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. C. Kessler, J. R. Kling, and L. Sanbonmatsu.
    Long-Term Neighborhood E¤ects on Low-Income Families: Evidence from Moving to Opportunity.
    American Economic Review, 103(3):226–31, May 2013.

[24] R. Fernandez and R. Rogerson. Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative
    Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform. The American Economic Review, 88(4):813–833, 1998.

[25] A. Fogli and V. Guerrieri. The End of the American Dream? Inequality and Segregation in US cities.
    Working Paper, 2018.

[26] A. Galichon. Optimal Transport Methods in Economics. Princeton University Press, 2016.

[27] E. Giannone. Skill-Biased Technical Change and Regional Convergence. 2017 Meeting Papers 190,
    Society for Economic Dynamics, 2017.

[28] E. L. Glaeser and D. C. Mare. Cities and Skills. Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2):316–342, 2001.

                                                   44
[29] C.-T. Hsieh and E. Moretti. Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation. Working Paper 21154,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2015.

[30] M. Huggett. The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance Economies. Journal of
    Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5):953 –969, 1993.

[31] G. Kaplan and S. Schulhofer-Wohl. Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration.
    International Economic Review, 58(1):57–94, 2017.

[32] J. Kennan and J. R. Walker. The E¤ect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions.
    Econometrica, 79(1):211–251, 2011.

[33] R. E. J. Lucas. Life Earnings and Rural-Urban Migration. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1):S29–
    S59, 2004.

[34] B. Moll. Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital Misallocation?
    American Economic Review, 104(10):3186–3221, October 2014.

[35] M. Morten. Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India. Working Paper
    22159, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2016.

[36] F. Postel-Vinay and J.-M. Robin. Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer Hetero-
    geneity. Econometrica, 70(6):2295–2350, 2002.

[37] S. J. Redding. Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare. Journal of International Economics, 101:148
    –167, 2016.

[38] L. A. Sjaastad. The Costs and Returns of Human Migration. Journal of Political Economy, 70(5):80–93,
    1962.

[39] J. Stock and M. Yogo. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. Andrews DWK Identi-
    …cation and Inference for Econometric Models, pages 80–108, 2005.

[40] W. J. Wilson. The Truly Disadvantaged. The Inner City, the Underclass and Public Policy. University
    of Chicago Press, 1987.




                                                    45
A      Appendix: Proofs for the model in Section 2
A.1     Proof of Lemma 1
We split the proof in three parts:

    1. Location decisions of constrained and unconstrained individuals

    2. Equilibrium in cities in which at least one unconstrained individual lives

    3. Equilibrium in cities with only constrained individuals

A.1.1     Location decisions

Recall that for unconstrained individuals,
                                                                   s
                                                           R=
                                                                q 0 (z)
Therefore, unconstrained individuals of skill s locate in cities Z U (s) such that

                                                                   s
                                                     R=
                                                             q 0 (Z U (s))
In addition, some constrained individuals may choose cities in which only constrained individuals locate.
For those individuals, we cannot use the expression above, and we directly use the mobility Euler equation:

                                    (y1 + Ra) + zS C (y0 ; y1 ; z)   S C (y0 ; y1 ; z)
                                                                   =
                                          [y0 a q(z)]                     q 0 (z)

which implies
                                                               q 0 (z)(y1 + Ra)
                                     S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) =                                                         (11)
                                                            [y0 a q(z)] zq 0 (z)
Notice that for constrained individuals (y0 ; y1 ; S C (y0 ; y1 ; z)) who locate in a city z where at least one un-
constrained individual with skill S U (z) lives, we can substitute out q 0 (z) = S U (z)=R, leading to

                                                                S U (z)(y1 + Ra)
                                  S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) =                                                            (12)
                                                           R (y0 a q(z)) zS U (z)

In the sequel, it will be useful to have notation for this relationship in terms of all the endogenous objects.
Therefore, we de…ne

                                                                              s(y1 + Ra)
                      X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) =                                                      (13)
                                                                R (y0        a q(Z U (s)))   Z U (s)s

Equation (13) describes which constrained individuals (y0 ; y1 ; X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))) choose to locate
in city Z U (s).

                                                              46
   To obtain the lowest possible income in a given city, we can re-write equation (12) as

                                                            1             (y1 + Ra)S U (z)
                                   y0 = a + q(z) +            [zS U (z) +                     ]                                  (14)
                                                            R               S C (y0 ; y1 ; z)

This delivers the lower bound on initial income for constrained individuals who locate in city z with at least
an unconstrained individual:

                                                                1                                 S U (z)
                          y0      Y 0 (z) = a + q(z) +            [zS U (z) + (y1 + Ra)                   ]
                                                                R                                    s

A similar bound involving q 0 (z) holds for cities in which only unconstrained individuals live.

A.1.2    Equilibrium in cities with at least one unconstrained individual

We …rst consider equilibrium in cities with at least one constrained individual. Because at any skill, con-
strained individuals locate in worse cities that unconstrained individuals, cities with unconstrained individ-
uals have higher z than those with only constrained individuals. Thus, there exists a cuto¤ z^ such that a
city has at least one unconstrained individual i¤ z                   z^.
   We start by assuming that the matching function Z U (s) is increasing at all s. Total population that
locates in cities [Z U (s); Z U (s) + ZsU (s)ds) is the sum of the unconstrained individuals of the same skill and
constrained individuals of higher skill. Before expressing total population, we denote by

                                                                                                         y1 +sZ U (s)
                 ~ 0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) = y0                    U       y0    q(Z U (s)) +        R
                 A(y                                                 q(Z (s))
                                                                                                1+

desired savings as a function of individual characteristics and the matching function. Using the notation we
de…ned, we can express total population as:

             G(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)); ZsU (s))
             ZZ                  h                                   i
                                   ~              U        U
                 f (y0 ; y1 ; s)1 A(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z (s); q(Z (s))) > a dy0 dy1
             ZZ h                                          i
           +         ~ 0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) a
                 1 A(y

                                                                                d[X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))]
                    f (y0 ; y1 ; X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))))                                                  dy0 dy1
                                                                                                  ds
                               d[X(y0 ;y1 ;s;Z U (s);q(Z U (s)))]
where it is understood that                   ds                    is the total derivative of s 7! X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))




                                                                     47
with respect to s. We can calculate this last term explicitly:

       d[X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))]
                                                      X0 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))
                         ds
                                                        X1 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) ZsU (s)
                                                      +
                                                                              1+
                                                         R X1 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))
                                                      +                                            q 0 (Z U (s))        ZsU (s)
                                                         s                   1+

where an s subscript denotes a derivative w.r.t. s, and where we de…ne

                                                          y1 + Ra                     sZ U (s)(y1 + Ra)
X0 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) =                                       +
                                            R (y0      a q(Z U (s))) Z U (s)s [ R (y0 a q(Z U (s))) Z U (s)s]2
                                             R y0       a q(Z U (s)) (y1 + Ra)
                                     =
                                          [ R (y0       a q(Z U (s))) Z U (s)s]2

and
                        X1 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))           s2 Z U (s)(y1 + Ra)
                                                              =
                                         1+                     [ R (y0 a q(Z U (s))) Z U (s)s]2
We now make use once again of the mobility Euler equation q 0 (Z U (s)) = R=s to re-write

                 d[X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))]
                                                            = X0 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))
                                   ds
                                                                 +X1 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))       ZsU (s)

Substituting these expressions into our expression for the supply of individuals in cities [Z U (s); Z U (s) +
ZsU (s)ds), we obtain

           G(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)); ZsU (s)) = A(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) + B(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))              ZsU (s)

where we de…ned
                                                ZZ            h                                       i
                    U          U
            A(s; Z (s); q(Z (s))) =                             ~ 0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) > a dy0 dy1
                                              f (y0 ; y1 ; s)1 A(y
                                            ZZ h                                          i
                                          +       ~ 0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) a
                                              1 A(y

                                                          f (y0 ; y1 ; X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))))
                                                       X0 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))dy0 dy1
                                                ZZ    h                                       i
            B(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) =                ~ 0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))) a
                                                     1 A(y

                                                          f (y0 ; y1 ; X(y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s))))
                                                          X1 (y0 ; y1 ; s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)))dy0 dy1


                                                                 48
Now, equating total population supply to total housing supply:

                          h(Z U (s))L(Z U (s))ZsU (s) = G(s; Z U (s); q(Z U (s)); ZsU (s))

where recall that h(z) is the density of cities with income z. Re-arranging,

                                                   A(s; q(Z U (s)); Z U (s))
                            ZsU (s) =
                                        h(Z U (s))L(Z U (s)) B(s; q(Z U (s)); Z U (s))

It is easier at this stage to write the system in terms of the inverse matching function for unconstrained
individuals S U (z) for the range of cities in which unconstrained individuals live. Using the mobility Euler
equation again, we …nally obtain a nonlinear system of coupled Ordinary Di¤erential Equations (ODEs):

                                                 h(z)L(z) B(S U (z); Q(L(z)); z)
                                 SzU (z) =
                                                      A(S U (z); Q(L(z)); z)
                                                       R
                                 Lz (z) =         U
                                                 S (z)Q0 (L(z))

where recall that house prices are given by q(z) = Q(L(z)). The boundary conditions of this system are
S U (z) = s, and S U (^
                      z ) given by total population supply, as de…ned below. When s> 0 and f is bounded,
inspection of this system reveals that it is uniformly Lipschitz continuous. In addition, the solution, if it
exists, must be bounded. Indeed, diverging S U or L(z) are ruled out by our compact support assump-
tions and by the fact that house prices cannot exceed income which is bounded above. Thus, conditional
on boundary conditions, standard results ensure existence and uniqueness of a global solution to this system..


     Recall that we assumed that the matching function Z U (s) was locally increasing. We now show that the
matching function Z U (s) cannot be decreasing. The ODE without assuming that the matching function
                                        h(z)L(z) B(S(z);Q(L(z));z)
is increasing would be jSzU (z)j =           A(S(z);Q(L(z));z)     .   Then, if the matching function has negative
slope negative at some z0 , since the right-hand-side is of constant sign and the matching function Z U (s)
cannot be ‡at (otherwise we would have a mass point, ruled out through the price function), the matching
function S(z) cannot have a zero and hence is decreasing everywhere. Thus, house prices are concave
throughout the support (from the no-arbitrage condition). Then we have q 0 (z) = S(z)=R < s=R, and
hence q(z) < q(S U (^
                    z )) + sz=R. Substituting back into the budget constraint of the individuals with skill in
(s    ds; s], they would have an incentive to increase their city choice, since this would yield a higher return
on housing. This violates the Second Order Condition for optimality, and hence cannot hold in equilibrium.

A.1.3     Equilibrium in cities with only constrained individuals

We now turn to cities in which only constrained individuals live. We will apply the exact same logic as in the
case for cities with at least one unconstrained individuals. We …rst de…ne notation that is the counterpart


                                                           49
of S C (y0 ; y1 ; z), but makes explicit the dependence on all endogenous objects:

                                                                         q 0 (z)(y1 + Ra)
                                     C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)) =
                                                                      [y0 a q(z)] zq 0 (z)

and notice that S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) = C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)) at the equilibrium house rent schedule.
   Total population in location z must satisfy
                                  ZZ     h                                              i
                h(z)L(z) =                 ~ 0 ; y1 ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)))
                                        1 A(y                                          a
                                                                                d[C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z))]
                                     f (y0 ; y1 ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)))                                      dy0 dy1
                                                                                            dz

We can compute

               d[C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z))]
                                             = C0 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z)) + C1 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z))      q 00 (z)
                           dz

where we de…ne

                                                                           (1 + )[q 02 [y1 + Ra]
                                C0 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z)) =
                                                                         f [y0 a q(z)] zq 02
                                                                                y1 + Ra
                                C1 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z)) =                                +
                                                                          [y0 a q(z)] zq 0 (z)

and hence
                                 h(z)L(z) = D(z; q(z); q 0 (z)) + E(z; q(z); q 0 (z))            q 00 (z)

where
                                       ZZ     h                                              i
                         0
           D(z; q(z); q (z)) =                  ~ 0 ; y1 ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)))
                                             1 A(y                                          a

                                    f (y ; y ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z))) C0 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z))              dy0 dy1
                                  Z Z 0h 1                                          i
            E(z; q(z); q 0 (z)) =          ~ 0 ; y1 ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z))) a
                                       1 A(y

                                         f (y0 ; y1 ; C(y0 ; y1 ; q(z); q 0 (z)))   C1 (y0 ; y1 ; z; q(z); q 0 (z))     dy0 dy1

which de…nes the nonlinear second-order ODE:

                                                      h(z)Q   1 (q(z))  D(z; q(z); q 0 (z))
                                         q 00 (z) =
                                                                E(z; q(z); q 0 (z))

with boundary conditions q(^       z + ), q(zmin ) = 0 that pins down zmin . In addition, q 0 must be
                           z ) = q(^
continuous at the limiting point, otherwise there would be scope for arbitrage: q 0 (^          z + ) = R=S U (^
                                                                                     z ) = q 0 (^              z ).
The same argument as before ensures existence and uniqueness of the global solution conditional on boundary


                                                                    50
                                                                                   R
conditions. Finally, S U (^
                          z ) is determined by the requirement that                    h(z)L(z)dz = 1, total population. Thus,
an equilibrium exists.

A.2    Proof of Lemma 3
Suppose that s = s = s. Unconstrained individuals are indi¤erent between any of the locations in which there
is at least one unconstrained individual. Because constrained individuals always locate in worst cities than
any unconstrained individual of the same skill and we have only one skill type, it must be that constrained
individuals all locate below z^. In other words, there is perfect segregation.
   In this case, for unconstrained individuals,

                                                                     s
                                                       R=
                                                                 q 0 (z)

This implies that for all cities z    z^,
                                                  d[q 0 (z)]          s
                                                             =           <0                                                 (15)
                                                    dR                R2
By continuity, this result extends to the case in which s                  s is strictly positive but small enough.

A.3    Proof of Lemma 4
First, we need to specify the production technology of housing. Suppose housing a produced using the …nal
                                                                  1                       1
good k as sole input, according to H = xk , where           =              and q0 =      x1=
                                                                                               . Under perfect competition in the
housing sector, this production function results in the house rent prices used in the competitive equilibrium.
The planner’s problem can then be split into two stages: (1) allocate individuals over space to maximize
second period output net of discounted housing creation, and (2) redistribute output for consumption. So
if the planner can produce more output net of housing production than the competitive equilibrium, he can
achieve any utilitarian or Pareto improvements over the competitive equilibrium. The planner chooses the
joint distribution of (s; z), g(s; z), to solve
                                                  Z                                Z
                                           max szg(s; z)dsdz                   R       k(z)dz
                                            g;k
                                           Z
                                      s:t:    g(s; z)dz = f (s)
                                           Z
                                              g(s; z)ds = xk(z)
                                           Z
                                              g(s; z)dsdz = 1

where f is the given marginal skill distribution. Note that the planner discounts house production at the
market interest rate, since if it did not use second period output to pay for housing today, it could save
those resources which would deliver a gross return of R tomorrow.


                                                            51
       First, we re-write this in terms of the shadow price of land that would prevail in the planner’s allocation.
We have after some algebra
                                                         1
                                                  L(z)                     1                1
                                      k(z) =                 = ( x) 1              q(z) 1
                                                   x

and hence
                                           Z                      Z
                                                                1        1+ 1
                                      max szg(s; z)dzdz R( x) 1     q(z)      dz
                                       g;q
                                      Z
                                 s:t:    g(s; z)dz = f (s)
                                      Z
                                                        1=
                                         g(s; z)ds = q0 q(z)1=



By construction, the planner’s solution must yield weakly higher output than the competitive equilibrium.
       Now, conditional on a shadow housing price schedule q(z), this is a standard optimal transport problem,
and given the supermodularity of the surplus sz, the solution is perfect Positive Assortative Matching
(PAM): there exists an increasing matching function S(z) such that
                                        Z   s                          Z   z
                                                                1=
                                                 f (x)dx = q0                  q(z 0 )1= dz 0
                                          S(z)                         z

i.e.
                                                                       Z       z
                                                                  1
                                                 S(z) = F                          q(z 0 )1= dz 0
                                                                           z
                                                                  1=
                                     f (S(z))S 0 (z) = Q0              q(z)1=

where F (s) = 1        F (s) is the skill tail cdf. In addition, from Theorem 4.7 p. 39 in Galichon (2016), we
know that the solution is unique.
       Now, the planner also chooses q. Clearly the house rent schedule from the competitive equilibrium is in
the planner’s choice set. Yet, we know that conditional on the competitive equilibrium’s house rent schedule,
the unique maximizer of the planner’s problem features perfect PAM. Since the competitive equilibrium
delivers imperfect PAM (the positive mass of constrained individuals do not satisfy strict PAM), the planner’s
solution must yield strictly higher gross output than the competitive equilibrium given the same house rent
schedule.
       In addition, since the planner can always choose the same house rent schedule as the competitive equilib-
rium, and the sorting of individuals di¤er strictly between both cases, it must be that output net of housing


                                                             52
costs is strictly higher in the planner’s solution. In sum, the planner’s solution yields strictly higher gross
and net output compared to the competitive equilibrium.

A.4     Proof of Lemma 5
The proof is structured in three steps.

   1. Show that city income net of rents is a su¢ cient statistic to capture welfare losses from the policy

   2. Show that city income net of rents declines for all unconstrained individuals below the announced skill
      threshold

   3. Show that this implies that it declines also for constrained individuals below the same skill threshold.

A.4.1    Indirect utility

We …rst go back to the problem of the individual and de…ne indirect utility. For the unconstrained, con-
sumption is

                                                 1                    y1 + z s
                                         c0 =         y0        q +
                                                1+                       R
                                         c1 = Rc0

where we denote optimal choices with asterisks (*), and omit dependence on individual characteristics for
notational simplicity. Indirect utility of unconstrained individuals is

                           V U :=   log R + (1 + ) log c0
                                          ( R)                     y1 sz
                                = log         1+
                                                 + (1 + ) log y0 +   +                    q
                                        (1 + )                     R   R

For the constrained, consumption is

                                                c0 = y0         q     a
                                                c1 = y1 + z s + Ra

and their indirect utility is

                                 V C = log (y0    q   a) +          log (y1 + z s + Ra)

Consider a small change in q (dq) and zs (d(zs)). Then indirect utility changes according to

                                                      1      c1
                                            dV C =       dq + d(zs)
                                                      c0

                                                           53
Therefore, using the …nancial Euler equation,

                                                                     z s
                                              c0     dV C < d                 q
                                                                      R

Therefore, if the right-hand-side is negative for the policy change (even though the change may be large,
we can integrate the inequality across a sequence of in…nitesimal changes), constrained individuals lose. In
                                                                                           z s
sum, for both constrained and unconstrained individuals, a decline in                       R    q entails a decline in indirect
utility.

A.4.2      Income net of rent for unconstrained individuals

De…ne net income before the policy change as

                                                     sz (y0 ; y1 ; s)
                                  I(y0 ; y1 ; s) =                          q(z (y0 ; y1 ; s))
                                                          R

and net income after the policy change as

                                                              z0 s
                                                     I(s) =             q0
                                                               R

where q0 is unique the rent after the policy change. For unconstrained individuals, we simplify notation to

                                                                   sZ U (s)
                                   I(y0 ; y1 ; s)    I U (s) =                    q(Z U (s))
                                                                     R

because location choice does not depend on (y0 ; y1 ) conditional upon being unconstrained. For them, net
income is an increasing and convex function of skill s. Indeed, di¤erentiating it w.r.t. s:

                d    sZ U (s)                       Z U (s)   s                                         Z U (s)
                                q(Z U (s))    =             +              q 0 (Z U (s))    ZsU (s) =           >0
                ds     R                              R       R                                           R

where the last equality comes from the mobility Euler equation.


    After the policy change, matching still holds (even though it is degenerate) and hence the same formula
applies. In this case the slope calculated in the previous equation is constant in s, and takes the unique
value z0 =R.


    We now turn to the rent after the policy change, q0 . Using the assumption                          < 1, we can easily make




                                                              54
comparisons:

                  q0 = q0 L0
                       = q0 E[L]            (where L is the equilibrium population before policy change)
                       > q0 E[L ]           (Jensen’s inequality on the concave function L 7! L )
                       = E[q]
                       > q(E[z])            (Jensen’s inequality on the convex function z 7! q(z))

Now, de…ne s1 < s0 such that Z U (s1 ) = E[z] < z0 = Z U (s0 ). For unconstrained individuals with s1                        s
s0 , since   IsU (s)   =   Z U (s)   2 [E[z]; z0 ], we can integrate to obtain

                                           E[z](s0     s1 )                               z0 (s0 s1 )
                                                              < I U (s0 )   I U (s1 ) <
                                                R                                               R

Therefore,

                                                                             z0 (s0 s1 )
                                                     I U (s1 ) > I U (s0 )
                                                                                   R
                                                                 s 1 z0
                                                               =           q(E[z])
                                                                   R
                                                                 s 1 z0
                                                               >           q0 = I(s1 )
                                                                   R

Hence, we know that at skill s1 , net income for unconstrained individuals pre-reform is above net income
post-reform. In addition, the slope of net income is lower pre-reform for s                             s1 : it is Z U (s)   E[z]
pre-reform, compared to z0 > E[z] post-reform.
    The convexity of I U (s) then implies that

                                                        I U (s) > I(s) ; 8s          s1

i.e. that all unconstrained individuals with lower skill than s1 lose net income form the reform. Since net
income is a su¢ cient statistic for indirect utility, unconstrained individuals with s                   S U (E[z]) lose from the
policy.

A.4.3        Constrained individuals.

We can repeat exactly the same argument as for unconstrained individuals. We simply need to allow for
dependence on (y0 ; y1 ) and leverage the monotonicity property of Z C in skill. De…ne s0 (y0 ; y1 ) < s1 (y0 ; y1 )
such that Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s1 (y0 ; y1 )) = E[z] < z0 = Z C (y0 ; y1 ; s0 (y0 ; y1 )). Then the argument carries through,
holding (y0 ; y1 ) …xed: the range is now for all constrained individuals with skill in [s; S C (y0 ; y1 ; E[z])]. Since
S C (y0 ; y1 ; z) > S U (z), the range of skills for which constrained individuals lose is larger.


                                                                       55
B     Appendix: Extensions with Amenities and Variable Housing Choice
This section develops extensions to our baseline model. We add amenities and a variable housing choice. We
start by deriving the optimality conditions for location choice in that extended model. With an eye towards
our empirical exercise, we then proceed to showing comparative statics with respect to income shocks in
the absence of credit constraints. In particular, we show that without credit constraints two individuals
who start in the same location and both receive the same negative income shock would downgrade location,
but the initially high-income individual would downgrade more. This is inconsistent with the empirical
evidence we present. Therefore, our results are unlikely to be driven by a simple static amenities choice. In
fact, it suggests that if we do not control for wage growth, or amenities in the new location, our estimates
are a lower bound on the causal e¤ect of the consumption-smoothing motive alone, net of the contribution
of amenity consumption to mobility. This lends additional support to the intertemporal consumption-
smoothing mechanism we highlight in the main text.
    The key observation is that for two individuals to be in the same location, the initially high-income
individual must have lower returns to mobility. Thus, following the income shocks, the initially high-income
individual would downgrade more. To formally prove this result, we rely on the central insight that in the
absence of credit constraint, a dynamic model is essentially isomorphic to a static model because it can be
cast in present value terms. We rely on it to show our comparative statics in the two-period model. We
then show that the logic is robust to adding more time periods, and extend our results to an in…nite-horizon
model.

B.1      Generalized two-period model
We …rst consider a version of our two-period model with variable housing choice, amenities, and city income
in both periods. Namely, suppose that individuals indexed by (y; s) solve the following problem:

                    V (y0 ; y1 ; s) =        max              log(A(z) `0 c10       )+   log(A(z) `1 c11   )          (16)
                                        c0 ;c1 ;h0 ;h1 ;a;z



                              s.t. c0 + a + q(z) + p(z)`0 = y0 +                         (s; z)
                                        c1 + [q(z) + p(z)`1 ] = y1 + Ra + (s; z)
                                                                     a          a

where, relative to the model in the main text,                 governs how much of the mobility returns individual receive
immediately, and   governs how much housing costs must be paid in the second period. When                      (s; z) = sz;
 =    = p(z) = 0, A(z) = 1, and         = 0, we obtain the model in the main text.
    Cobb-Douglas utility in consumption and variable housing implies constant expenditure shares on con-
sumption and housing, so that the individual’s problem can equivalently be written in terms of consumption


                                                                    56
only. Namely,
                              V (y0 ; y1 ; s) = max log(B(z) c0 ) +                        log(B(z) c1 )
                                                   c0 ;c1 ;a;z


                                             c0
                                  s.t.             + a + q(z) = y0 +                       (s; z)
                                         1
                                                  c1
                                                         + q(z) = y1 + Ra + (s; z)
                                              1
                                                                  a            a

                A(z)
where B(z) =    p(z)   are perceived amenities after variable housing consumption has been internalized.
   The …nancial Euler equation is then
                                                                 c1
                                                                           R
                                                                  c0
which holds with equality if and only if the individual is …nancially unconstrained, i.e. a > a,
   The mobility Euler equation becomes

                                                       c1      z (s; z)          q 0 (z)
                                                           = 0
                                                        c0  q (z)              z (s; z)

where the period-1 return has to be netted out from housing costs at that period, and the period-0 cost has
to be netted our from the current return of mobility.

B.2    Comparative statics in the generalized two-period model without credit con-
       straints
When we remove credit constraints, we can compare the location decisions of individuals who initially
locate in the same place, but have di¤erent income. The goal is to verify that incentives to change amenities
consumption in response to an income shock cannot explain our empirical …ndings. We show that when
two individuals who start in the same location receive a negative income shock, the initially high-income
individual should downgrade more. This supports the view that our empirical …ndings are not driven by
amenity or variable housing choice, but rather by consumption-smoothing incentives in the presence of credit
constraints. More formally, we show the following result.

Lemma 6 Suppose the following assumptions hold:

  1. A(z) is continuously di¤ erentiable and nondecreasing in z

  2. p(z)    p0 is constant across locations (materials for construction)

  3. The housing production technology results in land prices q(z) = Q(L(z)) where L(z) is total population
      in z, and Q is an increasing function such that Q(0) = 0 and limL!+1 Q(L) = +1



                                                                      57
                                                        Z
  4. The supply of land exceeds population:                 h(z)dz      1, where h(z) is the density of land of quality z     0

  5. Individual income is of the form I(y; s; z) = y + (s; z), where                        is continuously di¤ erentiable and
       (s; z) > 0;   z (s; z)   > 0,   sz (s; z)   >0

  6. There are no credit constraints: a =               1

   Consider two individuals A and B who solve Problem (16), with the same future income and location
choice. Namely, they have:

     The same period-1 income: y1A = y1B

     Di¤ erent period-0 incomes: y0A < y0B . A is initially lower-income than B

     The same location choice: z A = z B = z

   Suppose that they both receive a negative income shock in period 0, such that both individuals loose income
          0     0
down to y0A = y0B < y0A . Then the initially high-income individual (B) downgrades location more than the
initially low-income (A):
                                                            z 0B < z 0A < z

   The logic for this result is simple. Without credit constraints, the dynamic problem above can be
reduced to a static present-value problem. As we explain in the proof, we can boil it down to the following
maximization:
                                              max B(z)[y +             (s; z)    q(z)]
                                                   z

where y is permanent income, and           ; q are proportional to              ; q. In that static problem, for two individuals
to locate in the same place, it must be that the high-y individuals is low-s. Therefore, the initially high-
income individual is more location-elastic because she cares less about downgrading location. Thus, after
the income shock, she downgrade more.
   We structure the proof of this result in several steps. First, we study the static problem and show the
comparative statics there. Second, we reduce the dynamic two-period problem to the static problem and
deduce the comparative statics.
   To assess the robustness of this result, we prove it under several variants. First, as mentioned already, we
show it in a static case. Second, we extend it in a similar in…nite-horizon model without credit constraints.
Third, we show that the result does not depend on the particular assumptions 1 to 6 in Lemma 6, as long
as there is strict positive sorting in the economy. We state this last point as follows:

Corollary 7 Suppose only:

  7. Primitives are such that individuals choose location according to a matching function Z(y; s), where
     y is permanent income, and such that Zy (y; s) > 0 and Zs (y; s) > 0 ,

                                                                  58
      instead of Assumptions 1-6. Then the implications of Lemma 6 continue to hold: consider two individuals
A and B who solve Problem (16) ,with the same future income and location choice. Namely, they have:

        The same period-1 income y1A = y1B

        Di¤ erent period-0 income y0A < y0B : A is initially lower-income than B

        The same location choice z A = z B = z

      Suppose that they both receive a negative income shock in period 0, such that both individuals loose
 0A      0
y0 = y0B < y0A . Then the initially high-income individual (B) downgrades location more than the initially
low-income (A):
                                                       z 0B < z 0A < z

B.2.1        Proof of Lemma 6 and Corollary 7: Part 1, Static Problem

We study the following static problem:

                                                    max A(z)c1        `
                                                    c;h;z
                                              s:t: c + q(z) + p(z)` = I(y; s; z)

The consumption-housing choice implies that expenditure shares on consumption and housing are constant
fraction of income:

                                                     c = (1           )I(y; s; z)
                                                p(z)h =        I(y; s; z)

Substituting housing and consumption decisions into the maximization problem, we obtain a problem in
terms of choosing location alone:
                                                     max B(z)I(y; s; z)
                                                       z

where we de…ned
                                                                    A(z)
                                                       B(z) =
                                                                    p(z)
the perceived amenities of location z, after variable housing choice. The FOC is

                                                             sz zq 0 (z)
                                                  (z) +                  =0
                                                            y + sz q(z)

                 zB 0 (z)
where (z) =       B(z)      is the elasticity of perceived amenities. Re-arrange it as

                                           ( (z) + (z))q(z)      ( (s; z) + (z)) (s; z)
                                      y=
                                                                 (z)

                                                               59
                 z   z (s;z)
where (s; z) =       (s;z)     is the elasticity of city-income elasticity. De…ne

                                              ( (z) + (z))q(z)      ( (s; z) + (z)) (s; z)
                                  G(z; s) =
                                                                    (z)


   First, suppose that there is positive sorting in equilibrium on both y and s. Namely, we
assume that there exists a unique solution Z(y; s) to the FOC

                                                    y = G(Z(y; s); s);

and in addition we assume Zy (y; s); Zs (y; s) > 0. Use of the implicit function theorem implies that Gz > 0
and Gs < 0. In particular, (z) > 0. Now consider individuals A and B, before and after the shock. Then

                                                 G(z 0A ; sA ) = G(z 0B ; sB )

Because Gs < 0 < Gz , it must be that z 0A > z 0B : Thus, the initially high-income individual downgrades
more. This proves Corollary 7.

   Second, we show that positive sorting obtains in equilibrium under Assumptions 1-6. First,
                                                                                                zB 0 (z)
the assumptions that A(z) is increasing and that p(z) = p0 ensure that (z) =                     B(z)      0: Denote


                                           u(z; y; s) = B(z)[y + (s; z)          q(z)]

the utility function. Then

           zuz (z; y; s)
                         [y + (s; z)          q(z)] = (z)y + (z) (s; z) + z          z (s; z)    (z)q(z)     zq 0 (z)
                u

Second, the assumption of excess land together with Q(0) = 0 ensures that there is always a worst city
which is empty with zero land price. Thus, in equilibrium,

                                                  y + (s; z)       q(z)    0

Finally, denote again the optimal location choice Z(y; s) (the matching function). Notice that if uz (Z(y; s); y; s) =
0, then uz (Z(y; s); y; s0 ) > 0 for s0 > s. Therefore, it must be that the optimal choice Z(y; s) is weakly in-
creasing in s: Zs (y; s)         0. If the matching function is locally ‡at (i.e. the derivative is zero), then the
assumption that limL!+1 Q(L) = +1 implies that prices are locally in…nite. This cannot be an equi-
librium, and hence the matching function is strictly increasing. The same logic applies for Zy (y; s) > 0.
Therefore, strict positive assortative matching must hold in equilibrium. Thus, the comparative statics
proven above follow.



                                                              60
B.2.2    Proof of Lemma 6 and Corollary 7: Part 2. Two-Period Problem

First, maximizing out the variable housing choice that attributes constant expenditure shares in Problem
(16), we obtain the equivalent problem

                           V (y0 ; y1 ; s) =     max log(B(z) C0 ) +                 log(B(z) C1 )
                                               C0 ;C1 ;a;z



                                   s.t. C0 + a + q(z) = y0 +                    (s; z)
                                               C1 + q(z) = y1 + Ra + (s; z)

where B(z) = A(z)=p(z) . Second, using the Euler equation C1 = RC0 to express consumption in period
1 as a function of consumption in period 0, and combining both budget constraints into the intertemporal
budget constraint, we obtain the equivalent problem

                                               V (y0 ; y1 ; s) = max(1 + ) log[B(z)C0 ]
                                                                    C0 ;z
                                                      1                          1                1
                     s.t. (1 + )C0 + (1 + R               )q(z) = y0 + R             y1 + [ + R       ] (s; z)

Using the budget constraint to expression period-0 consumption as a function of location, we obtain the
equivalent problem


                                  V (y0 ; y1 ; s) = max B(z)[y +              (s; z)     q(z)]
                                                           z

where we de…ned

                                                                      1
                                               (s; z) =         +R             (s; z)
                                                                      1
                                                    y = y0 + R            y1
                                                                          1
                                               q(z) =          1+ R            q(z)

The result follows from Part 1 of the proof.

B.3     Comparative statics in the generalized in…nite-horizon extension without credit
        constraints
We now extend the previous results in our two-period model to an in…nite-horizon model without credit
constraints. We assume no risk for simplicity. Individuals solve




                                                               61
                                                                1
                                                                X
                 V (a0 ; y0 ; z   1 ; s)       =       max               t
                                                                             log A(zt )ct1   `t                                   (17)
                                                      c;a;h;z
                                                                   t=o

                                             s:t: ct + q(zt ) + p(zt )`t + at+1 = Rat + s zt              1   + z t + yt

where at are assets, zt is location, ct is consumption of a perishable good, ht is housing consumption. s is
a permanent skill that governs returns to location.                               governs the fraction of location-speci…c income that
accrues upon arrival in a location. yt is an exogenous income stream. R                              1 is an exogenous interest rate on
…nancial assets. A(z) are amenities, p(z) is the price of variable housing, and q(z) is the price of the …xed
component of housing. Relative to the two-period model in which we spread our rents for a unique location
choice across the two periods, we e¤ectively set                             = 0 because the natural assumption with many periods is
to have rents paid in the current period. Lemma 6 extends in the following way.

Corollary 8 Impose either (i) assumptions 1-6 of Lemma 6, or (ii) assumption 7 of Corollary 7 for period-
0 location choice. Consider two individuals A and B solving Problem (17) in a stationary equilibrium, with
the same initial assets, past location and future income and location choice. Namely, they have:

     The same income after period 1: ytA = ytB for all t                                1 ; the same asset holdings aA    B
                                                                                                                     0 < a0 ; the same
     past location z A1 = z B1

     Di¤ erent period-0 income y0A < y0B : A is initially lower-income than B

     The same location choice in period 0: z0A = z0B = z0
     Suppose that they both receive a negative income shock in period 0, such that both individuals loose
       0     0
     y0A = y0B < y0A . Then the initially high-income individual (B) downgrades location more than the
     initially low-income (A):
                                                                         z00B < z00A < z0

   Proof. Using the same logic as in the two-period model, we can (i) maximize out variable housing
choice, (ii) use the Euler equation to link consumption across time periods, (iii) iterate forward on the
budget constraints and use the transversality condition to re-write Problem (17) as an equivalent present-
value problem:

                  V (a0 ; fyt gt ; z       1 ; s)   = max B(fzt gt )[Y (a0 ; fyt gt ) + (s; fzt gt )          Q(fzt gt )]
                                                      fzt gt   0




                                                                               62
where we de…ned
                                                                     "   1
                                                                                                   #
                                                                         X            A(zt )
                                                                                t
                                         B(fzt gt ) = exp                         log
                                                                                      p(zt )
                                                                         t=0
                                                                "              1
                                                                                                               #
                                                                               X
                                                                                        t
                                   Y (a0 ; fyt gt ) = R a0 +                         R yt + (s; z          1)
                                                                               t 0
                                                            1
                                                            X
                                         (s; fzt gt ) =              R t ( (s; zt ) +              (s; zt+1 ))
                                                            t 0
                                                            X1
                                         Q(fzt gt ) =                R t q(zt )
                                                               t 0

 R = 1 must hold in a stationary equilibrium. Then the utility value of amenities decays at the same rate
as income. Taking the FOC with respect to. zt ; we obtain:

                                                       ( + R 1 ) z (s; zt ) q 0 (zt )
                                            (zt ) +                                   =0
                                                       Y0 + (s; fzt gt ) Q(fzt gt )

                                 A(z)
where    is the elasticity of    p(z)    . Then it is straightforward to show that:

                                                        z0 = Z(Y0 ; fyt gt            1 ; s)


and depends on y0 only through the denominator (…rst express it as a function of Y0 + (s; fzt gt ) Q(fzt gt )).
Denote

                                      A(z)
                            B(z) =
                                     p(z)
                                                        1
                            (s; z) = ( + R ) (s; z)
                                       "   1
                                                                                               #
                                           X
           Y(a0 ; fyt gt 1; z 1 ) = R a0 +    R t yt + (s; z                                1)
                                                         t 1
                                                1
                                                X
                                            +         R t ( (s; Z(Yt ; fyr gr t ; s)) +                  (s; Z(Yt ; fyr gr   t+1 ; s)))
                                                t 1
                                                1
                                                X
                                                      R t q(Z(Yt ; fyr gr t ; s))
                                                t 1


   The problem for solving for z0 as a function of (y0 ; s) given (a0 ; fyt gt                           1; z 1)   is now equivalent to solving

                V (y0 ; s; a0 ; fyt gt   1; z 1)   = max B(z)[y0 + Y(a0 ; fyt gt                    1; z 1 )   +   (s; z)    q(z)]
                                                        z

The result the follows from the proof in the static case (Part 1 of the proof in the two-period case).


                                                                         63
C     Appendix: Calibration
We calibrate our in…nite horizon economy to an annual level with two income states N = 2 for CRRA utility
               1
         c1            1
u(c) =     1       1       . We choose the parameter values in Table 6.

                                                   Table 6: Calibration Parameters


                            Parameter                                      Notation                   Value


                            Preferences
                               Discount Factor                                                         0.95
                               Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution                                 0.2

                            Idiosyncratic Income
                               Skill                                          s                         0.5
                               Low Income State                               y1                       0.05
                               High Income State                              y2                        0.2
                               Transition Probability From Low to High          12                      0.6
                               Transition Probability From High to Low          21                      0.1

                            Financial Markets
                               Risk-Free Rate                                  R                       1.03
                               Credit Constraint                               a                       0.00

                            Cities
                               Best City                                         z                   1.00
                               Worst City                                        z                   0.00
                               House Rents Slope                             q 0 (z)   0:18 + R0:44 z 1:05
                                                                                                 z 0
                               House Rents                                   q(z)               z q (x)dx




    Most of those values are standard. For instance, if we interpret the low income state y1 as unemployment
and the high income state y2 as employment, we can compute the stationary unemployment rate in this
economy through the invariant distribution of the Markov chain transition matrix                 0.   At our current values,
we obtain a stationary unemployment rate of 14%.
    Our value of the Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution             (IES) is within the accepted range. The value
of skill we use is s = 0:5. Given our house rent schedule and the equilibrium city choice, this implies that
the idiosyncratic component of income yt represents between 15% and 30% of total labor income yt + szt
depending on where individuals are in the state space. City income szt thus represents between 70% and
85%. This re‡ects the large observed di¤erences in wages across cities. The di¤erences in location between


                                                                 64
the best city 0:99 and the lowest city 0:43 individuals locate in, imply an income change of 0.28, which is of
the order of magnitude of the high idiosyncratic income state.
    Finally, our house rents schedule is constructed in such a way that unconstrained individuals of skill
s = 0:5 locate towards 99% of the best available city, and are free to downgrade as much as they like. It also
implies housing expenses of about one third of total labor income, consistent with its empirical counterpart
reported in Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011).
    To solve the model numerically, we adapt the method of endogenous grid points of Caroll (2006).


D     Appendix: Data Description and Robustness Exercises
D.1    Data Description and Sample Selection
Our main data sources are the DADS Panel and Postes. Both are administrative tax data from the French
statistical institute (INSEE). The DADS are matched empoyer-employee datasets with rich information on
the universe of workers who receive taxable labor income in France. The DADS Panel is a panel of all
workers in France born in October of even years (approximately 4%). In this dataset we can track the same
individual throughout her employment spells for the period 1994-2007. The DADS Postes have a di¤erent
structure, although they come from the same original ax returns. One DADS Postes dataset is a 2-year
panel with the universe of workers in France. Each worker is uniquely identi…ed in that 2-year panel. For
both the DADS Panel and Postes, for each worker, we use the following variables:

      the start and end day of all of her employment spells

      for each employment spell:

        – total net wage earnings
        – age and gender
        – municipality of residence and workplace
        – district (département) of birth
        – their employer’s unique …rm identi…er
        – occupation and industry 4-digit codes

    As is common with matched employer-employee datasets, because the underlying data is reported by
employers, we have no information on individuals when they are not employed. Therefore, for simplicity,
we label any individual who is not in the dataset as ‘Unemployed’, even though we acknowledge that the
labor force participation margin may be active for some individuals.
    The French mainland territory is partitioned in about 96 districts (‘Départements’) and 36,552 munici-
palities (‘Communes’). Départements are fairly large areas (median area is 8,763 km2 and median population

                                                     65
is 531,380 inhabitants), while municipalities are much smaller (median area is slightly above 10 km2, and
median population is 432 inhabitants). To measure house prices and calculate real wages we use a house
price index at the département-year level computed by INSEE.
   Individual identi…ers are reset in each of the 2-year panels of the DADS Postes, so that we cannot link
individuals across datasets. However, the time coverage of the panels overlap. For instance, the …rst panel
we use has years 2002 and 2003, and the second has years 2003 and 2004. For this reason, we apply all our
data selection criteria separately to each of those datasets and merge them at the end. Because we observe
start and end dates of each spell, we can make sure that a given spell for a given individual is not duplicated
in our …nal sample. For each of the DADS Postes and for the for the DADS Panel. We use the Postes and
the Panel for di¤erent empirical exercises, so we apply slightly di¤erent sample selection rules. Namely, we
do the following:

     We …rst compute a measure of how desirable a municipality is. To do so, we compute log nominal
     daily wages for each individual and each municipality. We then compute the average log nominal daily
     wage in each municipality. We then rank mean log nominal daily wages across municipalities in each
     year, and compute the corresponding percentile for each municipality. This is our measure of z. We
     do this computation in the DADS Postes to obtain the most accurate information, and use the ranks
     from the Postes in the exercises with the Panel.

     Second, we restrict the sample of individuals and employment spells in the following way:

        – (Only for DADS Postes) Because the data comes at the annual level, we …rst combine any
           employment spells that end in the last day of the …rst year with a corresponding employment
           spell that starts in the …rst day of the second year, with the same individual and …rm identi…er, as
           one employment spell. We do not do the same in the Panel because we wish to track individuals
           at the annual frequency, even if they keep the same employer.
        – Second, we remove minor employment spell to ensure that each individual has only one employ-
           ment spell at any given point in time. To do so, we keep only the highest paying employment
           spell in any given month for each individual and remove spells less than one month..
        – Third, we de…ne Employment-to-Employment (EE) and Employment-to-Unemployment-to- Em-
           ployment (EUE) transitions as follows. An EE transition happens if an individual switches …rms
           with less than forty days non-employed (the start day of the second employment spell minus the
           end day of the …rst employment spell is less than forty). We de…ne an EUE transition if an
           individual switches …rms with more than forty days non-employed.
        – (Only for DADS Postes) Fourth, we restrict our sample to individuals who have exactly one EE
           transition or one EUE transition. Within 2 years:
               1.7% of individuals experience at least one EUE transition. Of those individuals, 98% expe-
               rience exactly one EUE transition.

                                                      66
                  0.9% of individuals experience at least one EE transition. Of those individuals, 98% experi-
                  ence exactly one EE transition.
             Thus, our restriction keeps the vast majority of individuals who experience a transition. At
             this stage, we obtain a sample of individuals who make exactly one EE transition or one EUE
             transition. We thus observe exactly two employment spells per individual.
        – Fifth, we keep only transitions for which each employment spell before and after the transition
             exceeds three months.
        – Sixth, we keep only transitions for which the origin municipality has more than 100 inhabitants
             throughout the year, to limit measurement error issues in our right-hand-side variables.

      (Only for DADS Postes) We then combine those samples for each of the years between 2002-2003 and
      2006-2007. We do so because of a major classi…cation revision in 2008 and more minor one in 2002.
      We end up with a sample of over 7 million transitions in the Postes, and over 300,000 transitions
      individuals in the Panel.

D.2    Appendix: Initial Veri…cations for z
Here we verify that our measure of z is positively associated with wages after controlling for cost of life
and selection on observables and selection on unobservables. We use the long 4% panel. The solid blue line
in Figure 11 shows mean log daily real wages by deciles of z. They are monotonically increasing, with a
di¤erence of 40% between the best municipality and the worst. To construct the dashed red line, we …rst
run a standard Mincer regression


                                 log wi;t =   G(i)   +   A(i;t)   +    Y (t)   +    O(i;t)   +   I(i;t)   + "i;t

where wi;t are log daily wages divided by the house price index in i’s residence location at time t. We
include …xed e¤ects for gender (          G(i) ),    each age (        A(i;t) ),   year (    Y (t) ),   2-digit occupation (   O(i;t) )   and
industry (   I(i;t) )   of worker i at time t. We then compute the average of the estimated residual "c
                                                                                                      i;t by decile
of z, which we plot as the dashed red line. Mean residual wages remain monotonically increasing in z,
with about half of the real wage gap between the extremes begin absorbed by selection on observables. To
con…rm that z is positively associated with wages when controlling for selection on unobservables, we include
worker …xed e¤ects in the above Mincer regression, and plot the residuals as the dashed green line. The
gap between the best and the worst location shrinks to 2.5%, but the relationship with z remains positive.
In addition, because we have typically few observations for a given worker, the worker …xed e¤ect would
absorb a large part of the causal e¤ect of location on wages, explaining the relatively smaller pay gap.




                                                                      67
                                3.3     3.25
                    Mean log real wages
                   3.15       3.2
                                3.1




                                               1         2           3          4         5          6          7             8      9   10
                                                                                         Location decile

                                                                    Observed wages
                                                                    Residuals from Mincer regression with charateristic FEs
                                                                    Residuals from Mincer regression with charateristic and worker FEs



Figure 11: Plot of mean log real daily wages across deciles of z. The solid blue line (circles) displays mean
observed wages. The dashed red line (squares) displays mean residual wages from a Mincer regression that
includes a full set of gender, age, 2-digit occupation and 2-digit industry …xed e¤ects. The dashed green
line (triangles) shows mean residual wages when including worker …xed e¤ects in the Mincer regressions.


D.3    Appendix: Robustness of Return to Location
Here we show two robustness exercises to support the results in Figure 6. First, Figure 12 shows the
simple mean log daily nominal wage, for movers to municipalities in the top quintile, and movers to the
municipalities in the bottom quintile. The means are plotted for each year before and after the move. The
pre-period shows some noise, but after the move a gap of 10% opens upon impact, and widens over time
up to 20%. Notice that the di¤erence in the simple means is very similar to the magnitude of the e¤ect
estimated in equation (9) that controls for unobserved …xed worker heterogeneity and group trends. Second,
Figure 13 displays the coe¢ cients                              t          1   in a regression similar to equation (9), but that does not include
the non-parametric trends                          i;t       Controlling for lagged wage increases the direct mobility gain to 20%, but
the incremental return over 7 years is still about 10%.

D.4    Appendix: Robustness: Universe of Workers
See Tables 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.

D.5    Appendix: Robustness of Wage Regressions
See Tables 13, 14, and 15.
   .



                                                                                           68
                                         .4
                    Nominal log daily wages
                     0                .2 -.2




                                                                       -3      -2        -1     0       1        2     3      4       5      6    7
                                                                                                     Year since move

                                                                                    Move to bottom quintile                Move to top quintile
                                                                Mean and 90% CIs.

Figure 12: Plot of nominal nominal log daily wages. Movers to top quintile and movers to bottom quintile
of z. Normalized 1 year before move. t = 0 is the …rst move of a worker and is the instantaneous e¤ect of
location. Group means and 90% con…dence intervals.
                                         .3
                    Conditional real wage gains from mobility
                       0              .1 -.1         .2




                                                                -4     -3      -2        -1     0       1        2     3      4       5      6    7
                                                                                                     Year since move
                                                                Mean and 90% CIs.

Figure 13: Plot of the t        1 coe¢ cients, for t =  4:::7, and observed daily real wages. t = 0 is the
…rst move of a worker and is the instantaneous e¤ect of location. Standard errors clustered at the origin
municipality level. Using the 4% long panel. Point estimates and 90% con…dence intervals.




                                                                                                       69
Table 7: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers with département …xed e¤ects

                                                                                              Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
   Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.089                0.088                0.101               0.124               0.333              0.324         0.321         0.321         0.499
                                                           (0.007)              (0.006)              (0.004)             (0.004)             (0.012)            (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.019)
   Controls
    Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                        -0.084             -0.069        -0.070        -0.070        -0.071
                                                                                                                                             (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
      Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                                        0.015         0.016         0.013         0.014
                                                                                                                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
      Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                               0.008         -0.001        -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)
      Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                                             0.290         0.290
      (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                                            (0.013)       (0.013)
      OWP * W0                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.045
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.002)
      Constant                                             -0.044
                                                           (0.009)
   Fixed e¤ ects
    Origin Département & Year                                                         X                    X                X                   X                  X             X             X             X
    Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                               X                X                   X                  X             X             X             X
    2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                              X                   X                  X             X             X             X
   Obs.                                                    2,302,146            2,302,146            2,285,408           2,052,150           2,052,150          2,052,150     1,866,967     1,840,675     1,840,675
   R2                                                        0.005                0.059                0.069               0.073               0.087              0.088         0.089         0.155         0.157
   W.-R2                                                                          0.005                0.006               0.008               0.022              0.023         0.025         0.095         0.097
   2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
      p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.
   E ¤e c t o f O W P a t m e d ia n W 0 in la st c o lu m n = 0 .4 9 9 - 0 .0 4 5 * 3 .4 8 0 = 0 .3 4 2 . A t P 1 0 = 0 .3 9 6 . A t P 9 0 = 0 .2 9 6


Table 8: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers with municipality …xed e¤ects

                                                                                              Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
          Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                  0.089                0.055                  0.062            0.067            0.162              0.149         0.144         0.144
                                                                   (0.007)              (0.005)                (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.007)            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
          Controls
           Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                     -0.031             -0.032        -0.031        -0.033
                                                                                                                                                 (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
             Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                                     0.020         0.021         0.019
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
             Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                            0.007         -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.001)       (0.001)
             Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                                          0.292
             (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                                         (0.013)
             Constant                                              -0.043
                                                                   (0.009)
          Fixed e¤ ects
           Origin Municipality & Year                                                         X                   X                    X               X                  X             X             X
           Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                               X                    X               X                  X             X             X
           2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                                  X               X                  X             X             X
          Obs.                                                     2,302,146            2,302,146              2,285,408        2,052,150        2,052,150          2,052,150     1,866,967     1,840,675
          R2                                                         0.005                0.302                  0.307            0.311            0.314              0.316         0.319         0.384
          W.-R2                                                                           0.003                  0.003            0.003            0.007              0.009         0.011         0.102
          2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
             p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,            p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




D.6        Appendix: Construction of Assets
To construct assets, we assume that individuals solve the following maximization problem
                                                                                                                      "   T
                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                    max E0                             (ct          c2t )
                                                                                                                          t=0
                                                                                                              70
                                                                                 s.t..                ct +at+1 = Rat +y t
Table 9: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers with département …xed e¤ects,
in declining municipalities only.

                                                Movers only. Fixed City Rank. Declining municipalities only (<P10=-5.2%).
    Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.078               0.077              0.092               0.129         0.315         0.313          0.307            0.305            0.526
                                                            (0.013)             (0.011)            (0.008)             (0.009)       (0.027)       (0.028)        (0.031)          (0.032)          (0.060)
    Controls
     Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                                                                                                          -0.064        -0.065         -0.064           -0.064           -0.055
                                                                                                                                     (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)
        Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                         0.005          0.009            0.005            0.006
                                                                                                                                                   (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)
        Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                 0.007            -0.002           -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.001)
        Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                                  0.235            0.235
        (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                                 (0.018)          (0.018)
        OWP * W0                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.010)
        Constant                                            -0.038
                                                            (0.021)
    Fixed E¤ ects
     Origin Département & Year                                                       X                   X                  X            X             X                 X               X             X
     Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                            X                  X            X             X                 X               X             X
     2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                             X            X             X                 X               X             X
    Obs.                                                      49455               49454               49235               42001        42001         42001             36865           35737         35737
    R2                                                        0.004               0.115               0.128               0.134        0.144         0.144             0.137           0.192         0.193
    W.-R2                                                                         0.004               0.005               0.008        0.019         0.019             0.020           0.078         0.080
    2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 3 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
        p < 0:05,         p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rte m e nt le ve l.



Table 10: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers with municipality …xed e¤ects,
in declining municipalities only.

                                                Movers only. Fixed City Rank. Declining municipalities only (<P10=-5.2%).
                 Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.078               0.046              0.048             0.039        0.057         0.046        0.039           0.040
                                                                         (0.013)             (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.015)         (0.014)
                 Controls
                  Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                                                                                                       -0.006        -0.007       -0.006          -0.007
                                                                                                                                               (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.004)
                   Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                        0.019        0.022           0.020
                                                                                                                                                             (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)
                   Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                              0.008           -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.002)         (0.001)
                   Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                              0.257
                   (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                             (0.015)
                   Constant                                              -0.038
                                                                         (0.021)
                 Fixed E¤ ects
                  Origin Municipality & Year                                                      X                   X              X            X             X                X           X
                  Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                            X              X            X             X                X           X
                  2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                         X            X             X                X           X
                 Obs.                                                      49455               46278              46058            38703        38703         38703            33539       32390
                 R2                                                        0.004               0.564              0.570            0.571        0.571         0.573            0.575       0.624
                 W.-R2                                                                         0.003              0.002            0.001        0.001         0.005            0.008       0.106
                 2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 3 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
                    p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rte m e nt le ve l.




where        > 0 is such that consumption is always increasing in the equilibrium range, T is time to retirement.
We assume R = 1, which must hold in any stationary equilibrium when there are no credit constraints. It


                                                                                                                      71
Table 11: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers unemployed (1 year+) relative
to job switchers

                                                                            Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
                1[Long EUE] * OWP                                                        0.005                0.073           0.073       0.066       0.076
                                                                                         (0.006)              (0.008)         (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
                OWP                                                                      0.162                0.369           0.364       0.359       0.358
                                                                                         (0.005)              (0.015)         (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
                Controls
                  Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                                                                      -0.079          -0.076      -0.076      -0.076
                                                                                                              (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)
                   1[Long EUE] * W0                                                                           -0.006          -0.035      -0.032      -0.035
                                                                                                              (0.002)         (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)
                   Post-Move Log Wage (W1)                                                                                    0.002       0.004       0.004
                                                                                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
                   1[Long EUE] * W1                                                                                           0.023       0.019       0.016
                                                                                                                              (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
                   Post-Move Log Comm. Dist. (C1)                                                                                         0.009       0.005
                                                                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)
                   1[Long EUE] * C1                                                                                                       0.003       0.004
                                                                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)
                   Post-Move Amenities perc. (A1)                                                                                                     -0.010
                   (First PC, other 4 unrep,)                                                                                                         (0.002)
                   1[Long EUE] * A1                                                                                                                   0.014
                   (other 4 interactions unreported)                                                                                                  (0.002)
                Fixed E¤ ects
                  Origin Département & Year                                                    X                    X            X           X           X
                  Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                     X                    X            X           X           X
                  2-Digit Origin Occupation & Industry                                         X                    X            X           X           X
                Obs.                                                                     1,156,191            1,156,191       1,156,191   1,050,533   1,035,741
                R2                                                                         0.067                0.082           0.083       0.085       0.114
                W.-R2                                                                      0.012                0.028           0.028       0.031       0.061
                2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis
                   p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d é p a rtm e nt le ve l.




is well-known that savings have a closed-form expression in this model. When T is large, savings are, to a
…rst order,                                                        " T      #                 " T    #
                                                           R 1      X                   1      X
                                                                         t
                             a1 a0 = y0                         E0     R yt   !R#1 y0      E0     yt
                                                          R R T                       T +1
                                                                                        t=0                                                    t=0
                                                                                                                                                          hP               i
                                                                                                                                                            T         t y . In
    The next step is to de…ne how individuals form their expectation of future income E0                                                                        t=0 R    t
the forecasting approach, we assume that individuals predict their future annual income wages based on an
AR(1) process for annual income growth43 :

                                                                                yt+1        yt
                                                                        log          = log      + "t+1
                                                                                 yt        yt 1

We estimate b =                0:36 annually. To avoid having to construct forecast many years ahead which would
   43
      We do not include a constant in the regression so that savings take the most transparent expression possible. When we
include a constant, we estimate it to be 0.24, and so a factor 1.27 would pre-multiply wage growth in the expression for savings.
The autocorrelation is then -0.39. Results in both cases are virtually identical.


                                                                                                    72
Table 12: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Universe of workers unemployed (1 year+) in declin-
ing municipalities relative to job switchers in expanding municipalities.

              Movers only. Fixed City Rank. EUE in declining (<P10=-5.2%) vs. EE in expanding (>P90=16.1%).
                     1[Long EUE] * OWP                                                0.105                0.126                 0.124     0.135
                                                                                      (0.013)              (0.015)               (0.015)   (0.017)
                     OWP                                                              0.306                0.290                 0.289     0.285
                                                                                      (0.024)              (0.022)               (0.024)   (0.025)
                     Controls
                      Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                                          -0.064               -0.055                -0.055    -0.055
                                                                                      (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.007)   (0.007)
                       1[Long EUE] * W0                                               -0.026               -0.045                -0.044    -0.047
                                                                                      (0.003)              (0.005)               (0.005)   (0.006)
                       Post-Move Log Wage (W1)                                                             0.013                 0.012     0.016
                                                                                                           (0.006)               (0.006)   (0.005)
                       1[Long EUE] * W1                                                                    0.019                 0.017     0.008
                                                                                                           (0.006)               (0.006)   (0.005)
                       Post-Move Log Comm. Dist. (C1)                                                                            0.011     0.003
                                                                                                                                 (0.002)   (0.001)
                       1[Long EUE] * C1                                                                                          0.003     0.001
                                                                                                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)
                       Post-Move Amenities Perc. (A1)                                                                                      0.256
                       (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                          (0.019)
                       1[Long EUE] * A1                                                                                                    0.036
                                                                                                                                           (0.014)
                     Fixed E¤ ects
                      Origin Département & Year                                             X                    X                  X         X
                      Age, Birthplace & Gender                                              X                    X                  X         X
                      2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                            X                    X                  X         X
                     Obs.                                                                117188              117188               106415    105050
                     R2                                                                   0.099               0.102                0.105     0.165
                     W.-R2                                                                0.023               0.027                0.031     0.095
                     2 3 ,6 2 1 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
                        p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rte m e nt le ve l.




necessarily be inaccurate given the simplicity of the speci…ed income process, we further assume that indi-
viduals predict next year’s income from the AR(1) process, and subsequently expect their income to remain
constant. Under this additional assumption, and with residuals of small variance, savings are

                                                                                    y0                     y0
                                                             a1         a0 =                  1
                                                                                    R                     y 1

   Finally, we set R = 1:00, although results with R = 1:04 are virtually identical. In the perfect foresight
approach, we simply read o¤ future income from the data.

D.7    Appendix: Robustness of Assets Regressions
See Tables 16, 17, 18, 19,.20 and .21.




                                                                                          73
                        Table 13: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Wage growth controls
                                                                                         Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
                       Origin Wage Percentile (OWP)                                                0.156                0.151            0.179         0.225         0.222         0.212
                                                                                                   (0.010)              (0.010)          (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)

                       Controls
                          Wage Growth Percentile (WGP)                                             0.124                0.112            0.119         0.127         0.123         0.110
                                                                                                   (0.007)              (0.006)          (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.005)
                             OWP * WGP                                                             -0.001               -0.000           -0.003        -0.003        -0.001        -0.019
                                                                                                   (0.012)              (0.012)          (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)
                             Post-Move Log Commuting Distance                                                                                                        0.009         0.001
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.001)       (0.001)
                             Post-Move Amenities Percentile                                                                                                                        0.279
                             (First PC, other 4 unreported)                                                                                                                        (0.013)
                             Constant                                                              -0.141
                                                                                                   (0.011)

                       Fixed E¤ ects
                           Origin Département & Year                                                                         X              X               X             X              X
                           Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                         X               X             X              X
                           2-Digit Origin Occupation & Industry                                                                                             X             X              X
                       Obs.                                                                          292486              292486          292428           292425       270348       269911
                       R2                                                                             0.019               0.069           0.082            0.086        0.088        0.146
                       W.-R2                                                                                              0.018           0.020            0.022        0.024        0.086
                       2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
                          p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,            p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.



      Table 14: Unemployment spells and location decisions: Heterogeneity across municipality deciles
                                                                                         Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
         Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.075                0.070                0.063               0.048            0.044           0.034          0.032         0.032
                                                                 (0.008)              (0.006)              (0.006)             (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)
         Origin Municip. Perc. (OMP)                             -0.682               -0.919               -0.930              -0.924           -0.924          -0.924         -0.924        -0.923
                                                                 (0.032)              (0.011)              (0.010)             (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.009)
         OWP * OMP                                               -0.004               -0.013               0.004               -0.033           -0.034          -0.045         -0.047        -0.052
                                                                 (0.019)              (0.013)              (0.011)             (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.010)
         Controls
          Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                     0.001           -0.003         -0.002        -0.003
                                                                                                                                                (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
           Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                                   0.035          0.035         0.033
                                                                                                                                                                (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)
           Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                           0.009         -0.000
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.001)       (0.001)
           Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                                         0.304
           (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                                        (0.012)
           Constant                                              0.352
                                                                 (0.014)
         Fixed e¤ ects
          Origi Département & Year                                                          X                       X                X             X               X              X             X
          Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                  X                X             X               X              X             X
          2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                                 X             X               X              X             X
         Obs.                                                      292489               292489               292431                292428        292428          292428         270351        269914
         R2                                                         0.349                0.409                0.417                 0.422         0.422           0.427          0.431         0.493
         W.-R2                                                                           0.376                0.378                 0.382         0.382           0.387          0.391         0.457
         2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis
            p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001, S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d é p a rtm e nt le ve l.




D.8     Appendix: Robustness to Yearly City Ranks
See Tables 22 and 23.



                                                                                                                    74
               Table 15: Location decisions of the unemployed (40 days+) relative to job switchers
                                                                                 Movers only. Fixed city ranks.
                     1[EUE] * OWP                                                             0.011              0.044            0.050     0.050     0.023
                                                                                              (0.005)            (0.013)          (0.013)   (0.014)   (0.015)
                     OWP                                                                      0.137              0.310            0.295     0.294     0.318
                                                                                              (0.007)            (0.020)          (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.021)
                     Controls
                       Pre-Move Log Wage (W0)                                                                    -0.079           -0.076    -0.077    -0.086
                                                                                                                 (0.004)          (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)
                         1[EUE] * W0                                                                             -0.005           -0.012    -0.010    -0.002
                                                                                                                 (0.002)          (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)
                         Post-Move Log Wage (W1)                                                                                  0.018     0.016     0.011
                                                                                                                                  (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
                         1[EUE] * W1                                                                                              0.005     0.005     0.009
                                                                                                                                  (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.004)
                         Post-Move Log Comm. Dist. (C1)                                                                                     0.012     0.002
                                                                                                                                            (0.003)   (0.002)
                         1[EUE] * C1                                                                                                        -0.002    -0.002
                                                                                                                                            (0.002)   (0.002)
                         Post-Move Amenities Percentile                                                                                               0.320
                         (A1, First PC, other 4 unreported)                                                                                           (0.017)
                         1[EUE] * A1                                                                                                                  -0.030
                         (other 4 interactions unreported)                                                                                            (0.013)
                     Fixed E¤ ects
                       Origin Département & Year                                                    X                   X            X         X         X
                       Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                     X                   X            X         X         X
                       2-Digit Origin Occupation & Industry                                         X                   X            X         X         X
                     Obs.                                                                       308123             308123          308123    284827    284369
                     R2                                                                          0.075              0.088           0.090     0.093     0.154
                     W.-R2                                                                       0.010              0.024           0.026     0.029     0.095
                     2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis
                        p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,            p < 0:001. S E c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.


        Table 16: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Forecasting Method assets: IV
                                            Movers only. Fixed city rank. Forecasting method. Instrumental variables.
Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                0.160                0.160              0.212              0.281          0.913     0.907     0.908     0.903
                                                        (0.010)              (0.009)            (0.008)            (0.011)        (0.044)   (0.045)   (0.045)   (0.046)
Controls
 Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                -0.136    -0.136    -0.136    -0.137
                                                                                                                                  (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)
  Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                        0.006     0.006     0.004
                                                                                                                                            (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
  Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                           0.008     -0.000
                                                                                                                                                      (0.001)   (0.001)
  Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                     0.286
  (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                    (0.013)
  Constant                                              -0.089
                                                        (0.007)
Fixed e¤ ects
 Origin Département & Year                                                        X                   X                  X            X         X         X        X
 Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X                  X            X         X         X        X
 2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                              X            X         X         X        X
Obs.                                                      292489              292489              292431             292428        292428    292428    270351    269914
2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
   p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                                                                                        75
     Table 17: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Perfect Foresight Method assets: IV
                   Mobility of the unemployed. Movers only. Fixed city rank. Perfect foresight method. Instrumental variables.
   Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                     0.171                  0.171                 0.274            0.333      1.105     1.016      1.010         1.006
                                                                (0.010)                (0.009)               (0.010)          (0.012)    (0.051)   (0.048)    (0.048)       (0.048)
   Controls
    Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                    -0.140    -0.146     -0.145        -0.146
                                                                                                                                         (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)       (0.007)
     Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                            0.073      0.072         0.070
                                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)
     Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                0.010         0.003
                                                                                                                                                              (0.002)       (0.001)
    Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                               0.270
    (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                              (0.013)
   Constant                                                     -0.088
                                                                (0.007)
   Fixed e¤ ects
    Origin Département & Year                                                                X                       X           X          X          X            X              X
    Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                         X           X          X          X            X              X
    2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                                   X          X          X            X              X
   Obs.                                                           292489                 292489                292431         292428      292428    292428      270351       269914
   2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
      p < 0:05,           p < 0:01,              p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




Table 18: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Forecasting Method assets: IV and heterogenous
e¤ects across municipalities
                                                                      Movers only. Fixed city rank. Instrumental variables.
         Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                      0.133                0.122                0.124         0.090     0.102     0.068     0.060       0.057
                                                                       (0.013)              (0.009)              (0.009)       (0.010)   (0.014)   (0.013)   (0.014)     (0.014)
         OAP * OMP                                                     -0.027               -0.039               -0.015        -0.060    -0.060    -0.073    -0.075      -0.082
                                                                       (0.028)              (0.019)              (0.015)       (0.014)   (0.015)   (0.014)   (0.014)     (0.015)
         Origin Municipality Perc. (OMP)                               -0.666               -0.904               -0.920        -0.904    -0.903    -0.902    -0.902      -0.900
                                                                       (0.038)              (0.015)              (0.014)       (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)     (0.012)
         Controls
          Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                              -0.003    -0.004    -0.003      -0.004
                                                                                                                                         (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)     (0.002)
           Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                      0.035     0.034       0.032
                                                                                                                                                   (0.002)   (0.002)     (0.002)
           Post-Move Log Com. Dist.                                                                                                                          0.009       -0.000
                                                                                                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)
          Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                      0.304
          (First PC, next 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                      (0.012)
         Constant                                                      0.309
                                                                       (0.016)
         Fixed e¤ ects
          Origin Département & Year                                                               X                    X          X          X        X         X           X
          Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                     X          X          X        X         X           X
          2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                              X          X        X         X           X
         Obs.                                                            292489               292489                 292431     292428    292428    292428    270351      269914
         2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
            p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                                                                                                      76
    Table 19: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Perfect Foresight Method assets: IV.

                                            Movers only. Fixed city ranks. Perfect foresight method. Instrumental variables.
             Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                0.171                0.106              0.154         0.081     0.165      0.091       0.076          0.066
                                                                     (0.010)              (0.006)            (0.006)       (0.006)   (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.016)        (0.016)
             Controls
              Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                      -0.014     -0.013      -0.011         -0.011
                                                                                                                                     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)
               Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                               0.039       0.037          0.035
                                                                                                                                                (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)
               Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                    0.008          -0.000
                                                                                                                                                            (0.001)        (0.001)
               Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                   0.307
               (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                  (0.012)
               Constant                                              -0.088
                                                                     (0.007)
             Fixed e¤ ects
              Origin Municipality & Year                                                       X                   X          X         X          X           X              X
              Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X          X         X          X           X              X
              2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                      X         X          X           X              X
             Obs.                                                      292489              287453              287394      287391     287391     287391      265056         264604
             2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
                p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




Table 20: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Forecasting Method assets in declining munic-
ipalities only: OLS.

                                                Movers only. Fixed City Rank. Declining municipalities only (<P25=-0.4%).
    Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                     0.074                 0.056                0.056          0.056      0.064       0.059        0.059            0.056
                                                                 (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.010)          (0.010)
    Controls
     Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                -0.007      -0.013       -0.013           -0.016
                                                                                                                                      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)          (0.003)
      Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                          0.026        0.027            0.027
                                                                                                                                                  (0.004)      (0.004)          (0.004)
      Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                                0.012            0.003
                                                                                                                                                               (0.001)          (0.001)
     Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                                  0.245
     (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                                 (0.015)
    Constant                                                     -0.047
                                                                 (0.017)
    Fixed E¤ ects
     Origin Département & Year                                                               X                    X            X          X            X              X               X
     Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                     X            X          X            X              X               X
     2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                                X          X            X              X               X
    Obs.                                                           26195                 26195                 26187         26186      26186       26186          24077             24021
    R2                                                             0.004                 0.097                 0.111         0.115      0.116       0.118          0.123             0.185
    W.-R2                                                                                0.003                 0.002         0.002      0.002       0.005          0.010             0.079
    2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 6 . P 2 5 = -0 .4 % . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
       p < 0:05,           p < 0:01,              p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d é p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                                                                                                     77
Table 21: Unemployment spells and location decisions using Forecasting Method assets in declinning mu-
nicipalities only: IV.

                                          Movers only. Fixed City Rank. IV. Declining municipalities only (<P25=-0.4%).
     Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                 0.166               0.092               0.107             0.072         0.132     0.095     0:072+    0.080
                                                              (0.014)             (0.013)             (0.014)           (0.014)       (0.039)   (0.039)   (0.041)   (0.038)
     Controls
      Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                               -0.012    -0.014    -0.010    -0.015
                                                                                                                                      (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.006)
         Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                     0.029     0.030     0.030
                                                                                                                                                (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
         Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                        0.008     -0.000
                                                                                                                                                          (0.002)   (0.001)
         Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                  0.267
         (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                 (0.015)
         Constant                                             -0.100
                                                              (0.014)
     Fixed E¤ ects
      Origin Municipality & Year                                                        X                      X              X          X          X        X         X
      Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                                 X              X          X          X        X         X
      2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                              X          X          X        X         X
     Obs.                                                       26195                22739              22731              22729       22729      22729    20697     20645
     2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 6 . P 2 5 = -0 .4 % . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
     +
         p < 0:10        p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,            p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d é p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                 Table 22: Unemployment and location decisions using yearly city rank
                                                                                    Yearly city rank. Movers only.
   Origin Wage Perc. (OWP)                                 0.106                0.107              0.124              0.155          0.372      0.362     0.361     0.358
                                                           (0.006)              (0.005)            (0.004)            (0.006)        (0.017)    (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)
   Controls
    Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                -0.089     -0.092    -0.092    -0.093
                                                                                                                                     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
     Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                                         0.025     0.024     0.022
                                                                                                                                                (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
     Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                            0.010     0.001
                                                                                                                                                          (0.002)   (0.001)
     Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                                      0.315
     (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                                     (0.012)
     Constant                                              -0.042
                                                           (0.009)
   Fixed E¤ ects
    Origin Département & Year                                                        X                   X                 X            X          X         X          X
    Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X                 X            X          X         X          X
    2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                             X            X          X         X          X
   Obs.                                                      291495              291495              291437            291434         291434     291434    269496    269239
   R2                                                         0.009               0.063               0.074             0.077          0.092      0.094     0.098     0.167
   W.-R2                                                                          0.009               0.010             0.011          0.027      0.029     0.033     0.107
   2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
      p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                                                                                           78
Table 23: Unemployment and location decisions using the forecasting method and yearly city rank.

                                                               Yearly city rank. Movers only. Forecasting method.
Origin Asset Perc. (OAP)                                0.086                0.076              0.079         0.081     0.101     0.094     0.094     0.089
                                                        (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.004)       (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.007)
Controls
 Pre-Move Log Wage                                                                                                      -0.015    -0.021    -0.021    -0.023
                                                                                                                        (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
  Post-Move Log Wage                                                                                                              0.029     0.028     0.026
                                                                                                                                  (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
  Post-Move Log Comm. Dist.                                                                                                                 0.011     0.001
                                                                                                                                            (0.002)   (0.001)
  Post-Move Amenities Perc.                                                                                                                           0.313
  (First PC, other 4 unrep.)                                                                                                                          (0.012)
  Constant                                              -0.041
                                                        (0.012)
Fixed E¤ ects
 Origin Département & Year                                                        X                   X          X         X         X         X         X
 Age, Birthplace & Gender                                                                             X          X         X         X         X         X
 2-Digit Origin Occ. & Ind.                                                                                      X         X         X         X         X
Obs.                                                      291495              291495              291437      291434     291434    291434    269496    269239
R2                                                         0.005               0.058               0.068       0.071      0.071     0.075     0.078     0.148
W.-R2                                                                          0.004               0.004       0.004      0.005     0.008     0.012     0.086
2 2 ,1 8 0 O rig in M u n ic ip a litie s; 2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 7 . S ta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e sis.
   p < 0:05,          p < 0:01,           p < 0:001. S E s c lu ste re d a t th e d e p a rtm e nt le ve l.




                                                                                                        79
