NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCING VS. FORGIVING
A DEBT OVERHANG

Paul Krugman

Working Paper No. 2486

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1988

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2486
January 1988

Financing vs. Forgiving A Debt Overhang

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the tradeoffs facing creditors of a country whose
debt is large enough that the country cannot attract voluntary new lending.
If the country is unable to meet its debt service requirements out of current
income, the creditors have two choices. They can finance the country, lending
at an expected loss in the hope that the country will eventually be able to
repay its debt after all; or they can forgive, reducing the debt level to one
that the country can repay. The post-1983 debt strategy of the IMF and the US
has relied on financing, but many current calls for debt reform call for
forgiveness instead.
The paper shows that the choice between financing and forgiveness
represents a tradeoff. Financing gives the creditors an option value: if the
country turns out to do relatively well, creditors will not have written down
their claims unnecessarily. However, the burden of debt distorts the
country's incentives, since the benefits of good performance go largely to
creditors rather than itself.
The paper also shows that the tradeoff itself can be improved if both
financing and forgiveness are made contingent on states of nature that the
country cannot affect, such as oil prices, world interest rates, etc.

Paul Krugman
National Bureau fo Economic
Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617)868-3900

Discussion of new approaches to the developing country debt

problem is more intense now than at any time since 1983. Some
proposals, such as the Baker initiative, involve revitalization
and continuation of the 1983 strategy of financing without either

debt forgiveness or change in the nature of claims. Other

proposals, such as the Bradley Plan, call for major debt
forgiveness in an effort to clear the books and restore normal
conditions. In between are a variety of proposals for changing the

character of the relations between debtors and creditors,
including interest capitalization,

lending or debt relief

contingent on world prices, conversion of debt into equity or
equity-like claims, and so on.

Somewhat surprisingly, this practical discussion is taking
place with little parallel analytical discussion among economists.

While there is a fairly substantial theoretical literature on the

problem of sovereign risk (survey-ed by Eaton, Gersovitz, and
Stiglitz(1986)), the bulk of this literature has focussed either
on the case of creditor rationing of a country that is borrowing
with no existing debt, or the choice by a country whether to repay

or default. The position in the real world, however, is one of
both repayment and new borrowing; countries have arrived in the

1

current situation with a stock of "inherited" debt, which they

cannot fully service without new borrowing. If the countries'
future repayment were not in doubt, they would have no difficulty

in borrowing to service existing debt, but for a group of large

debtors doubt about future repayment is sufficient that only
through extraordinary measures have creditors been induced to
provide new money.

Now there does exist a small theoretical literature that

bears on the actual debt problem fairly closely. This is the
literature on the problems posed by a debt overhang. By a debt

overhang I mean the presence of an existing, "inherited" debt
sufficiently large that creditors do not expect with confidence to

be fully repaid. The effects of such a debt overhang have been
analyzed in only a few papers, including Sachs (1984,1986) and
Krugman (l985a,1985b). These papers have shown that the presence

of a debt overhang may give creditors an incentive to lend at an

expected loss to protect their existing claims (Sachs 1984;
Krugman 1985a, 1985b). It also shows that there may be a conflict

between creditors' individual and collective interest, and that

free rider problems may compromise the ability to achieve
desirable new lending. On the other hand, the incentives of a
debtor may be distorted by the presence of a debt overhang, and
the distortion will be reduced if creditors provide immediate debt

2

forgiveness rather than providing new money and hoping for more

favorable future conditions (Sachs 1986). The debt overhang
approach is highly suggestive of the desirability of innovative
approaches to the provision of funds, and perhaps of changes in
the nature of bank claims on developing countries.

The purpose of this paper is to provide a synthetic
presentation of the debt overhang analysis that, although
abstract, may help clarify ideas for practical discussion. The

first part of the paper sketches out three examples that are
intended to convey some of the key issues. The second part of the

paper presents a more formal model that focusses on the tradeoff
between new lending and debt forgiveness as ways of coping with a

debt overhang. The third part then examines how changing the
nature of claims might help resolution of a debt overhang.

fl

debt overhang problem: some illustrative examples.

A debtor country is something like a debtor firm, although
the parallel is not exact. At any given time, the creditors of a

firm view that firm as having a probability distribution over
streams of future earnings, out of which debt service can be paid.

If the present value of the stream of earnings is expected to be

less than the firm's debt, then creditors will not expect to be

3

fully repaid - -

although

they may prefer to wait and see rather

than force the firm immediately into bankruptcy proceedings.

A country, like a firm, has an expected stream of earnings,

but not all of this stream is potentially available to service
debt. Instead, some fraction of national income represents the
maximum resource transfer that the country can be induced to make.
Loosely, we can think of the expected stream of potential resource

transfers from a country to its creditors as analogous to the
expected stream of earnings of a firm.

Now the analogy is less than exact, because the potential
resource transfer from a country to its creditors is not really a

fixed number. Instead, the maximum level of resource transfer is

determined ultimately by the country's willingness to pay, which
in turn reflects both rational calculations of the cost of default

and internal political considerations. There is a bargaining
problem between creditors, who would like to get the most possible

out of a country, and the country, which would like to minimize
resource transfer. Some progress has been made on the bargaining

issue, for example by Bulow and Rogoff (1986). However, it is
useful for analytical purposes to put this bargaining issue aside,
and imagine that the rate of resource transfer that is possible at

any point in time is a well-defined number (although perhaps
uncertain ex ante).

4

If we grant ourselves the enormous simplification of taking

maximum resource transfer as given, we are left with a
straightforward definition of the problem of debt overhang.
country has a debt overhang problem whenthe expected present value
of potential future resource transfers is less than its debt.

To illustrate the implications of debt overhang, I will
consider three highly stylized examples of the problems that such

overhang can cause. The three examples share a common structure,

in which the action takes two periods. In the first period a

country starts with an inherited debt, all of which (for
simplicity) is due during that period. The country attempts to pay

that debt with resource transfer plus new borrowing. The new
borrowing, in turn, must be repaid with resource transfer in the
second period.

What happens if a country is unable to repay fully at the
end? For the moment, I will ignore the problem of costs of default

and assume that creditors simply share the maximum resource
transfer the country can make. Thus if the country is unable to
repay fully in the second period, the result is effectively that

part of the debt is forgiven. This shifts the emphasis to the

first period. The key question is whether the country will
experience a liquidity crisis. Will the country be able to attract
new borrowing in order to service its inherited debt? This depends

5

on the behavior of lenders. I will assume that lenders are risk

neutral, and face a given opportunity cost of funds on world
markets. An important question is whether creditors are purely
competitive or can operate collusively in their joint interest. We
will consider both cases.

Debt overhang without uncertainty

Consider first the situation where there is no uncertainty,
i.e. ,

the

potential resource transfers in period 1 and 2 are

known from the beginning. We assume that all of the debt comes due
in period 1, with required debt repayment D; the resource transfer

possible in each period is x1, x2. We let i be the opportunity
cost of funds to lenders.

Does this country have a liquidity problem? The country can

make repayment of debt equal to x1 out of current resources; if
current debt service exceeds this amount, it must engage in new
borrowing equal to D-x1. Lenders will supply this voluntarily at
their opportunity cost i if they believe that they will be fully
repaid, as they indeed will provided that (l+i)(D -

equivalently, if x1 +

x2/(l+i)

x1) < x2, or,

> D. Not surprisingly, there will

be no problem of liquidity if the present value of potential
resource transfer exceeds the inherited debt.

6

Suppose on the other hand that x1 +

x2/(1-1-i) < D. Then the

country will not be able to meet its debt service. It certainly
cannot borrow the needed resources D -

at

the safe rate, since

it will be seen to be unable to repay its loans in full. Nor can
it attract additional lending by offering an interest rate above
the safe rate. The total resources available for debt repayment in

period 2 are x2, with a present value of x2/(l÷i). Regardless of
the interest rate on period 1 loans, that is what creditors will
get, and it is less than the value of the necessary loans.

Thus the best that the initial creditors can do is reach a
settlement with the country that immediately reduces the country's

obligations. The mechanics of the settlement are, at this level of
abstraction,

arbitrary.

Any combination

of

rescheduling,

forgiveness of principal, forgiveness of interest, and new lending

at concessional rates will do as long as it brings the actual
resource transfer in line with what is possible.

In the absence of uncertainty, then, the problem of what to

do about debt overhang would be straightforward. If the country

can pay, there will be no liquidity problem. If it cannot, the
debt must be written down at the outset.

Debt overhang with uncertainty

Now consider a country that similarly has inherited a debt D,

7

but faces an uncertain future. Either because the world economic

environment is uncertain, or because the country's own economic
performance cannot be predicted, the potential resource transfer

in period 2 is a random variable. To keep things simple, we
suppose that first period resource transfer is a known value x1,
while in the second period the maximum transfer will take on only

one of two values, XG (good case) or x (bad case). In the bad
case, the present value of potential resource transfer will be

less than the initial debt, while in the good case it may be
possible that the debt can be repaid.
Is this country solvent? This is not a well-defined question.

Unless the present value of resource transfer is less than the
debt in both states, it is simply unknown whether the country can

earn enough to repay its debt. However,we can ask whether the

country will have a liquidity problem, and here there is a
straightforward answer: it will be able to borrow to service its

debt if and only if the expected present value of the resource
transfer is at least as great as the debt.

To see this, let p be the probability of a good outcome, i-p

be the probability of a bad outcome. What we want to ask is
whether there is an interest rate that the country can offer that

will induce lenders to supply the resources L —

D

-

x1

that are

necessary to allow debt service. Suppose that the country offers

8

an interest rate r on its new borrowing such that L(l+r)

X.

This is the highest interest rate that makes sense, since the

country cannot even in the best case pay more than this. Then
lenders will receive all of the potential resource transfer in
either state. The expected present value of their receipts will be

[pxc + (l-p)xB]/(1+i). They will be induced to lend if this
exceeds the necessary lending D -

x1. But the condition [px +

(l-p)xB]/(l+i) > D-x is simply the condition that the expected

present value of resource transfer exceed the value of the
inherited debt.

As long as this criterion is satisfied, the country will be

able to borrow enough to service its debt simply by paying a
sufficiently high interest premium. If it is not satisfied, the
country will not be able to attract voluntary borrowing, and will
thus be unable to service its debt.

Now if that were that, we would simply see a default whenever

financial markets view a country as having less future ability to

pay than its existing debt. However, it is in the interest of
existing creditors to prevent this. Even without any explicit

modelling of how a liquidity crisis is played out, it seems
obvious that the creditors are not likely to collect the full

potential resource transfer from the country if there is a
disorderly default.Let Z be the present value of what creditors

9

expect to be able to collect from a country if there is a
liquidity crisis in period 1; it seems safe to assume that Z < x1
+

[pxc

+

(lp)xBJ/(l4i)

< D. Yet it is not necessary that

creditors accept the certainty of loss. Suppose that they are able

to relend enough to the debtor to avert default in period 1, and

postpone the reckoning until period 2. Then if they are lucky,

they may receive full repayment after all; while if they are
unlucky, they will still be better off than if they had allowed a
default to take place immediately.

We can easily construct a strategy that will achieve this
aim. Let the existing creditors relend the country L =

an interest rate such that L(l+r) =

x.

D

-

x1 at

Then the creditors will

receive all of the potential second period resource transfer in

either state. Viewed in isolation, this will still be a losing
proposition: the expected present value of their receipts will be
[pxG +

(lp)xB]/(l+i)

< L. Thus no lender would voluntarily enter

the package if she had no stake in the repayment of the original
debt. From the point of view of the initial creditors, however, a

lending package insures that they receive the full present value

of the country's potential resource transfer, which is more than

they would get without the lending. Thus lending that would be

unprofitable viewed in isolation is worth doing as a way of
defending the value of existing debt.

10

There are several points worth noting about this kind of
defensive lending scenario, since even this simple an example is

enough to show that several commonly held beliefs about debt
problems are incorrect.
First, much discussion about the debt problem tries to make a

clear distinction between liquidity and solvency, with the

argument being that new lending to cover debt service is
appropriate for liquidity but not for solvency problems. Even this

simple schematic approach makes clear, however,

that the

distinction is not useful. If we knew that the country could repay

the full present value of its debt - -

or

even if the expected

value of potential payments were large enough - -

the

country could

attract voluntary lending by offering a sufficiently high interest
premium. The inability to attract funds comes because the expected

ability to pay is too low; a liquidity crisis must occur because

of doubts about solvency. As we have just seen, however, the
expectation of insolvency does not prevent new lending from being
in the interest of existing creditors.
Second, some commentators have pointed to the large discounts

at which developing country debt sells on secondary markets as
evidence that further lending is inappropriate. Clearly in this

model new lending to the debtor would immediately sell at a
discount, since it has an expected present value less than the

11

value of the lending. The discount is just another aspect of the
fact that the new lending is unprofitable viewed in isolation. The

point is, however, that it is still worth doing beacuse it does
not take place in isolation; it is essential to the repayment of
existing debt.

Third, we have seen that it is in the interests of existing

creditors to relend enough to avoid an immediate default on the

part of the country. However, it is only in their .collective.
interest. Any individual.creditor would be better off if it could

opt out of the new lending and let other creditors carry the
burden. Thus we have the free rider problem emphasized by Cline
(1983) and many others. This free rider problem could lead to a
liquidity crisis even though this is not in anyone's interest.

Fourth, we often ask whether or not the new lending that

takes place to debtors is at concessionary terms or not. The
standard usually used is a comparison with market interest rates.

However, the example makes it clear that the market rate
comparison is essentially irrelevant. From the point of view of

the lenders, the loans yield an expected return less than the
market rate, whatever the face interest rate; thus they will view

this as lending at concessional terms. Whether the interest rate

on the loan is more or less than their opportunity cost of funds

depends on how favorable the good state is. The interest they

12

charge is defined by the relationship L(l+r) =

XG.

The rate r will

exceed i if xG/(l+i) > D-x1, be less than i if xG/(l+i) <

that is, on whether even in the good state the present value of
resource transfer exceeds the opportunity cost of funds.

This last observation raises a puzzle. The example suggests

that if there is y state in which the present value of resource

transfer exceeds the value of existing debt, the interest rate

charged by creditors on new lending should exceed their
opportunity cost of funds. Presumably for most debtors there is at

least the possibility of such a favorable state; even Bolivia
might discover a valuable, unsuspected natural resource. Yet this
description of creditor behavior seems both wrong in practice and

disturbing; isn't there any circumstance under which new lending
(or rescheduling of existing debt) will take place at concessional

rates? To develop any motivation for debt forgiveness, we need to
have an example in which creditors have to be concerned about the
incentives they give the debtor.

Incentive effects

In the last example, creditors have an incentive to lend to
the debtor, even at an expected loss, as a way to defend the value

of their existing claims. However, their incentive is to lend at

the highest interest rate that could be paid, even in the most

13

favorable state of nature; only in this way can they insure that

they collect the maximum resource transfer from the country. In
effect, while the creditors are taking an expected loss, they will

have an incentive to provide financial relief to the country
entirely through new money rather than through interest rate
reduction. Indeed, as long as there is any state of nature in
which the present value of resource transfer exceeds the value of
inherited debt, the creditors will charge an interest rate that is
higher than their opportunity cost of funds.

In order to soften this result, we need to take into
consideration the effect of the debt burden on the incentives

facing the debtor. In the real world there are a variety of
actions that debtors can take which affect their future ability to

make resource transfers: exchange rate adjustment, investment,
budget policies, and so on. Let us summarize these policies under
the vague heading of "adjustment effort". Then creditors will want
a country to make as much adjustment effort as possible, certainly

more than the country would like to undertake. Now suppose that
the debt burden on a country is as large as the maximum that the
country could possibly pay, even with maximum adjustment effort.

Then there is in fact no reason for the country to make the
adjustment effort, since the reward goes only to its creditors. It
makes sense, therefore, for the creditors to demand less than this

14

maximum, in order to provide the creditor with some incentive to
adjust.

For our third example, we consider the extreme case where the

potential resource transfer depends only on the action of the
debtor, and not at all on the state of nature (this is the case
considered by Sachs (1986)). In period 1, as always, there is a
debt service requirement D and a known maximum resource transfer
x1. Creditors thus must lend D-x1 to prevent a liquidity crisis.

In the second period, however, the potential resource transfer

depends on the adjustment effort. If the adjustment effort is
high, maximum resource transfer is xH; if it is low, xL. Other
things equal, the debtor would prefer to make the lower adjustment
effort.

The maximum interest rate that could conceivably be paid is

defined by L(l+r) = x.fl.

If the creditors charge this interest

rate, however, the debtor will have no incentive to make the high
adjustment effort. It may thus be in the interest of creditors to
charge an interest rate sufficiently low that the debtor makes the

higher adjustment effort. If there is a liquidity problem, and no

uncertainty, the optimal interest rate in the absence of
uncertainty must be one that is below the market rate i.

Several observations follow from this example. First, we note

that charging an interest rate that is below the maximum resource

15

transfer and below the market rate is actually in the interest of

the creditors. If we compare the value of their claims with the
optimal interest rate with the value with a higher interest rate,
we will find that reducing the face value of loans actually raises
their market value.

Second, this example suggests both the motivation for
conditionality and the problems of enforcing it. The creditors

would like to impose a requirement for high adjustment as a
condition for the loan -

- in

which case the interest rate could be

higher. On the other hand, the threat not to lend if the country
fails to act correctly may be hard to establish credibly, since it

remains in the interest of the creditors to avoid provoking a
liquidity crisis.

Third, while debt forgiveness may be desirable from the point

of view of creditors as a way of creating incentives, it is

clearly a blunt instrument for this purpose. The example
immediately suggests that loans are the wrong form of claim; some

form of contingent claim would be preferable. (The specification

of the optimal claim is left to the more elaborate discussion
below).

We have now gone about as far as we can with simple examples.

In order to integrate the insights from these examples, we now
turn to a formal model.

16

2. A formal model of debt overhang

As in the simplified examples, we consider a country that has

inherited a stock of debt D, all of it due in the first of two
periods. In period 1 the country can make a known maximum resource
transfer x1. In period 2 the country's resource transfer potential

is unknown, so that

(1) x2s+z
where s is a random variable that ranges from s to s and z is a
choice variable capturing the concept of "adjustment effort" by
the debtor country.

The country is assumed to care about two things: the level of

resources left to it in the second period, and the size of the
adjustment effort it is required to make. Let C2 be the difference

between the country's potential resource transfer x2 and the
actual payment it must make to creditors:

(2) C2 =

x2

-

P

For simplicity, and to avoid mixing insurance issues into our

17

analysis, the country's objective function will be assumed linear
in C:

(3) U =

-

C2

v(z)

v'>O, v''>O

where the function v(z) captures the dislike of the country for

making adjustments that enlarge its future ability to pay
creditors.

Suppose that the creditors are able to overcome the free

rider problems we mentioned in the previous section and lend
enough to avert default in the first period. Then it follows that

first period lending will be equal to the difference between
maximum potential debt service and the value of the debt,

(4) L = D

-

Suppose that the creditors have charged an interest rate r on
their new lending. If potential resource transfer exceeds L(l+r),

the loan will be repaid in full. If it does not, we assume that
the creditors will receive the maximum possible, so that

(5) P =

=

x2 if x2 < L(l-i-r)

L(l+r)

if x2 > L(l+r)

18

We can now think of this as a game in which the creditors
fir;t choose the interest rate, then the debtor chooses the level

of adjustment effort. To solve this game, we first solve the
debtor's problem conditional on the interest rate. From (3) and
(5) we derive the expected utility of the country:

(6) EU

J[(s+z) L(l+r)-z

L(l+r)]f(s)ds

-

v(z)

An increase in the adjustment effort z raises the resources

of the country in favorable states when it does not have to pay
all of its potential resource transfer to the creditors, but is
costly in and of itself:

Jf(s)ds

(7) 8EU/Bz =

-

v'(z)

L(l+r) -z

If the effort level has an interior maximum, we must have ÔEU/8z=O
and 32EU/3z2 < 0, where

(8) 32EU/3z2 =

f[L(l+r)

-

z]

-

v''(z)

We now want to calculate the response of adjustment effort to

the interest rate charged by creditors. To do this we first

19

calculate the cross-derivative

(9) 82Eu/azar

L[L(l-i-r)

-

-

z]

< 0

Then we use the implicit function theorem to derive the
response

(10) dz/dr

Lf[L(1+r) -

z]/(32EU/8z2)

<0

Thus the higher the interest rate, the lower the country's
adjustment effort.

The objective of the creditors is to maximize the expected
value of their new lending. From (5)
s

L(1+r)-z

f(s+z)f(s)ds +

(11) ER =
S

L(l+r)$f(s)ds
L(1+r)-z

The creditors' first-order condition is therefore

L(1+r)-z
LJf(s)ds + (dz/dr)Jf(s)ds
S

(12) 3ER/Br =
L(l+r)-z

= 0

s

This condition clearly indicates the two motives facing the

creditors. The first term, which is always positive, is the

20

"new-money" bias imparted by the presence of uncertainty. Since
something may always turn up that allows the debtor to pay more
than you expected, creditors have an incentive to roll over debt

at as high an interest rate as possible in order to be able to
benefit from good news. The second term, which is always negative,

represents the "debt forgiveness" bias imparted by the problem of

incentives for the debtor. Creditors do not want to make the
country's situation too hopeless, or it will have no incentive to
improve its ability to repay.

If the situation were dominated only by one or the other
consideration, the choice between new money and debt forgiveness

would be clear. If uncertainty were the only issue, it would
always be best for creditors to finance but not forgive, so as to

preserve the option of cashing in on unexpected good fortune. If
incentives were the only issue, it would on the contrary be best
for creditors to take their loss up front so that it does not act
as a prohibitive tax on debtors' effort. Unfortunately, in reality

both issues are present, so that the choice of the right strategy
is not an easy one.

The dilemma presented by this tradeoff, however, is not
inescapable. It is due to the fact that both new money and debt

forgiveness are rather blunt instruments for dealing with the
problem of debt overhang. Can an innovative repayment scheme, one

21

that effectively changes the nature of claims, do better? In
principle, at least, it can.

3. Changing the nature

claims

A number of proposals have been advanced for converting debt
into some other kind of claim. The proposals range from piecemeal

debt-equity conversions, to Bailey's (1982) proposal to convert
debt to proportional claims on exports, to proposals that either
interest rates or new lending be indexed automatically to prices
of exports. The approach taken inthis paper cannot do justice to
the details of such schemes, since it treats the real economy as a

"black box" out of which resources are somehow extracted.
Nonetheless, it is possible to capture some of the spirit of
innovative proposals by considering schemes in which the required
repayment depends on the size of the potential resource transfer.

We may divide proposals to change the nature of claims into
two broad classes. First are schemes that link repayment to some
general measure of ability to repay. The best-known examples are
proposals that debt repayment beproportional to export revenues.
The key point about these schemes is that they make no distinction

between favorable results due to national effort and those due to

factors outside the nation's control. On the other side are

22

proposals to link repayment to some measure of the shocks
experienced by a country, such as the level of world interest
rates or the price of the country's principal export good. These
two kinds of proposal are quite different at least in principle.
There is a further distinction within these proposals between

debt postponement and debt forgiveness. Most proposals that link

repayment either to ability to pay or to the state of nature do

not, at least on paper, reduce the eventual obligation of a
country to pay: the obligation is simply rescheduled, at market

interest rates, into the future. However, it will be easier
analytically to imagine that what is at stake is immediate debt
forgiveness. We can then ask whether debt postponement is similar
in its implications.

Repayment linked to ability to repay

Suppose that we have a country exactly like that described in

the previous section, but the its creditors take an innovative
approach to its problem. Instead of lending it the money needed to

service its debt, they establish a claim that varies with the
ability to repay. We can approximate such a scheme by supposing
that repayment is a function of second-period potential resource
transfer:

23

O<B<l

(13)P—A+Bx2

Does such a scheme resolve creditors' conflict between taking

advantage of good news and providing debtors with an incentive to

adjust? Unfortunately, it does not. Consider the first-order

condition of the debtor. Given the repayment schedule, the
difference between potential and actual resource transfer will be

(14) C2

-A +

(l-B)x2

Thus the debtor will maximize

(15) EU =

f

[-A +

(l-B)(s+

z)Jf(s)ds -

v(z)

with the first-order condition

(16) 8EU/3z =

(1-B)

-

v'(z)

= 0

This condition may be interpreted as follows: the country receives

only a fraction (1-B) of the benefit from any improvement in its
resource transfer capacity. There is a tradeoff in substituting a

24

claim contingent on ability to repay for a simple loan: it is no

longer the case that in bad states of natureextra adjustment
effort provides no benefit to the debtor, but the benefit it

receives in good states is diluted. It is unclear without a
detailed model of the economy which will distort incentives more.

This analysis shows that proposals to link repayment to
exports or other measures of capacity to repay do not eliminate

the problem of incentives, and therefore do not eliminate the
tradeoff between new money and debt forgiveness. Notice, however,

that while this is the only issue that can be addressed in the

stylized framework presented here,

in practice

exchange

participation notes or other schemes might still be valuable for
other reasons, for example as a way to allow debt service to rise
over time in line with economic growth and inflation.

Payment linked to the state of

nature

The alternative class of proposal would link repayment to
sonic

measure of the state of nature. An ideal measure would

separate perfectly between the consequences of the country's

effort and events outside its control; it is easiest to
concentrate our formal analysis on this case, then discuss how the
imperfection of real measures affects the argument.

25

In the context of our formal model, the form of an optimal

scheme is obvious: it would appropriate all of the gains that
result from the state of nature s, but none of the consequences of
the effort level z:

(17) P A + s

The resulting first-order condition will be

(18) 3EU/Bz

1 -

v'(z)

0

Thus the distortion in the country's incentive to adjust is
completely eliminated.

For the creditors, the degree of freedom in the scheme would
be in setting the constant term A. At first glance, it might seem

that the creditors could set A equal to the optimal z, so that
they would provide the debtor witha marginal incentive to adjust

yet in the end capture all of the debtor's potential resource
transfer by the debtor. This may look too clever to be real, and
it is. In addition to satisfying the marginal conditon (18), the
debtor's choice of adjustment effort must be globally optimal. If

there is no gain from adjusting, the debtor will be better off
choosing its own preferred level of effort and simply defaulting

26

on the payment scheme (17). Thus the expected resource transfer
that can be extracted from the country will be limited by the need

to provide enough incentive for the country to participate in the

debt initiative. This constraint is not, however, unique to
state-contingent schemes. The only unique feature is that a
perfect state-contingent sheme would extract from the country less

than its maximum reasource transfer in all states of nature, even
the least favorable.

It is clear from the analysis that an ideal state-contingent
scheme should be able to do better than either a simple loan that

will probably not be repaid in full or a claim linked to broad
ability to repay. In reality, of course, a scheme will be less
than ideal, if only because the state of nature cannot be fully
specified. For example, repayment might be linked to the price of

the country's principal export, but shocks arising from weather
fluctuations might not be included. What this imperfection will do

is to blur the effectiveness of the state-contingency in
eliminating incentive problems. There will be some states of

nature in which the country will be unable to meet its
obligations, even though these will in principle be indexed to the

state of nature. At the margin, an improvement in the country's

ability to pay will in these states of nature benefit only the
creditors, not the country; thus the country's incentive to adjust

27

will be diluted. Clearly, however, the dilution will be less if
the obligations at least somewhat reflect the state of nature than

if they do not. So an imperfect state-contingent claim is
stilibetter than a claim that is not state-contingent at all.

Debt postponement

So far we have discussed only schemes that link debt
forgiveness to either ability to pay or the state of nature.
However, the more immediate issue is one of proposals to link new

money to export revenues or export prices. Is this something
completely different, or is the analysis similar?

The essential point here is that once we are in a situation
of defensive lending by existing creditors, the creditors do not

expect to be fully repaid --

nor do the debtors expect to pay

fully. Thus new money contains a concessional element, even if it
does not do so on paper. As a result, the same considerations that
apply to eventual forgiveness also apply to new money.

Consider an extension of our basic model to three periods. In

period 1 the country makes a decision about adjustment effort,
which affects maximum resource transfer in period 2; ability to

repay in period 3 is also uncertain. Then any relief from the
burden of resource transfer in period 2 will not be fully offset

28

by an increase in the expected burden in period 3. Itfollows that

the incentive to adjust initially will depend on the conditions
attached to new money in period 2. If creditors will demand the

maximum possible resource transfer regardless of the state of
nature, there will be noincentive to adjust. If, on the contrary,

new lending is linked to the state of nature, so that adjustment

effort at the margin benefits the country rather than the
creditors, the incentive to adjust will be greater.

Although the analysis is highly abstract, then, we seem to be
left with a clear conclusion: linking either eventual repayment or
new money to measures of the state of nature is a good idea.

4. Concluding remarks

This paper has presented a highly abstract analysis of the

issues involved in dealing with the developing country debt
problem. I have argued that the best way to think about that
problem is as one of debt overhang: the 'tinherited debt" of some

countries is larger than the present value of the resource
transfer that their creditors expect tham to make in the future.

Much popular discussion seems to presume that the appropriate

handling of a debt problem is simply contingent on the
distinctione between liquidity and solvency. If it is a liquidity

29

problem, financing should be provided until the country has worked

its way out; if it is a solvency problem, some kind of bankruptcy

procedure is called for. What even a highly abstract analysis of
the debt overhang problem shows is that this is a misleading way

to view the issue. There is no such thing as a pure liquidity
problem; it must arise because of doubts about solvency. Even if
there is a significant possibility that debt will not be repaid in

full, however, it may still be in creditors' interest to provide

enough financing to avert an immediate default. As is fairly
widely appreciated, however, there is a conflict between the
collective interest of creditors in providing financing and the
individual interest of each creditor in getting out.
The choice between financing and debt forgiveness should not,
according to the analysis presented here, hinge on some attempt to
settle the liquidity vs. solvency question. Instead, it represents

a tradeoff between the option value of a large nominal debt and

the incentive effects of a debt that is unlikely to be repaid.
Since good news is always possible, creditors would like to keep
their claims high, so that if by some chance a country should turn

out to be able to repay, they will not turn out to have forgiven
debt unnecessarily. On the other hand, if a country is not going
to be able to repay except in exceptional circumstances, it will
have little incentive to try to adjust. Thus creditors may wish to

30

forgive part of a country's debt to increase the likelihood that
it will repay what remains. It is because of the tension between

these two objectives that the issue of how much to rely on debt
forgiveness and how much to rely on financing is a difficult one.

There seems to be a compelling case that the tradeoff between
forgiveness and financing can be improved by indexing repayment to

the state of nature. If paymentis linked to some measure of
conditions outside the country's control,the probability for any
given expected payment that adjustment effort will at the margin

benefit the country, not its creditors, will be increased. Thus

the analysis in this paper, abstract though it is, does suggest

that linking new money and possibly debt relief to measures of
economic conditions could be to the mutual benefit of debtors and
their creditors.

31

References

Bailey, N. (1983): "A safety net for foreign lending", Business Week,
January 10.

Bulow, J. and Rogoff, K. (1986) : "A cnstant recontracting model of

sovereign debt", mimeo, Stanford University.

Eaton, J., Gersovitz, M. and Stiglitz, J. (1986): "The pure theory of
country risk", European Economic REview, June.

Krugman, P. (1985a): "International debt strategies in an uncertain
world" in Cuddington, J. and Smith, G., eds., International debt and
the devioping countries, World Bank.

Krugman, P. (1985b): "Prospects for international debt reform", in
UNCTAD, International Monetary and financial issues for the developing
countries.

Sachs, J. (1984): "Theoretical issues in international borrowing",
Princeton studies in international finance, 54.

Sachs, J. (1986): "The debt overhang problem of devloping countries",
presented at the conference in memorial to Carlos Diaz—Alejandro,
Helsinki, August 1986.

