NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RE-EXAMINING THE EFFECTS OF TRADING WITH CHINA ON LOCAL LABOR MARKETS:
A SUPPLY CHAIN PERSPECTIVE
Zhi Wang
Shang-Jin Wei
Xinding Yu
Kunfu Zhu
Working Paper 24886
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24886

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018, Revised October 2018

We thank Pol Antràs, Costas Arkolakis, Lorenzo Caliendo, Hanming Fang, David Dorn, Gordon
Hanson, Ann Harrison, Amit Khandelwal, Fernando Parro, Daniel Xu, and seminar/conference
participants at University of Pennsylvania, Johns Hopkins SAIS, MIT, George Washington
University, UIBE, and Columbia University for helpful comments. The paper represents the
personal views of the authors, and all errors are the responsibilities of the authors alone. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Zhi Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Re-examining the Effects of Trading with China on Local Labor Markets: A Supply Chain
Perspective
Zhi Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 24886
August 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. F16
ABSTRACT
The United States imports intermediate inputs from China, helping downstream US firms to
expand employment. Using a cross-regional reduced-form specification but differing from the
existing literature, this paper (a) incorporates a supply chain perspective, (b) uses intermediate
input imports rather than total imports in computing the downstream exposure, and (c) uses
exporter-specific information to allocate imported inputs across US sectors. We find robust
evidence that the total impact of trading with China is a positive boost to local employment and
real wages. The most important factor is employment stimulation outside the manufacturing
sector through the downstream channel. This overturns the received wisdom from the reducedform literature and provides statistical support for a key mechanism hypothesized in general
equilibrium spatial models.
Zhi Wang
Schar School of Policy and Government
George Mason Universty
3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1,
Alington, VA 22201
zwang36@gmu.edu
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Xinding Yu
School of International Trade and Economics
University of International Business and Economics
Beijing 100029, CHINA
yuxd@uibe.edu.cn
Kunfu Zhu
Research Institute on Global Value Chains
University of International Business and Economics
Beijing 100029, CHINA
kfzhu@uibe.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Trade in intermediate goods has been growing steadily over time (Hummels, Ishii, and Yi,
2001; Johnson and Noguera, 2017; Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2014). This can alter how imports
affect the labor market of the importing countries. In this paper, we show that incorporating a
supply chain perspective in a cross-regional reduced-form specification can overturn the received
wisdom in the literature with a similar specification that looks only at the direct competition
channel (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013). The paper also provides statistical support for a key
mechanism hypothesized (but not tested) in recent general equilibrium spatial models used to
assess the effects of trade shocks on labor markets.
In 2000, US imports of intermediate goods from China was 14.8 billion US dollars, accounting
for 28.6% of that year’s total imports from China. This number increased to 63.2 billion USD in
2007, and doubled again to 130.2 billion USD in 2014 (accounting for 37.5% of total imports from
China that year). Across industries, those that experience a high rate of growth in total imports
from China tend to see an even higher growth rate in intermediate inputs (see Figure 1). US firms
that use these inputs potentially expand their employment.
Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017) estimate that US manufacturing firms that source
intermediate inputs from abroad tend to increase their production and may even buy more inputs
from domestic manufacturing firms simultaneously. In this paper, we suggest that many nonmanufacturing firms also use imported inputs from China and increase their operational scale as a
result. Indeed, the employment gains by non-manufacturing firms that can be traced to trading
with China will be shown to dominate those of manufacturing firms.
An influential paper by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), using a cross-regional reduced-form
regression specification, shows that US regions with greater exposure to competition from China
experience a greater decline in employment. Pierce and Schott (2016), another well-published
paper that also focuses on the direct competition channel, reach the same conclusion that imports
from China has reduced US manufacturing jobs and total employment.
This paper adopts an explicit supply chain perspective, which is missing in Autor, Dorn, and
1

Hanson (2013). We find that while the direct competition effect reduces manufacturing sector
employment, an indirect upstream channel further exacerbates job losses in both manufacturing
and non-manufacturing sectors. In other words, those US firms that do not compete directly with
Chinese imports but sell their output to other US firms that are squeezed by Chinese imports also
experience job losses. However, the job gains from the downstream channel are not only
statistically significant but also economically powerful enough to more than offset the combined
negative effects from direct competition and the upstream channel. Once we account for all three
channels of exposure to trading with China, the total effect for an average region is a net job
increase of 1.27% (as a share of working age cohort) a year relative to a hypothetical region with
no exposure to trading with China. We also find that 75% of the workers in an average region
experience a real wage growth as a result of exposure to the China trade.
To place this paper in the literature, it is useful to discuss four questions. First, how is it
different from the previous attempt to incorporate a supply chain perspective in a cross-regional
reduced-form specification? Second, how is it related to the emerging literature that uses a general
equilibrium spatial model? Third, why would an indirect (positive) employment effect from a
downstream channel be powerful enough to overwhelm a direct (negative) employment effect from
import competition? Fourth, how to address possible endogeneity of US imports from China?
Let us start with a comparison with the previous attempt to incorporate supply chain channels,
namely Acemoglu et al. (2015). Methodologically, our paper differs from theirs in two ways. First,
they do not separate intermediate goods from final goods in computing downstream exposure to
China trade. Since the downstream effect is about how input costs are affected by imported Chinese
inputs, that distinction is important. Second, Acemoglu et al. (2016) do not use exporter-specific
information to allocate imports from China to the downstream sectors in the United States. In other
words, they effectively assume that the imported inputs from China are allocated in the same way
across US sectors as imported inputs from Germany or any other countries. Correcting these two
items makes our approach better in line with a supply chain perspective. They turn out to make a
big difference in the conclusion too. In particular, while Acemoglu et al (2016) reaffirm the
2

conclusion of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) that trading with China causes a net job loss, we
overturn this result. In addition, we find that the total real wage in the United States has been made
higher by trading with China.
We now relate our paper to the new literature on general equilibrium (GE) spatial models.
Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2018) develop a dynamic multi-regional and multi-sector model
with an important methodological innovation that solves for comparative statics without having to
solve for the steady state values of the variables. Adao, Arkolakis, and Esposito (2018) develop a
static general equilibrium model with multiple regions and multiple sectors and solve for changes
in labor shares (comparative statics) following a trade shock. Note that the cross-regional reducedform specification used in this paper (as well as in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013) does not by
itself speak about general equilibrium effects. Without information on inter-regional linkages, it
would be misleading to extrapolate the results from the reduced-form regressions to a national
aggregate effect on the labor market. GE spatial models, on the other hand, allow for inter-market
linkages and can therefore speak meaningfully about the effects of trade shocks on national labor
market and on welfare.
Our paper is a useful complement to the GE spatial models for four reasons. First, a key
potential shortcoming of our specification is assessed to be unimportant quantitatively. In particular,
Caliendo et al., (2018) find that labor mobility across regions is very modest (with the median
mobility across states being less than one half of one percent per quarter). (Autor, Dorn, Hanson,
and Song, 2016, also report low inter-regional labor mobility.) Adao et al., (2018) state that,
because the inter-regional mobility is low, the inferences from the cross-regional reduced-form
regressions are in principle valid. Since they are much easier to implement, it is useful to do them
as a check on the performance of the GE models. Second, our paper provides a useful statistical
test on a key mechanism hypothesized in Caliendo et al. (2018). In particular, firms using imported
inputs in the GE spatial models would expand their employment and much of the job expansion
takes place in the service sectors (see, for example, Figures 1, 6, and 8 of Caliendo et al, 2018, and
the associated discussions in the text). Their model is calibrated to fit the input-output linkages.
3

This mechanism is crucial for their conclusion that the overall effect of trading with China is an
increase in the aggregate employment and aggregate welfare. However, their paper does not
provide a statistical test for the presence of such a mechanism. Indeed, the existing test in
Acemoglu et al. (2016) appears to reject the significance of this mechanism. Our paper provides
the first affirmative evidence that the downstream channel, especially outside the manufacturing
sector, is statistically significant and economically powerful. Third, GE models make several
assumptions that our paper does not. For example, Caliendo et al., 2018; and Adao, et al., 2018
assume that agents in their models have perfect foresight (in order for the models to be solved).
Without having to make these assumptions, our results are potentially robust to alternative
assumptions. Fourth, by using a specification that is essentially the same as Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013) except for the addition of two supply chain terms, our paper makes it transparent
about what may be the crucial missing items in the existing reduced-form literature. In particular,
stripped of multiple sources of complexity in GE models, our paper makes it easier to see that it is
not the cross-regional mobility but rather downstream/upstream linkages (a particular form of
cross-market linkages) that are responsible for the differences in the conclusions between the GE
models of Caliendo et al. (2018) and Adao et al. (2018) and the reduced-form results of Autor,
Dorn, and Hanson (2013).
The third comment is about how an indirect downstream effect on employment can be stronger
than the direct competition effect. Intuitively, since a subset of the manufacturing sectors are
responsible for most of the US imports from China, the direct competition channel only affects
these sectors, which collectively constitute a small part of the US labor market. In comparison, the
downstream channel benefits almost all sectors in the economy, including service sectors. Even
research institutes, hospitals, schools, banks, law firms, government departments, and restaurants
use imported Chinese made laptops, desktop computers, electric cables, communication devices,
steel parts, tables and chairs, light bulbs, bed sheets, uniforms, or wash towels. This is true not
only for the economy as a whole, but also for the vast majority of local labor markets. Note that
the upstream channel also affects more sectors than the direct competition channel. Therefore,
4

whether the downstream channel can ultimately overturn the existing results is an empirical
question.
The fourth comment is about possible endogenous nature of US imports from China. We
employ three instrumental variable (IV) approaches to address this issue. The first is to use sector
variations in imports from China by other high-income countries as instruments for the sector
variations in US imports from China. This follows the spirit of the IV approach in ADH (2013).
The second is to add routine job share and offshorability index developed by Autor and Dorn (2013)
as additional IVs；they are (partial) predictors of the exposures to China, and the three IVs
collectively pass the over-identification test. The third IV approach is to expand the set of IVs
further to include “PNTR Gaps,” which use the sector variations in the reduction of uncertainty
after the United States granted permanent normal trading relations (PNTR) status to China in 2000
to predict subsequent growth of US imports from China by sector. This follows the idea from
Pierce and Schott (2017). Again, we perform an over-identification test for the validity of the
instruments.
We also investigate the effects of the China trade on real wages, another important labor
market outcome that has also been studied by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), Ebenstein, Harrison,
McMillan, and Phillips (2014), and Chetverikov, Larsen, and Palmer (2016). We show that the
supply chain perspective makes a difference as well. In particular, if one focuses just on the direct
competition effect, as Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Chetverikov, Larsen, and Palmer (2016)
do, one would find that workers in almost all initial income groups either experience a decline in
real wage or no increase in real wage. In contrast, our supply chain perspective uncovers a different
picture. For a region with an average exposure to trading with China relative to a region with no
exposure, while there are winners and losers, the total effect of trading with China is an increase
in the real wage for 75% of American workers as well as an increase in the aggregate real wage.
It might be useful to take note of the estimated impact of the China trade shock on employment
in other countries. Using linked employer-employee data for (almost) the entire labor market in
Denmark, Trailberman (2017) finds that trading with China does not result in a net increase in
5

unemployment. Since the United States has a more flexible labor market than Denmark, it would
seem surprising if the labor market outcome is indeed worse for the United States than for Denmark.
We organize the rest of the paper in the following way. Section 2 provides some motivating
facts about US-China trade. Section 3 introduces our empirical approach and data sources.
Estimation results, model extensions and a set of robustness checks are presented in Sections 4-6,
and Section 7 concludes.
2. Some Basic Facts about US Imports from China
For US firms to benefit from imported inputs from China, one might conjecture that the
Chinese imports are associated with cost savings for US firms. To check for plausibility of this
channel, we examine unit import values at the HS 6-digit level. In the top graph in Figure 2, we
present a binned scatter plot of changes in average unit value from 2000 to 2007 against increases
in the share of China in US imports. More precisely, we divide all the increases in China’s share
in US imports at the HS 6-digit level into 20 equal-sized bins, and then plot the average value of
the changes in the unit import values (on the vertical axis) for all observations in a bin against the
mid-point of all changes in China’s shares in the same bin (on the horizontal axis). The resulting
binned scatter plot purges the noise from having too many data points on a raw scatter plot. We
can clearly see a negative relationship between the two variables: those products for which China
has become a relatively more important source tend to exhibit a greater decline in unit import
values.
As the supply chain perspective is about trade in intermediate goods, the bottom graph in
Figure 2 presents a different binned scatter plot focusing on US imports of intermediate goods at
the HS 6-digit level. We see the same pattern: Imported intermediate inputs become relatively
cheaper when China becomes relatively more important as a source country.
The data pattern can be confirmed more formally with the following regression model:
ΔlnUnitPricei,2000-2007 =β0 +β1×ΔCHN-Sharei,2000-2007 + ui,2000-2007

6

where i represents a 6-digit product under the HS classification system. ΔlnUnitPricei,2000-2007 is
the change in log import unit price for product i averaged across all source countries from 2000 to
2007 (multiplied by 100). CHN-Sharei,2000-2007 is the change (in percentage points) in the quantity
share (i.e., share in total weight or total physical units) of China in US imports of product i.
We have done the regressions that give equal weights to all products as well as weighting each
product in proportion to its total import values at the start of the sample period. They yield
qualitatively similar results. In the first column of Table 1, we report the equal-weighted result in
the first row, and the value-weighted results in the second row. In both cases, a negative coefficient
means that an increase in the share of China in US imports and a decline in average unit value tend
to go together. The effect is stronger when we weight the products according to their relative
importance. Based on the coefficient in the first column, second row, an increase in the China share
by one percentage point is approximately corresponding to a decline in the unit value by one
percent. Note that the regression is done with all available observations (i.e., more than those in
the binned scatter plots).
To address endogeneity of the change in China’s share in US imports, we use the change in
China’s share in other high-income countries’ imports as an instrumental variable2. The IV results
are reported in Column 2 of Table 1. We continue to find a negative and significant coefficient.
Indeed, the point estimates are bigger than the corresponding OLS estimates. Based on 2SLS
estimate in the value-weighted regression, an increase in the China share by one percentage point
leads to a reduction in unit import price by 1.8%.
In Columns 3 and 4, we re-do the regressions by focusing on intermediate inputs only. We find
the slope estimates tend to be larger than the corresponding estimates in the first two columns.
Based on the 2SLS estimate from a value weighted regression (last column, last row), an increase
in China’s share in US imports of intermediate inputs by one percentage point tends to reduce the
average US intermediate import price by 2.1%. Across all intermediate inputs, the median increase
Other high-income countries are five G7 countries: Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, France, and Italy (hereafter referred to as
“G5”). We exclude Canada as it is effectively an extension of the US economy due to its proximity and close supply chain
relationships. As a robustness check, we have also added Australia, Denmark, Finland, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland to the
set and found little change in the key results (results are not reported to save space).
2

7

in China’s share in US imports during 2000-2007 was 8.23 percentage points; this translates to a
reduction in intermediate import price by 17.4%.
The top three most important intermediate inputs for the United States by import values are
“portable automatic data processing machines” (i.e., laptops), “transmission apparatus”, and “parts
& accessories for data processing machinery” (including computer parts), respectively. For these
three intermediate inputs, the Chinese shares in US intermediate imports have increased by 67.6,
14.4, and 42.6, percentage points, respectively, during 2000-2007. This leads to a much greater
decline in intermediate import prices than the average or median across products3.
To summarize, the data on unit import values and China’s shares in US imports are consistent
with the notion that trading with China has generated substantial cost savings for US firms.
It may also be useful to look at some macro facts regarding the relationship between US
unemployment and the US trade deficit. Appendix Figure 1 plots the time series of US
unemployment rate and US trade deficit as a share of total trade from 1960 to 2015. A striking
feature that emerges from this graph is that the two variables tend to be negatively correlated: the
US trade deficit tends to be large when the US labor market is strong (low unemployment) and
small when the US labor market is weak. In other words, an increase in US net imports is unlikely
to be associated with an increase in national unemployment.
To zoom in on US trading with China, Appendix Figure 2 presents the time series of US
unemployment rate and US trade deficit with China as a share of US total trade from 1990 to 2015.
Again, the relationship is negative. The US tends to run a larger trade deficit with China when its
employment situation is good and vice versa4. While these macro facts are not a direct proof (as
both are endogenous variables), they raise a question of whether trading with China systematically
raises the US unemployment rate.
Total employment is the sum of manufacturing and non-manufacturing employment. While
the US manufacturing employment has been declining over the last two decades, the employment

For big changes in the China share, the Jensen’s inequality sets in, and the difference in log is no longer a good approximation
for calculating percentage change in the import prices.
4 The same patterns are observed when we use US imports from China instead of US trade deficit with China.
3

8

outside the manufacturing sector has been on a rise. While Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) makes
a case that the observed decline in US manufacturing employment is to a significant part due to
trading with China, it implicitly assumes that the equally dramatic rise of non-manufacturing
employment is not related to China. (Indeed, most service sectors are typically labeled as nontraded.) One way to interpret what we do in this paper is to discover and document that the rise in
the non-manufacturing jobs is to a significant part also due to trading with China.
3. Empirical Approach and Data Sources
We now turn to the framework for examining the effect of trading with China on local
employment in the United States. To maintain maximum comparability with Autor, Dorn, Hanson
(2013) and Acemoglu et al. (2016), we intentionally keep the methodology and the data as close
as possible to theirs. In particular, we use changes in employment and changes in exposure to
trading with China at the commuting zone level as units of observation.
We keep the differences at a minimum (by design), and they are introduced as a result of the
supply chain perspective. First, we argument their specification by two additional terms capturing
the downstream and upstream channels, respectively. Second, in computing the downstream
exposure, we separate imported intermediate inputs from general imports. Third, we use a multicountry input-output table to capture the exporter-specific information on sector linkage. (This
means that we do not have to assume that Chinese inputs are allocated across US sectors in the
same way as German inputs or inputs from other countries.) These modifications make our
measurement and framework more faithful to the spirit of a supply chain perspective.

3.1 Specification
We run (variants of) the following regression:

L-Sharek , = 0 + 1Directk, + 2 UPk, + 3Downk, + 4 k ,2000 +  k ,
where k stands for one of the 722 commuting zones that cover the mainland US. The concept
9

“Commuting Zone” was first developed by Tolbert and Sizer (1996), defined as an aggregation of
counties that are characterized by strong internal commuting ties. This can be taken as a geographic
area that constitutes a local labor market. It is the basic unit of observation in Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013).
We estimate this model for the period from 2000 to 2007 (t=2007), which is similar to Autor,
Dorn, and Hanson (2013) 5 . To construct the dependent variable, we consider four mutually
exclusive outcome variables, all measured as a share of the working age cohort in a commuting
zone k: manufacturing employment, non-manufacturing employment, unemployment, and people
not in the labor force. The four shares sum to 100%. L-Sharek , is 100 times the annualized
change in each outcome variable over the relevant time interval.

Directk, , Upk, and Downk, are 100 times the annualized change over the period τ
(2000 to 2007) in direct, upstream and downstream exposures to trading with China in commuting
zone k, respectively. They will be defined below in more detail.  k ,2000 refers to a vector of startof-period control variables at the commuting zone level, including initial employment share in
working-age population (age 16-64) and census divisions fixed effects6.

3.2 Three Channels of Exposure to the China Trade Shock
To quantify the three channels of trade exposure (in terms of direct competition, downstream
effect, and upstream effect, respectively), we start with a sector level measure and then convert
them to commuting zone level measures based on each a sector’s employment share in a region.
The Direct Competition Channel
The exposure to direct competition for Sector j is defined as the annualized change (in
percentage point) in imports7 from China of Sector j’s products as a share of the sector’s total

The United States Census Bureau divides the country into nine census divisions, including East North Central, East South Central,
Middle Atlantic, Mountain, New England, Pacific, South Atlantic, West North Central and West South Central.
7 Trade values are converted to 2000 US dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator.
6

10

absorption in year 2000:
,U
,U
− M Cj,2000
M Cj,2007
100
Direct j, =

,
*
7 Y j,U2000 + M *j,U2000 - E Uj,2000

(1)

U

*
where Y j,2000 is sector j’s total output in year 2000, M *j,U2000 - EUj,2000
is sector j’s net imports
*
(imports from all sources, M *j,U2000 , minus exports to all destinations, EUj,2000
). Thus the

U
*U
U*
denominator Y j,2000 + M j,2000 - E j,2000 equals sector j’s total absorption. The numerator
,U
,U
measures the change in imports of sector j’s products from China from 2000 to
M Cj,2007
− M Cj,2000

2007. This definition of direct competition channel is identical to the “Change in Import
Penetration Ratio” in Acemoglu et al. (2016).
To control for US domestic demand factors in the US imports, we instrument the numerator
in (1) with other high-income countries’ imports from China and replace the denominator by its 5year lagged value as:
,G 5
,G 5
− M Cj,2000
M Cj,2007
100
Direct =

*
7 Y j,U1995 + M *j,U1995 - EUj,1995
IV
j,

(2)

We then convert the direct exposure to Chinese imports from the sector level to the
commuting zone level based on the composition of the working age population in various sectors
in each commuting zone. An exposure to direct competition from China for commuting zone k
from 2000 to 2007 is defined as:

Directk, = 
j

Lk , j ,2000
Lk ,2000

Direct j,

(3)

where subscript k indexes commuting zones, Lk , j ,2000 is the employment of sector j at commuting
zone k in 2000, and Lk ,2000 represents total employment of commuting zone k in 2000. In other
words, the commuting zone level measure of exposure to direct competition is the weighted
11

average of the changes in import penetration ratios across sectors, with weights proportional to
each sector’s initial employment share.
Following Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), an instrumental variable version of the exposure
to direct competition at the commuting zone level is defined as：

Directk,IV = 
j

Lk , j ,1990
Lk ,1990

Direct IVj,

(4)

The weight on sector j’s exposure to direct is the share of that sector in local employment in
1990 (the 10-year lag is proposed by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 20138).
The Downstream Channel
The downstream exposure for a commuting zone describes how it benefits from being able to
use imported intermediate goods. We also construct it in two steps. First, at the sector level, it is a
weighted average of all of its input g’ exposure to growth in China-sourced intermediate inputs
(annualized to make it easy to compare across time periods):
,U
,U
− M -int g,C2000
M -int g,C2007
100
Down
Down j, =
  wg , j ,2000
*
7
Y -int Ug,2000 + M -int g,*U2000 − E -int Ug,2000
g

(5)

The denominator is the total absorption of intermediate inputs by US sector j in 2000, whereas
the numerator is the change of US imports of intermediates from China from 2000 to 2007. As
pointed out before, our measure focuses on imported intermediate inputs whereas Acemoglu et al.
(2016) use all imports including final goods.
The sectoral weights are proportional to each input sector’s imports of intermediate goods
from China：

8

When we use the labor shares in 2000, we obtain similar results (not reported to save space).

12

wgD,own
j ,2000 =

Z gC,,Uj ,2000

Z
i

C ,U
i , j ,2000

(6)

The numerator in the weight represents imports of intermediate input in sector g from China
by US sector j in 2000, whereas the denominator is all intermediate inputs from China used by US
industries j. Importantly, it does not assume that the Chinese and German intermediate inputs are
allocated in the same way across US sectors (because we use an inter-country input-output table).
In comparison, Acemoglu et al. (2016) and Feenstra et al. (2017) effectively make this assumption,
and this assumption is rejected by the Inter-Country Input-Output Table.
The downstream exposure at a commuting zone level is the weighted average of the sector
level downstream exposure, with the weights proportional to each sector’s employment share in
2000:

Downk, = 
j

Lk , j ,2000
Lk ,2000

Down j,

(7)

The instrumented version of the downstream exposure at the sector level is constructed as：
,G 5
,G 5
− M -int g,C2000
M -int g,C2007
100
Down
Down =
  wg , j ,2000
*
7
Y -int Ug,1995 + M -int g,*U1995 − E -int Ug,1995
g
IV
j,

(8)

The instrumented version of the downstream exposure at a commuting zone level is the
weighted average of the corresponding sector level measure, with employment share in 1990 as
the sector weight. That is, the instrumented measure of downstream exposure for commuting zone
k is:

Downk,IV = 
j

Lk , j ,1990
Lk ,1990

Down IVj,

(9)

The Upstream Channel
The upstream exposure captures how a commuting zone may be affected indirectly when their

13

firms are at an upstream to those US firms that compete with Chinese imports directly.
For a given sector j, the upstream exposure is the annualized change in sales-weighted average
of the direct competition exposure of all of its customers:

UPj, =  wUP
j , g ,2000 Direct g,
g

(10)

where weight wUP
j , g ,2000 is computed as：

UP
j , g ,2000

w

=

Z Uj , g,U,2000

Z
i

U ,U
j ,i ,2000

(11)

U ,U
where Z j ,i ,2000 represents US sector j’s output sales to US sector i as the latter’s intermediate
UP
input. Thus, the economic meaning of such a weight w j , g ,2000 is the relative importance of US

sector g for sector j as a percent of sector j’s total sales in year 2000. The higher the percentage,
the larger the impact of sector g’s direct exposure to the China trade shock.
We convert the sector level measure of upstream exposure to commuting zone level by
making use of each sector’s initial share in local employment:

UPk, = 
j

Lk , j ,2000
Lk ,2000

UPj,

(12)

UPj,IV

(13)

The corresponding instrumental variable version is:

UPk,IV = 
j

Lk , j ,1990
Lk ,1990

IV
UP
IV
where UPj, =  w j , g ,2000 Direct g,
g

14

(14)

3.3 Data Sources and Basic Statistics
The construction of the downstream and upstream exposures requires the use of inter-country
input-output (ICIO) tables. We use ICIO tables from OECD9, which cover 64 economies and 34
industries from 1995 to 2014. The structure of the ICIO Table is presented in Appendix Table 1.
The local employment data are derived from the U.S. Census microdata (5% sample for the
year 1990 and 2000) and American Community Survey (ACS) microdata (for the year 2001 to
2014) provided by the IPUMS-USA database (Ruggles et al., 2015). These two datasets use a 5digit numeric variable (PUMA code) to identify the Public Use Microdata Area where the
respondent is located. The PUMA code is state-dependent, which must be read in conjunction with
the 2-digit State FIPS code. We merge the Public Use Microdata Areas to 722 commuting zones
by using the concordance between the 1990/2000 Census Public Use Micro Areas and 1990
commuting zones provided by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013). Both census and ACS data provide
information on a respondent’s employment status: whether he/she is in the labor force, currently
unemployed, and in which industry is the employment. The respondents' wage income, gender and
educational attainment are also available.
Table 2 shows the three channels of exposure to China trade at the sector level in terms of
annualized percentage changes in exposure to imports from China. Taking direct exposure to
imports from China (ΔDirect) as an example, the mean of 0.224 represents an annual increase of
0.224% on average during 2000 to 2007.
In Figure 3, we plot the three channels of exposures at the sector level during 2000-2007 for
all 34 industries in the OECD ICIO database. The direct competition channel only affects the
manufacturing sectors in which China has comparative advantage or runs a large trade surplus
from processing and assembling trade. Those manufacturing industries, such as Textile Products,
Computer and Electronic Products and Electrical Equipment, account for a large portion of imports
from China, but collectively only account for a small part of the US labor market. While the
Our results also hold when we use the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) instead of the OECD database. We choose to report
the results based on the OECD’s Inter-country Input-Output database because the required data for our empirical exercise are more
consistent across years in the OECD data (whereas WIOD changed sector definition and methodology in the middle of the sample).
9

15

upstream exposure is more important in the manufacturing sector than service and primary sectors,
the downstream exposure benefits almost all sectors in the economy.
We now turn to commuting zone level measures. For all 722 commuting zones, as shown in
Table 3, the exposure to direct competition has increased by an average of 0.112% a year during
2000-2007. The top five commuting zones that have experienced the most direct competition are
Rome, GA; Hickory, NC; Morganton, NC; Martinsville, VA and Talladega, AL, respectively. The
five commuting zones that exhibit the least exposure to direct competition are Gunnison CO;
Granby CO; Winnemucca NV; Elko NV and Reno NV, respectively.
Interestingly, both the indirect upstream and downstream exposures have increased during
the sample period. Similar to the sector level results, the increase in the downstream exposure is
greater than those of the other two channels, partly because the imports of intermediate goods from
China has grown faster than the imports of final goods.
Our baseline measures of upstream and downstream exposures keep the diagonal elements in
the input-output matrix in computing the weights. There are two potential issues. First, since these
elements are reflected in both the direct competition channel and the two indirect value chain
channels, there is some double counting in these measures. Second, the double counting makes it
more likely that the indirect channels and direct channel are collinear. Pairwise correlations among
the three measures are presented in Table 4a. The multicollinearity problem appears most serious
between the direct competition channel and the upstream channel. This makes it hard for the
regression coefficients to be estimated precisely. Hence, as a robustness check, we exclude the
diagonal elements in the input-output matrix in computing the weights. As shown in Table 4b, the
correlation coefficient between direct exposure and upstream exposure at the commuting zone
level has decreased from 0.97 to 0.78 after excluding the diagonal IO elements.
Table 5 presents the summary statistics for annualized changes in employment shares at the
commuting zone level , there has been a trend decline in the manufacturing employment share. In
comparison, non-manufacturing jobs exhibit a steady increase (at the rate of 0.231% a year during
2000-2007, offsetting the loss of manufacturing jobs, which was 0.23% a year). During this period,
16

the labor force non-participation rate decreased at the rate of 0.048% a year, slightly more than
offsetting an increase in the unemployment rate of 0.047% a year.

4. Estimation Results
4.1 An Incompletely-Specified Model that Only Looks at the Direct Competition Channel
This sub-section follows the specification in ADH (2013) by looking only at the direct
competition channel, ignoring the downstream and upstream channels. This is to ensure that we
can produce the same results as they do when the model specification is the same. The regression
results are shown in Table 6.
On the impact on US manufacture employment, our estimation results are consistent with
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2017). Both the OLS and the 2SLS
estimates indicate a negative impact on US manufacturing employment. Using the 2SLS estimates
as an example, a one percentage point rise in direct exposure to Chinese imports will reduce
manufacturing employment by 4.2 percentage points per year from 2000 to 2007. The magnitude
of the estimate is also comparable to ADH (2013). (The point estimate is slightly larger than theirs
because we scale our dependent variables by the working age cohort, whereas they scale
everything by the labor force.) The results in Table 6 suggest that the slight difference in the
definitions of the dependent variables does not make any qualitative difference.
In column 2 of Table 6, we report the results on non-manufacturing employment share. The
same exposure to direct competition raises employment in the non-manufacturing sector (e.g., laidoff steel workers may be re-employed as restaurant waiters) but the increase is smaller than the
decline of manufacture employment, resulting in a negative effect on total employment (Column
5). In Columns 3 and 4, we see that both the unemployment rate and the not-in-the-labor-force rate
go up in response to the exposure to direct competition from the Chinese imports.

17

4.2 Accounting for Supply Chain Channels
We now introduce the upstream and downstream exposures to the regression specification.
The benchmark results are reported in the upper panel of Table 7a, with the first stage regressions
shown in Table 7b. The direct competition effect is negative on manufacturing employment (a
decline with an elasticity of -3.5% in Column (1) of Table 7a). This number is smaller than the
corresponding number (-4.2) in Column 1 of Table 6 without the supply chain variables.
The direct effect on non-manufacturing jobs is positive (Column 2), reflecting possibly laidoff manufacturing workers (from both a direct competition effect and an indirect upstream effect)
working in service sector jobs such as restaurant servers. The direct effect leads to fewer people
staying outside the labor force (Column 3), and the impact on officially recorded unemployment
is small and not statistically significant (Column 4).
The supply chain perspective produces two terms with opposite signs. On the one hand,
adding the upstream effect augments the negative impact on the US labor market. This is especially
true for service sectors jobs that provide inputs to those manufacturing firms that compete with
China imports directly (Column 2). On the other hand, the downstream channel produces a job
gain, especially in the non-manufacturing sector (with an elasticity of 5.6%). The downstream
channel also raises the labor force participation rate. Putting the results from Columns 1 and 2
together, we see that the downstream channel produces a net gain in jobs with an annualized
elasticity of 5.9% during 2000-2007 (column 5).
It is noteworthy that the F statistics from the first stage for the three endogenous variables are
298.9, 142.8 and 269.8, respectively (Table 7b). They allow for an easy rejection of the weak IV
null hypothesis. While the values of the F statistic are larger than many applications of the 2SLS
technique, there is no theoretical upper bound for the statistics.
To interpret the results and translate the estimates into economic magnitude, let us consider a
hypothetical “average” commuting zone whose three channels of exposure to trading with China
are equal to the average values across all commuting zones, and compare it to another hypothetical
commuting zone that has no exposure to trading with China. We can convert these estimates of the
18

elasticities to estimates of the job market responses by combining with the mean values of the
regressors reported in Table 3. The implied labor market reactions are reported in the lower panel
of Table 7a.
The effect of the exposure to direct competition in the average commuting zone is a job loss
in the manufacturing sector at the rate of 0.39% a year (Column 1 of Table 7a). Incorporating the
upstream effect would raise the negative effect on manufacturing jobs to 0.63% a year (-0.39% 0.24% = -0.63%). The sum of the direct and upstream effects also produces a loss of nonmanufacturing sector jobs at the rate of 1.34% a year (0.87% - 2.21%= -1.34%). (Those service
firms that used to provide inputs to the directly affected manufacturing firms also shed jobs.) The
sum of the direct competition and upstream exposure produces a reduction in total employment
(0.48% - 2.46%= -1.98%, Column 5). This reduction in total employment can be decomposed into
some decrease in the labor force participation rate (Column 3) and some increase in the reported
unemployment (Column 4).
However, this is not the whole story. In particular, the downstream channel produces large
job gains in the non-manufacturing sector (at the rate of 3.08% a year, Column 2) and a small
increase in jobs in the manufacturing sector (at the rate of 0.16% a year, Column 1). When we sum
up all three channels (downstream, upstream, as well as the direct competition effects) in both
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, the total effect of trading with China is a net job
gain of 1.27% a year as reported in Column 5.
Of course, many factors affect job market performance including technology and regulations
besides trade. What the estimates in Table 7a suggest is that these other factors may well have led
to job losses, but trading with China has mitigated the job loss.
Another way to provide economic interpretations to the estimation results is to compare two
commuting zones whose exposure in terms of the direct competition channel is at the 25th and 75th
percentiles of the entire distribution, respectively. To be concrete, the city of Plainview in Taxes at the 25th percentile of the distribution - experienced a relatively small exposure to direct
competition from Chinese imports during 2000-2007. In comparison, the city of Douglas in Illinois
19

- at the 75th percentile of the distribution - experienced a relatively large direct competition effect
from Chinese imports. Unsurprisingly, by our estimation, Douglas loses more manufacturing jobs
than Plainview due to competition with Chinese imports.
Once we have picked this pair of cities, their indirect exposure to Chinese imports in terms
of the downstream and upstream exposures can also be calculated. We summarize the relative
effects of trading with China on the job markets in these two commuting zones in Table 8.
First, if we use an incomplete specification that only looks at the direct competition channel
(i.e., using the same specification as Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013), we would have concluded
that, relative to Plainview, Douglas has experienced an additional loss of manufacturing jobs at the
rate of 0.22 percentage points a year, and an additional loss of total jobs at the rate of 0.15
percentage points a year. In other words, greater exposure to direct competition with China
produces a greater relative job loss.
Second, when we use a more complete specification that takes into account the supply chain
channels, we will find the opposite result. Even though Douglas suffered more from a combination
of a direct competition effect and an indirect upstream effect in the manufacturing sector, this is
completely offset by job expansion in the non-manufacturing sector10. In fact, taking into account
all three channels of exposure to Chinese trade, Douglas has a small net job gain of 0.01% a year
relative to Plainview.
Another way to see how the supply chain perspective alter the inference is to examine the
commuting zones most negatively hit by a direct competition effect. An important feature to note
is that in almost all commuting zones, non-manufacturing employment tends to dominate
manufacturing employment. (At the commuting zone level, there are no single-factory towns.) For
example, in Detroit in 2000, while 15% of the 790,000 people in the age cohort 18-64 are employed
in the manufacturing sector, 53% are employed outside manufacturing. (Additionally, 5.4% are
unemployed, and 29% are not in the labor force). As we noted earlier, most sectors, including those

In this example, because the downstream exposure is big in both Plainview and Douglas, the difference in their downstream
exposure is relatively small.
10

20

that are sometime labeled as non-tradable sectors, can in fact benefit from being able to use
imported intermediate inputs from China.
In terms of the negative job effects from the direct competition channel, the Detroit
commuting zone is not the worst hit in the country. The five commuting zones that are most
severely affected by import competition are: Rome, GA; Hickory, NC; Morganton, NC;
Martinsville, VA and Talladega, AL, respectively. Table 9 reports the estimated manufacturing job
loss from the direct competition channel in these five places (relative to a hypothetical region with
no exposure to Chinese imports). By construction, they all show a large negative job effect in the
manufacturing sector.
Importantly, the table also reports the downstream and upstream effects in both the
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors. (The calculations are done when each is compared
to a hypothetical commuting zone that is unaffected by trading with China in any way.) An
important take-away message is that the supply chain channels are important, and the job
expansion effect in the non-manufacturing sector (that can be traced to trading with China) is
economically powerful enough to offset any job loss in the manufacturing sector. In the end, the
total effect of trading with China does not produce a net job loss in any of these five commuting
zones.
It may be instructive to compare the total employment effect and the direct competition effect
across all commuting zones through two graphs. In Figure 4, we plot the actual employment
change against the direct exposure to imports from China across the 722 commuting zones from
2000 to 2007. We can see a negative relationship between the two: on average, those commuting
zones that experience greater growth in imports from China tend to experience a greater decline in
local employment. This of course is a graphic representation of the ADH result.
In Figure 5, we plot the change in local employment against the total China effect after taking
into account all three channels of exposure to the China trade. The total China effect is computed
by summing up all three channels using the estimated coefficients in Table 7a. Strikingly, the
21

relationship between the employment change and the total China effect across all commuting zones
is positive when the supply chain perspective is incorporated. In other words, those regions with
greater exposure to total China effect tend to experience a relatively greater increase in local
employment. Basically, non-manufacturing industries are a bigger part of a local labor market than
manufacturing industries in all commuting zones, and the expansion of local non-manufacturing
jobs can be systematically and statistically traced to the ability of the United States to import China
made intermediate inputs.
Note that in the absence of information on cross-regional mobility, one cannot extrapolate the
relative-relative results from such reduced-form regressions to the aggregate effect in local labor
markets. However, the general equilibrium spatial model of Adao et al. (2018) has found a low
degree of inter-regional mobility, and explicitly conclude that the results from the reduced-form
regressions are in principle valid. Since US employment tends to be stronger when US imports
more from China or when it runs a larger trade deficit with China (Appendix Figure 2), it would
seem easier to reconcile the aggregate employment patterns with our conclusion than with that of
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013).

5. Extensions and Robustness Checks
5.1 Alternative Measures of Downstream and Upstream Exposures
Since the direct competition channel and supply chain channels are highly correlated, as a
robustness check, we compute an alternative pair of downstream and upstream measures that
exclude the diagonal elements in the input-output matrix. We re-do the regressions in Tables 7a
and 7b with the new set of regressors, and report the corresponding results in Tables 10 and
Appendix Table 5. As it turns out, our key results and interpretations are not affected. In particular,
while a direct competition effect (and an upstream effect) produces a job loss, this is more than
offset by a job expansion effect from a downstream channel. Overall, trading with China does not
produce a net job loss once the supply chain channels are taken into account.

22

5.2 Additional Instrumental Variables and Controls
In addition to the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions
fixed effects, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) also consider start-of-period employment share in
routine occupations, offshorability index, share of female workers, share of foreign-born
population and education level in each commuting zone as control variables.
Occupations that are relatively intensive in routine tasks

are jobs that follow precisely

prescribed rules or procedures. Workers who do this kind of work are more likely to be replaced
by foreign imports or computers. The offshorability index measures the degree to which an
occupation that require neither a fixed office location nor face-to-face communication with other
US workers. Viewed from the lens of the supply chain perspective, the initial routine occupation
share and occupational offshorability may reflect subsequent downstream effects of trading with
China. Indeed, the correlation matrix in Appendix Table 3 is consistent with this interpretation.
Both the routine occupation share and offshorability index show a high and significant positive
correlation with exposure to China trade. For this reason, we add these two variables as additional
IVs to the first stage regressions, and include share of female workers, share of foreigners and
education level as additional controls. (We will conduct an over-identification test to see if the
routine occupation share and offshorability index are valid instruments.)
Both routine occupation share and offshorability index are taken from Autor and Dorn (2013),
where routine occupation share is computed using the top 40 percent of occupations, and the
offshorability index is the average offshorability score of employment that is normalized to have
a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one cross 722 commuting zones in 1980. The three
control variables are calculated from the 5% sample of U.S. Census microdata. (As an additional
control, we also add the initial share of China-born in the local population, as well as the initial
share of population over 64 years old.)
The main regression results, as well as the first stage coefficients, are shown in Table 11a and
11b, respectively. The results confirm the previous findings: while a direct competition effect
23

produces a job loss, which is reinforced by an upstream channel, the total effect of trading with
China, however, is a net job gain (of about 1.93% a year).
With the additional instrumental variables, we can perform an over-identification test (of
whether the proposed IVs are uncorrelated with the error term in the main regressions). This serves
as a check on whether the proposed IVs are valid. All regressions, except the one with NILF share
as the dependent variable, have passed the over-identification test for the instrumental variables.
We can also expand the set of instrumental variables by using differential reductions in
uncertainty facing imports from China across products following US granting Permanent Normal
Trade Relations (NTR Gap) to China in 2000. This follows the idea in Pierce and Schott (2016).
We take five steps to calculate the NTR Gap for each sector (at the level of OECD ICIO sector).
First, we aggregate the “Column 1” (MFN or NTR) tariff rates that the United States offers to
WTO members and the “Column 2” (non-NTR) tariff rates to 6-digit HS level from the original 8digit HS level provided by Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002)11. Second, using the concordance
provided by OECD, we match the 6-digit HS code to OECD ICIO sector via ISIC revision 3 code.
Third, the NTR gap for each OECD ICIO sector is calculated as the difference between the NTR
and non-NTR tariff rates.
Fourth, we calculate the instrumented versions of the upstream and downstream exposures
with NTR gaps for each commuting zone by using equation (9) and (13). It is worth noting that
the uncertainty removed by the NTR affects both final consumption goods and intermediate goods.
Based on our definition of downstream exposure, only the latter has a cost reduction effect on
downstream sectors. We use the BEC classification to separate imports of intermediate goods and
those of final goods, and calculate separately the NTR Gaps for consumption goods and
intermediate goods. Finally, in the fifth step, we convert the sector level NTR gaps to the
commuting zone level based on each commuting zone’s employment structure.
The regression results with the enlarged set of instrumental variables, as well as the
11

NTR and non-NTR rates are measured as the average across three years (1997-1999) before the policy change in year 2000.

24

corresponding first stage coefficients, are reported in Table 12a and 12b, respectively. We still see
a significant positive downstream effect. In particular, while a direct competition effect and an
upstream channel produce a loss of manufacturing jobs, an indirect downstream effect produces
job expansion in the non-manufacturing sector. The total effect of trading with China, however, is
a net job gain of about 1.62% a year. All regressions, except for the one on manufacturing
employment, pass the over-identification J-test for the validity of the proposed instrumental
variables.
5.3 Accounting for High-Order Input-Output Relationship
Conceptually, one can consider higher orders of downstream and upstream effects. That is,
not only firms that use imported inputs from China can benefit, firms that buy inputs from other
US firms that buy Chinese inputs can benefit too. Similarly, not only those US firms that sell output
to US firms that compete directly with Chinese imports could suffer, other US firms that sell output
to US firms that compete indirectly with Chinese imports may suffer too. Both the downstream
and upstream effects can continue on higher orders. The Input-Output matrix allows us to compute
supply chain effects at multiple rounds into infinity. A higher order downstream and upstream
channels involve sums of power series of the input-output matrix.
In Table 13, we report the estimation results when we consider the high-order input-output
relationship. The key take-away is that the China shock impacts from all three channels are
amplified, especially for the positive downstream effect in the non-manufacturing sector (from job
expansion of 3.08% a year during 2000-2007 as reported in Table 7a to 5.69% a year as reported
in Table 13). The total effect of the China trade shock is a bigger increase in employment — 3.03%
a year now relative to 1.27% a year before.
5.4 Net Instead of Gross Imports
In the regression results reported in Appendix Table 6, we use net imports (imports minus
exports) rather than gross imports in computing the China exposure variables. As it turns out, some
of the major importing sectors are also major exporting sectors to China, and the two are expected
25

to have opposite effects on US employment in terms of the direct competition channel. For
example, the United States simultaneously exports $20.7 billion of transport equipment in 2014
and imports $17.4 billion of similar products from China in the same year, and the cumulative
growth of US exports of transport equipment to China at 615% exceeds that of US imports from
China (at 386%) from 2000 to 2014. Naturally, those US regions that are over-represented by these
sectors likely see their employment growth being helped by exporting to China. However, for most
regions (as well as for the United States as a whole), the growth of imports from China exceeds
that of exports to China. Moreover, since imports from China are more labor intensive than exports
to China, one might conjecture that looking at the direct competition effect of net imports rather
than gross imports from China might slightly reduce the negative employment consequence but
not eliminate it12. We will show empirically that this is indeed the case.
We replace the measure of the annualized direct exposure to China trade shock from gross
imports to net imports:
C ,U
U ,C
C ,U
U ,C
100 ( M j,2007 − E j,2007 ) − ( M j,2000 − E j,2000 )
NetDirect j, =
[
]
*
7
Y j,U2000 + M *j,U2000 − EUj,2000

(15)
U ,C

C ,U

where M j,2007 is US imports of sector j’s products from China in 2007, and E j,t is US sector j’s
exports to China. This is similar to the measure of direct exposure to China imports in equation (1)
except that we use US net imports from China to replace US gross imports from China in the
numerator.
An instrumented version (IV) of this variable is as follows：
C ,G 5

G 5,C

C ,G 5

G 5,C

100 ( M j,2007 − E j,2007 ) − ( M j,2000 − E j,2000 )
NetDirect =
[
]
*
7
Y j,U1995 + M *j,U1995 − EUj,1995
IV
j,

(16)

Feenstra, Ma, and Xu (2017) and Feenstra and Sasahara (2017) examine the employment effect of total US exports,
and show that it partially offsets a negative employment effect from importing from China through a direct competition
channel. They do not examine the employment effect of exporting to China alone, nor the employment effect of net
imports from China across commuting zones. In a robustness check, Feenstra, Ma, and Xu (2017) estimate the
employment effects of downstream and upstream channels and find no significant effects. However, their measures of
the two channels have the same two limitations that we have explained about the Acemoglu et al. (2016) method.
12

26

The conversion from the sector level to the commuting zone level is also similar as before:

NetDirectk, = 
j

NetDirectk,IV = 
j

Lk , j ,2000
Lk ,2000
Lk , j ,1990
Lk ,1990

NetDirect j,

(17)

NetDirect IVj,

(18)

As shown in Appendix Tables 6, once one considers US exports to China as well as US
imports from China, the negative direct competition effect on the manufacturing employment rate
becomes smaller (-0.21% as opposed to -0.39% a year during 2000-2007). On the other hand, the
positive employment effects from the downstream exposure channel are still significant. The
effects on total employment when both the direct and indirect channels are considered together are
very similar between Tables 7a and Appendix Table 6.

6. Effects on Real Wages
We now analyze the effect of trading with China on US wages. To do so, we follow the
regression model discussed in section 3.1, and use 100 times the annualized change in log real
weekly wage13 as a dependent variable, and control for initial income level.

 ln Wagek , = 0 + 1Directk , + 2 UPk , + 3Downk , + 4 k ,2000 +  k ,
For comparison, we report the results using the ADH specification in column 1 of Table 14.
The direct competition channel clearly puts downward pressure on real wage growth. Regions with
more exposure to growth of China imports experience a lower growth of real wage than regions
with less exposure to growth of China imports. To help with economic interpretation, we convert
the elasticity estimate to implied effects on the real wage growth for a hypothetical community
zone whose exposure to trading with China is equal to the sample mean across all community
zones relative to another hypothetical region with no exposure to China trade. The result is reported
13

Pre-tax wage and salary are converted to be in 2000 US dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator.

27

in the lower panel of Table 14. Under the ADH specification, the average commuting zone
experiences a decline in real wage by 0.85% a year during 2000-2007 due to its exposure to trading
with China.
In Column 2 of Table 14, we report the results from a regression that includes the two
additional supply chain variables. In this case, while the direct competition channel is no longer
significant, the upstream channel (a form of indirect competition) exhibits a strong negative effect
on real wage growth. On the other hand, the downstream channel produces a strong positive effect
on real wage growth. Again, to help with economic interpretation, we convert the elasticity
estimates to implied effects on the real wage growth for a hypothetical community zone whose
exposure to trading with China is equal to the sample mean in all three channels (direct competition,
downstream, and upstream channels) relative to another hypothetical region with no exposure to
China trade. From the lower panel of Table 14, we can see that the downstream channel produces
an increase in real wage by 8.5% a year, whereas the upstream channel produces a reduction in
real wage by 4.1% a year. The overall effect of trading with China is a boost to the real wage
growth by 4.9%.
Similar to the earlier discussion on the employment effect, it is useful to bear in mind that
technological changes, regulatory changes, and other factors besides international trade could
affect real wage during this period. Many factors could produce a declining or stagnant real wage.
Our estimate suggests that the total effect of trading with China helps to raise the real wage, even
though the sum of the direct competition channel and the upstream channel (which is a form of
indirect competition from China) puts significant downward pressure on the real wage growth.
In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 14, we perform separate regressions for real wage growth in
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors respectively. In the manufacturing sector, the
upstream channel depresses the real wage growth (by 4.0% a year). It is not statistically significant
mainly because the corresponding standard error is large. In any case, it is more than offset by the
positive wage effect through the downstream channel (with an increase in real wage by 20.4% a
28

year). The direct competition effect is modest and not statistically significant. Summing over all
three channels of trading with China, the manufacturing real wage increases by 17.5% a year. Note
that the estimated wage effect in the manufacturing sector likely reflects to a significant part a
compositional change – relatively low skilled and lowly-paid workers are laid off through the
upstream channel; the remaining workers are relatively more skilled and better paid than the
previous average wage.
In the non-manufacturing sector, the downstream channel raises the real wage whereas the
upstream channel depresses it. The overall effect of trading with China is an extra growth of nonmanufacturing sector real wage by 4.4% (bottom of Column 4). Note that the overall effect on all
workers (4.9% at the bottom of Column 2) is closer to that of the non-manufacturing workers (4.4%
at the bottom of Column 4) than that of the manufacturing workers (17.5% at the bottom of Column
3) because most people work outside the manufacturing sector.
In Columns 5 and 6, we splice the workers by education level (with and without some college
education14). There is a stark difference between these two groups. While the downstream channel
produces a big real wage boost to college educated workers, it does not have a statistically
significant effect on non-college educated workers. Overall, through trading with China, college
educated workers see a faster wage growth by 7.2% a year whereas non-college educated workers
see a decline by 4.3% a year. Without transfer, trading with China appears to enlarge the wage gap
between the more and less educated workers.
In Columns 7 and 8 of Table 14, we splice workers by gender. Both groups of workers gain
on average from trading with China. Female workers gain more (with an extra growth of real wage
by 7.2% a year, bottom of Column 8), compare with male workers (with an extra wage growth of
3.5%). Therefore, trading with China appears to promote gender equality in pay.
We now move to investigate the effects on wage distribution, using grouped IV quantile
regressions proposed by Chetverikov et al. (2016). Specifically, all US workers are grouped into
14

We classify a worker as “college-educated” if he/she has completed at least 1 year of college.

29

20 quantiles according to their initial income levels. The overall effect of trading with China
(summing over the three channels) is represented in Figure 6 together with a 95% confidence band.
For comparison, we also plot the effect on the wage distribution when we only look at the direct
competition effect, and this result is labeled as ADH specification. With the ADH specification,
the effect of trading with China is a reduction in real wage for workers in almost all income groups.
This is comparable to the results reported in Chetverikov et al. (2016)15. In comparison, with the
supply chain perspective, we see that 75% of the workers benefit from trading with China, but the
bottom 25% (in terms of initial income) are made worse off. This means, without income transfers,
trading with China produces more winners than losers. (Based on the results in Table 14, we know
that the sum of the gains by the winners outweigh the sum of the losses by the losers. Therefore,
even without transfer between capital and labor, transfer within the labor group could make
everyone better off.) Hence, incorporating the supply chain perspective or not makes an enormous
difference.
With the supply chain perspective, we further decompose the effects on the wage distribution
by channels and report the results in Figure 7. The direct competition channel is relatively modest,
with losers in the middle of the distribution. The upstream channel causes wage loss in the entire
distribution, with a greater loss on the two ends. In comparison, the downstream channel produces
gains for workers outside the bottom 20%, with the size of the gains rising approximately with the
initial income level.
We present similar results when the working age cohort is broken down by gender (Figure 8).
Broadly speaking, workers with a low initial income (below 20% for males and 25% for females)
tend to lose but an overwhelming majority of workers gain from trading with China even before
transfer. For those workers above the median income level, females gain more from trading with
China than males.

Based on the point estimates in Chetverikov et al. (2016), the effect of trading with China – looking at the competition channel
alone – is a reduction in real wage in 19 out of 20 income quantiles. For unclear reasons, the exception is the second highest income
quantile which shows a positive wage effect in terms of the point estimate, although it is still statistically not different from zero.
15

30

The wage distribution effects separated by education levels are presented in Figure 9. The
stark results in Table 14 can be seen more clearly in this graph. While an overwhelming majority
of workers with some college education gain from trading with China, a majority of less educated
workers appear to lose. Most of these less educated workers are in the bottom 25% of the initial
income distribution.
To summarize, trading with China produces substantially more winners than losers. Losers
are concentrated in the less educated group who are in the bottom 25% of the initial income
distribution. Some income transfer could make them better off from trading with China, and such
transfer seems feasible from an accounting point of view. This is because trading with China raises
the total wage bill for the workers as a whole. Put it differently, shutting down trading with China
would hurt workers as a group in terms of their real wage. Even without redistribution between
capitalists and workers, there exists a redistribution among workers that would make every worker
better.
Note that we have used a common price index to convert nominal wages to real wages for
workers in all income groups. If trading with China produces a greater reduction in cost of living
for low-income households than for high-income households16, then the set of losers may shrink
further and the set of winners may correspondingly become bigger.

7. Conclusions
US imports of intermediate inputs from China rose from about 1/4 of total imports in 2000 to
more than 1/3 in 2014. Those US firms using imported inputs can improve efficiency and
potentially expand their employment. Firms that use these imported inputs (e.g., computers,
printers, telecommunication equipment, and parts and components of various office machinery)

Amiti et al. (2018) show that trading with China has significantly reduced variety-adjusted prices in the United States. One
third of the beneficial impact comes from Chinese exporters lower their prices, and two-thirds comes from entry of new Chinese
exporters.
16

31

include those in what are traditionally labeled as “non-tradable sectors” such as banks, business
services, research and educational institutions.
While we use a cross-regional reduced-form specification, our paper differs from the existing
literature in a number of important ways. In particular, this paper explicitly considers downstream
and upstream effects of imports from China, and uses more precise information on how imported
intermediate inputs from China are allocated across US sectors. In contrast to the existing literature,
we find strong evidence that the downstream effect is positive (i.e., the use of imported Chinese
inputs raises US employment) and the effect is greater than the combined negative impact of a
direct import competition channel and an indirect upstream channel. In addition, the US labor
market is flexible enough that non-manufacturing employment is systematically stimulated by
trading with China. The net employment effect from trading with China is found to be positive.
As important, once a supply chain perspective is applied, we find that American workers as a
group experience an increase in real wage from trading with China. The effect is not the same
across all workers; most college educated workers gain substantially, whereas many non-collegeeducated workers experience a decline in real wage. Still, even without redistribution between
capital owners and workers, every worker can be made better off if the total wage bill can be
redistributed.
If voters only understand the direct effects but not the general equilibrium or indirect effects,
then it is possible that they mistakenly believe that trading with China produces a job loss and an
income loss even though a majority of them gain in the general equilibrium.
We do not wish to claim that this paper represents the last word on the subject. Indeed, an
important direction for future exploration is to construct estimation on how technology, local labor
market institutions (e.g., strength of labor unions), and trade shocks jointly affect local labor
market outcomes. Such estimation would be a useful complement to GE spatial models that study
the same questions.

32

Reference
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price, 2016, “Import
Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s”, Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1):
S141-198.
Adao, Rodrigo, Costas Arkolakis, and Federico Esposito, 2018, “Spatial Linkages, Global Shocks, and
Local Labor Markets: Theory and Evidence”, Chicago Booth, Yale, and Tufts Working Paper.
Amiti, Mary, Mi Dai, Robert Feenstra, and John Romalis, 2018, “How Did China’s WTO Entry Affect US
Prices?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 817.
Antràs, Pol, Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, 2017, “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and
Evidence from US Firms”, The American Economic Review, 107(9): 2514-2564.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, 2013, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States”, The American Economic Review, 103(6): 21212268.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song, 2014, “Trade Adjustment: Worker-level
Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1799-1860.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, 2018, “Trade and Labor Market Dynamics:
General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock”, Working Paper; first draft in 2015.
Chetverikov, Denis, Bradley Larsen, and Christopher Palmer, 2016, “IV Quantile Regression for GroupLevel Treatments, with an Application to the Distributional Effects of Trade”, Econometrica, 84(2):
809-833.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips, 2014, “Estimating the
Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers using the Current Population Surveys”, The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(3): 581-595.
Feenstra, Robert, Hong Ma, and Yuan Xu, 2017, “US Exports and Employment”, NBER Working Paper
No. 24056.
Feenstra, Robert, John Romalis and Peter K. Schott, 2002, “U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariff Data, 19892001”, NBER Working Paper No. 9387.
Feenstra, Robert, and Akira Sasahara, 2017, “The 'China Shock', Exports and U.S. Employment: A Global
Input-Output Analysis”, NBER Working Paper No. 24022.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001. "The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
World Trade," Journal of International Economics, 54(1): 75-96, June.
Johnson, Robert, and Guillermo Noguera, 2017. "A Portrait of Trade in Value-Added over Four Decades,"
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5): 896-911.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2014, “Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in
Gross Exports”, The American Economic Review, 104(2): 459-494.
33

Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott, 2016, “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing
Employment”, The American Economic Review, 106(7): 1632-1662.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Joasiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek, 2015, Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.
Traiberman, Sharon, 2017, “Occupations and Import Competition: Evidence from Denmark”, New York
University.
Tolbert, Charles M. and Molly Sizer, 1996, “US Commuting Zones and labor market areas”, Economic
Research Service Staff Paper No. 9614.
Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu, 2017a, “Measures of Participation in Global Value
Chains and Global Business Cycles”, NBER Working Paper No. 23222.
Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu, 2017b, “Characterizing Global Value Chains:
Production Length and Upstreamness”, NBER Working Paper No. 23261.
Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, and Kunfu Zhu, 2013, “Quantifying International Production Sharing at the
Bilateral and Sector Level”, NBER Working Paper No. 19677

34

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Changes in US Import Prices versus Changes in China’s Share in US Imports,
across HS 6-digit Products
Dependent Variable = Δ ln Unit Price (%)

Gross Imports
China’s Share
(Equally-Weighted)

(1) OLS
-0.594***
(0.0596)

Intermediate Imports

(2) 2SLS
-1.203***
(0.214)

(3) OLS
-0.628***
(0.0757)

(4) 2SLS
-1.137***
(0.232)

China’s Share
-1.044***
-1.773***
-1.358***
-2.116***
(Weighted by Relative
(0.320)
(0.651)
(0.391)
(0.735)
Values of the Products)
Note: This table reports the coefficients on China’s share in US imports at the HS 6 digit product from 8
separate regressions with changes in US import unit values at HS 6 digit level during 2000-2007 as the
dependent variable. Intercepts are included but not reported. The regressions in the 2nd and 4th columns
are two stage least square regressions with changes in China’s share in the imports of Germany, France,
Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom during the same period as an instrumental variable. The regressions
in the second row are weighted in proportion to each product’s total US import value from all sources in
2000. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** denote statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 2: Three Channels of Exposure to China Trade at the Sectoral Level
(Annualized Changes in Percentage Points)
Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

ΔDirect

34

0.224

0.386

-0.018

1.638

ΔDown

34

0.515

0.180

0.000

0.888

ΔUp

34

0.167

0.169

0.000

0.789

35

Table 3: Three Channels of Exposure to China Trade at the Commuting Zone Level
(Annualized Changes in Percentage Points)
Changes in Exposure to China Trade
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

ΔDirect

722

0.112

0.041

0.052

0.319

ΔDown

722

0.546

0.012

0.505

0.595

ΔUp

722

0.128

0.015

0.101

0.222

Instrumental Variables
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

G5 IV: ΔDirect

722

0.157

0.061

0.074

0.528

G5 IV: ΔDown

722

0.626

0.025

0.558

0.707

G5 IV: ΔUp

722

0.172

0.023

0.141

0.326

Note: We present in Appendix Table A2 an extended version of the summary
statistics that include alternative IV measures (routine job share, offshoring index
and PNTR IVs).

36

Table 4a: Correlation Matrix on the three measures and their three IVs
Upstream and downstream exposure measures that using Full Input-Output Matrix
ΔDirect ΔDownstream ΔUpstream
ΔDirect
ΔDownstream ΔUpstream
(IV)
(IV)
(IV)
ΔDirect
1
0.1342
ΔDown
1
0.9666
0.1965
ΔUp
1
0.9226
0.166
0.92
1
G5 IV: ΔDirect
0.4304
0.7946
0.496
0.5125
1
G5 IV: ΔDown
0.8737
0.2103
0.9071
0.9779
0.543
1
G5 IV: ΔUp
Note: We present in Appendix Table A3 an extended version of the correlation matrix that include a full set of control variables and
alternative IV measures (routine job share, offshoring index and PNTR IVs)
Table 4b: Correlation Matrix on the three measures and their three IVs
Upstream and downstream exposure measures that excluding the diagonal IO elements
ΔDirect ΔDownstream
ΔDirect
ΔDownstream ΔUpstream
(IV)
(IV)
ΔDirect
1
-0.3135
ΔDownstream
1
0.7773
0.0631
ΔUpstream
1
0.9226
-0.2715
0.7222
1
G5 IV: ΔDirect
-0.1659
0.8105
0.1698
-0.1974
1
G5 IV: ΔDown
0.5945
0.2261
0.8566
0.6199
0.306
G5 IV: ΔUp

37

ΔUpstream
(IV)

1

Table 5: Annualized Changes in Employment Shares at the Commuting Zone Level
(% of the Local Working Age Population)
Variables

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Δ Manufacturing Employment

722

-0.230

0.279

-1.583

0.570

Δ Non-Manufacturing Employment

722

0.231

0.348

-0.091

1.625

Δ Not in Labor Force

722

-0.048

0.336

-1.640

1.276

Δ Unemployment

722

0.047

0.179

-0.656

0.716

38

Table 6: An Incompletely Specified Model That Only Looks at the Direct Competition Channel
Manufacturing
(1)
-4.156***
OLS Estimates:
(0.319)
-4.236***
2SLS Estimates:
(0.318)
First Stage F Statistics: 291.63

Estimation Method

Non-Manufacturing
(2)
1.339**
(0.652)
1.393**
(0.659)

NILF
(3)
1.884***
(0.638)
1.892***
(0.650)

Unemployment
(4)
0.934***
(0.152)
0.951***
(0.168)

Total Employment
(5)
-2.817***
(0.706)
-2.844***
(0.724)

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
2SLS Estimates:

-0.47%

0.16%
0.21%
0.11%
-0.32%
-3.762*
Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects.
3.112*
All models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses.
-0.245
*, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated
0.896*
for a hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
-0.651
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.

39

Table 7a: Accounting for Downstream and Upstream Effects
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-3.534**

7.839**

-4.287

-0.0184

4.305

(1.517)
0.298

(3.109)
5.648***

(2.852)
-7.520***

(1.532)
1.574**

(3.893)
5.946**

(0.834)

(1.912)

(1.928)

(0.753)

(2.446)

ΔUp

-1.889
(3.843)

-17.24**
(8.103)

16.45**
(7.464)

2.686
(4.038)

-19.13*
(10.01)

Census Divisions Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.638

722
0.389

722
0.350

722
0.476

722
0.506

Dependent Variable = ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison: ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.39%
0.16%
-0.24%
-0.47%

0.87%
3.08%
-2.21%
1.74%

-0.48%
-4.10%
2.11%
-2.47%

0.00%
0.86%
0.35%
1.20%

0.48%
3.24%
-2.46%
1.27%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects. All
models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *,
** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a
hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.
40

Table 7b: First Stage Regressions
(a la Growth of Imports from China by Other High Income Countries, 2000-2007)
ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp
(1)
(2)
(3)
G5 IV: ΔDirect
G5 IV: ΔDown
G5 IV: ΔUp
First Stage F Statistics

0.825***
(0.0645)
-0.185***
(0.0340)
-0.409**
(0.183)
298.92

-0.0445
(0.0283)
0.557***
(0.0184)
-0.0175
(0.742)
142.78

0.0765***
(0.0212)
-0.0451***
(0.0130)
0.460***
(0.0661)
269.78

Note: The first stage regressions have the same controls as the second stage, and are also weighted by
each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states
in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table 8: Relative Effects of the China Shock on Two Local Labor Markets
CZ1= 25th percentile of the direct competition effect (Plainview, TX), and
CZ2=75th percentile of the direct competition effect (Douglas, IL)
CZ2 – CZ1

Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

Total Employment

Actual Change

-0.31%

0.21%

-0.10%

-0.22%

0.07%

-0.15%

-0.18%
0.01%
-0.03%
-0.21%

0.41%
0.12%
-0.30%
0.22%

0.22%
0.13%
-0.34%
0.01%

Direct competition Effect
(ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

The employment effects are for Douglas IL relative to Plainview TX.

41

Table 9: Employment Effects of Trading with China on the Five CZs
with the Largest Direct Competition Effects
Commuting Zone

6600

1100

1002

402

9500

Rome
(Georgia)

Hickory
(North Carolina)

Morganton
(North Carolina)

Martinsville
(Virginia)

Talladega
(Alabama)

Effect

Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

All Sectors

Direct Competition Effect

-1.13%

2.50%

1.37%

Downstream Effect

0.16%

3.05%

3.21%

Upstream Effect

-0.42%

-3.82%

-4.24%

Total Effect

-1.38%

1.72%

0.34%

Direct Competition Effect

-1.10%

2.44%

1.34%

Downstream Effect

0.16%

3.11%

3.27%

Upstream Effect

-0.35%

-3.24%

-3.59%

Total Effect

-1.29%

2.31%

1.02%

Direct Competition Effect

-1.03%

2.28%

1.25%

Downstream Effect

0.16%

3.07%

3.23%

Upstream Effect

-0.34%

-3.11%

-3.46%

Total Effect

-1.21%

2.24%

1.03%

Direct Competition Effect

-1.03%

2.28%

1.25%

Downstream Effect

0.16%

3.05%

3.21%

Upstream Effect

-0.35%

-3.21%

-3.57%

Total Effect

-1.22%

2.11%

0.89%

Direct Competition Effect

-0.97%

2.14%

1.18%

Downstream Effect

0.16%

3.05%

3.21%

Upstream Effect

-0.37%

-3.39%

-3.76%

Total Effect

-1.18%

1.81%

0.63%

42

Table 10: Excluding the Diagonal Elements in the IO Table
in Computing Downstream/Upstream Exposures
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-3.627***
(0.574)
0.443
(1.148)
-3.904
(2.788)

4.505***
(1.043)
5.933**
(2.418)
-15.42***
(5.795)

-1.843*
(1.067)
-8.887***
(2.491)
16.34***
(5.844)

0.966*
(0.498)
2.511***
(0.924)
2.981
(2.756)

0.878
(1.394)
6.376**
(3.179)
-19.32**
(7.587)

Census Divisions Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.645

722
0.405

722
0.366

722
0.486

722
0.529

Dependent Variable = ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison: ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.40%
0.25%
-0.51%
-0.67%

0.50%
3.35%
-2.03%
1.83%

-0.21%
-5.02%
2.15%
-3.08%

0.11%
1.42%
0.39%
1.92%

0.10%
3.60%
-2.54%
1.16%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects. All
models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *,
** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a
hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.
43

Table 11a: Expanding the Set of Instrumental Variables to Include
Routine Job Share and Offshoring Index
Dependent Variable =
ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp
Female
(% in Emp.)
Edu. Attainment
(Years of Schooling)
Foreign-Born
(1=Above Average)
Born in China
(% in Pop.)

Manufacturing Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-3.840**

4.332

-0.00883

-0.483

0.492

(1.648)
1.158

(2.929)
5.144*

(2.557)
-9.334***

(1.529)
3.031***

(3.719)
6.303

(1.545)

(3.046)

(3.436)

(0.955)

(4.012)

-1.603
(4.106)
-1.242**

-10.57
(7.643)
-1.296

8.162
(6.949)
1.976

4.009
(4.014)
0.563

-12.17
(9.901)
-2.539**

(0.531)

(0.945)

(1.336)

(0.699)

(1.156)

-0.0102

-0.349***

0.405***

-0.0451

-0.359***

(0.0522)

(0.0935)

(0.109)

(0.0367)

(0.118)

-0.0321

0.0570

-0.0524

0.0275

0.0249

(0.0268)

(0.0363)

(0.0333)

(0.0231)

(0.0474)

1.299

10.09**

-11.17**

-0.225

11.39**

(0.993)

(4.669)

(4.740)

(0.973)

(5.395)

Age 64 and above
(% in Pop.)

0.308

0.162

-1.657*

1.188***

0.469

(0.436)

(0.596)

(0.919)

(0.305)

(0.913)

Hansen J Statistics
P-value

2.068
0.356

4.066
0.131

6.797
0.0334

0.609
0.738

3.929
0.140

Census Divisions Fixed
Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.647

722
0.462

722
0.442

722
0.492

722
0.563

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison:
ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.43%
0.63%
-0.21%
0.00%

0.48%
2.81%
-1.36%
1.93%

0.00%
-5.09%
1.05%
-4.05%

-0.05%
1.65%
0.51%
2.11%

0.05%
3.44%
-1.56%
1.93%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census
divisions fixed effects. All models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust
standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the
China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another hypothetical commuting zone that
have no exposure to the China shock.
44

Table 11b: First Stage Regressions
(a la Growth of Imports from China by Other High Income Countries,
Routine Job Share and Offshoring Index)

G5 IV: ΔDirect
G5 IV: ΔDown
G5 IV: ΔUp
Routine
Offshoring
First Stage F Statistics

ΔDirect

ΔDown

ΔUp

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.734***

-0.0349

0.0294

(0.0623)

(0.0209)

(0.0193)

-0.167***

0.442***

-0.0546**

(0.0571)

(0.0241)

(0.0250)

-0.278*

-0.00365

0.538***

(0.162)

(0.0531)

(0.0533)

0.00222

-0.0206

-0.00614

(0.0335)

(0.0166)

(0.0122)

0.00952***

0.00804***

0.00607***

(0.00344)

(0.00195)

(0.00123)

369.4

211.2

340

Note: The first stage regressions have the same controls as the second stage, and are also weighted by
each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states
in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

45

Table 12a: Expanding the Set of Instrumental Variables to Include PNTR Gaps
Dependent Variable =
ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp
Female
(% in Emp.)
Edu. Attainment (Years
of Schooling)
Foreign-Born
(1=Above Average)
Born in China
(% in Pop.)

Manufacturing Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-3.866**

4.320

0.148

-0.602

0.454

(1.596)
1.192

(2.827)
4.595*

(2.462)
-8.014**

(1.509)
2.227***

(3.497)
5.787*

(1.459)

(2.662)

(3.167)

(0.707)

(3.486)

-1.695
(3.991)
-1.265**

-10.67
(7.289)
-1.364

7.941
(6.505)
2.101

4.427
(4.004)
0.529

-12.37
(9.207)
-2.630**

(0.546)

(0.937)

(1.324)

(0.685)

(1.162)

-0.0147

-0.341***

0.384***

-0.0278

-0.356***

(0.0517)

(0.0898)

(0.103)

(0.0353)

(0.111)

-0.0329

0.0590

-0.0580*

0.0319

0.0261

(0.0271)

(0.0369)

(0.0338)

(0.0238)

(0.0487)

1.354

10.29**

-11.62**

-0.0302

11.65**

(0.939)

(4.617)

(4.746)

(0.865)

(5.283)

Age 64 and above
(% in Pop.)

0.314

0.0848

-1.480

1.081***

0.399

(0.434)

(0.614)

(0.949)

(0.321)

(0.923)

Hansen J Statistics
P-value

7.689
0.0529

4.456
0.216

5.675
0.129

4.542
0.209

5.098
0.165

Census Divisions Fixed
Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.647

722
0.462

722
0.445

722
0.496

722
0.563

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison:
ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.43%
0.65%
-0.22%
0.00%

0.48%
2.51%
-1.37%
1.62%

0.02%
-4.37%
1.02%
-3.34%

-0.07%
1.22%
0.57%
1.72%

0.05%
3.16%
-1.59%
1.62%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census
divisions fixed effects. All models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust
standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the
China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another hypothetical commuting zone that
have no exposure to the China shock

46

Table 12b: First Stage Regressions
(a la Growth of Imports from China by Other High Income Countries and PNTR Gaps)

G5 IV: ΔDirect
G5 IV: ΔDown
G5 IV: ΔUp
PNTR IV: ΔDirect
PNTR IV: ΔDown
PNTR IV: ΔUp
First Stage F Statistics

ΔDirect

ΔDown

ΔUp

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.519***

-0.0355

0.0141

(0.0865)

(0.0469)

(0.0358)

-0.135**

0.382***

-0.00534

(0.0612)

(0.0540)

(0.0263)

0.297

0.253**

0.537***

(0.238)

(0.125)

(0.0923)

0.487***

0.0691

0.0832

(0.159)

(0.0763)

(0.0552)

-0.308

0.120

-0.149

(0.380)

(0.240)

(0.148)

-1.173**

-0.771***

-0.0543

(0.467)

(0.216)

(0.169)

560.4

504.8

762.7

Note: The first stage regressions have the same controls as the second stage, and are also weighted by
each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states
in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

47

Table 13: Accounting for High-Order Input-Output Relationship
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-2.855**

7.832***

-4.799*

-0.177

4.977

(1.449)
1.749

(2.986)
14.36***

(2.724)
-19.11***

(1.583)
2.994*

(3.825)
16.11***

(1.872)

(4.410)

(4.425)

(1.659)

(5.563)

ΔUp

-5.055
(5.140)

-23.23**
(10.88)

23.90**
(10.04)

4.381
(5.746)

-28.28**
(13.80)

Census Divisions Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.640

722
0.397

722
0.370

722
0.478

722
0.516

Dependent Variable = ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison: ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.32%
0.69%
-0.70%
-0.32%

0.87%
5.69%
-3.21%
3.35%

-0.54%
-7.57%
3.30%
-4.80%

-0.02%
1.19%
0.61%
1.77%

0.56%
6.38%
-3.91%
3.03%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects. All
models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *,
** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a
hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.

48

Table 14: Effect of the China Trade Shock on US Real Weekly Wage
Dependent Variable
= Δ ln (Real Weekly Wage)
(Annualized)

ADH
Specification

Value Chain Perspective

(1)
Full Sample

(2)
Full Sample

(3)
Manuf.

(4)
Non-Manuf.

(5)
College

(6)
Non-College

(7)
Male

(8)
Female

-7.595***
(1.112)

3.912
(5.576)
15.67***
(5.602)
-32.17**
(15.53)

9.398
(9.539)
37.33***
(14.35)
-30.81
(25.69)

0.484
(5.875)
13.62**
(5.525)
-23.89
(16.23)

10.49
(7.729)
23.02***
(7.171)
-50.88**
(20.68)

-4.919
(4.922)
-4.878
(7.085)
-8.234
(14.63)

-3.723
(7.265)
10.66
(6.624)
-14.75
(19.24)

13.29**
(5.816)
22.85***
(6.508)
-52.73***
(16.13)

Census Divisions
Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.194

722
0.216

722
0.053

722
0.203

722
0.227

722
0.213

722
0.197

722
0.123

1.2%
12.6%
-6.5%
7.2%

-0.5%
-2.7%
-1.1%
-4.3%

-0.4%
5.8%
-1.9%
3.5%

1.5%
12.5%
-6.8%
7.2%

ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp

Implied Real Wage Effects
Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.85%

-0.85%

0.4%
8.5%
-4.1%
4.9%

1.0%
20.4%
-4.0%
17.5%

0.1%
7.4%
-3.1%
4.4%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the start-of-period real weekly wage and census divisions fixed effects. All models are weighted by each
commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. ** and *** denote coefficient statistically
significant at the 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied real wage effects are calculated for a hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China
shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.

49

Figure 1: Growth in US Imports from China across Sectors
Intermediate Inputs vs Total Imports

Note: The annualized growth rate for gross imports and intermediate imports are measured over the
period 2000-2014 by using the OECD ICIO table.

50

Figure 2: Binned Scatterplots of Change in the Share of China in US Imports
and Change in US log Import Unit Price

51

Figure 3: Three Channels across Sectors

52

Figure 4: Employment Change against
the Direct Competition Exposure to China Imports across CZs
(% of the working age cohort, 722 Commuting Zones)

Figure 5: Employment Change against
the Total Effect of Trading with China across CZs
(% of the working age cohort, 722 Commuting Zones)

53

Figure 6: Effects of the China Trade Shock on US Wage Distribution:
Comparing the ADH and Supply Chain Approaches

54

Figure 7: Effect of China Trade Shock on US Wage Distribution: Three Channels

55

Figure 8: Effect of China Trade Shock on US Wage Distribution:
Male and Female Workers

Figure 9: Effect of China Trade Shock on US Wage Distribution:
College and Non-College Workers

56

Appendix Table 1: General Inter-Country Input-Output table
Outputs

Intermediate Use

Final Demand

1

2

⋯

g

1

2

⋯

g

Total
Output

1

Z11

Z12

⋯

Z1g

F11

F12

⋯

F1g

Y1

2

Z 21

Z 22

⋯

Z 2g

F 21

F 22

⋯

F 2g

Y2

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋱

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋱

⋮

⋮

g

Z g1

Z g2

⋯

Z gg

F g1

F g2

⋯

F gg

Yg

Value-added

Va1

Va2

⋯

Vag

Total input

(Y1 )′

(Y 2 )′

⋯

(Y g )′

Inputs

Intermediate
Inputs

where Zsr is an N×N matrix of intermediate input flows that are produced in country s and used in
country r; Fsr is an N×1 vector giving final products produced in country s and consumed in country
r; Ys is also an N×1 vector giving gross outputs in country s; and VAs denotes a 1×N vector of
direct value added in country s.

57

Appendix Table 2: Extended Summary Statistics of Key Variables
Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

ΔDirect

722

0.112

0.041

0.052

0.319

ΔDown

722

0.546

0.012

0.505

0.595

ΔUp

722

0.128

0.015

0.101

0.222

G5 IV: ΔDirect

722

0.157

0.061

0.074

0.528

G5 IV: ΔDown

722

0.626

0.025

0.558

0.707

G5 IV: ΔUp

722

0.172

0.023

0.141

0.326

PNTR IV: ΔDirect

722

0.056

0.027

0.018

0.194

PNTR IV: ΔUp

722

0.253

0.004

0.241

0.272

PNTR IV: ΔDown

722

0.081

0.010

0.062

0.144

Routine

722

0.336

0.033

0.267

0.423

Offshoring

722

-0.617

0.289

-1.383

0.544

Female

722

0.462

0.016

0.412

0.498

Edu

722

5.144

0.370

3.767

6.488

Foreign

722

0.307

0.462

0

1

China-Born

722

0.001

0.003

0

0.046

Above 64

722

0.143

0.028

0.050

0.293

58

Appendix Table 3: Extended Correlation Matrix on the three measures and their three IVs
ΔDirect ΔDown ΔUp

G5 IV: G5 IV: G5 IV: PNTR IV: PNTR IV PNTR IV:
China- Above
Routine Offshoring Female Edu Foreign
ΔDirect ΔDown ΔUp
ΔDirect IV: ΔUp ΔDown
born
64

ΔDirect

1

ΔDown

0.134

1

ΔUp

0.967

0.197

1

G5 IV: ΔDirect

0.923

0.166

0.920

1

G5 IV: ΔDown

0.430

0.795

0.496

0.513

1

G5 IV: ΔUp

0.874

0.210

0.907

0.978

0.543

1

PNTR IV: ΔDirect

0.923

0.065

0.902

0.961

0.415

0.916

1

PNTR IV: ΔUp

0.553

0.605

0.586

0.653

0.824

0.677

0.600

1

PNTR IV: ΔDown

0.864

-0.104

0.873

0.920

0.271

0.902

0.939

0.461

1

Routine

0.671

0.509

0.680

0.642

0.685

0.608

0.649

0.610

0.509

1

Offshoring

0.576

0.258

0.544

0.493

0.397

0.420

0.509

0.386

0.441

0.712

1

Female

0.092

0.257

0.090

0.048

0.235

0.009

0.049

0.030

0.025

0.300

0.156

1

Edu

-0.182

0.486

-0.171 -0.172

0.361

-0.183

-0.221

0.110

-0.294

0.180

0.112

0.404

Foreign

-0.146

0.444

-0.103 -0.106

0.427

-0.086

-0.153

0.260

-0.239

0.179

0.168

-0.027 0.448

China-Born

-0.016

0.418

0.015

0.005

0.329

0.008

-0.054

0.173

-0.126

0.159

0.255

0.051 0.329 0.360

Above 64

-0.003

-0.347

-0.055 -0.058

-0.283

-0.119

-0.018

-0.273

0.047

-0.187

-0.229

0.251 0.061 -0.353 -0.240

59

1
1
1
1

Appendix Table 4a: Accounting for Downstream and Upstream Effects:
2000-2014
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-4.527***

7.672***

-2.276

-0.868

3.145

(1.552)
0.863*

(2.021)
2.694***

(2.223)
-5.235***

(0.956)
1.678***

(2.258)
3.557***

(0.480)

(0.995)

(1.123)

(0.368)

(1.318)

ΔUp

3.149
(3.979)

-16.34***
(5.280)

9.873*
(5.466)

3.323
(2.512)

-13.20**
(5.564)

Census Divisions Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.614

722
0.387

722
0.434

722
0.382

722
0.458

Dependent Variable
= ΔEmp Share

ΔDirect
ΔDown

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison: ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.37%

0.16%

0.17%

0.04%

-0.21%

Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.37%
0.45%
0.34%
0.41%

0.63%
1.39%
-1.74%
0.27%

-0.19%
-2.70%
1.05%
-1.84%

-0.07%
0.87%
0.35%
1.15%

0.26%
1.84%
-1.41%
0.69%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects. All
models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *,
** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a
hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.
60

Appendix Table 4b: First Stage Regressions
(a la Growth of Imports from China by Other High Income Countries, 2000-2014)
ΔDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp
(1)
(2)
(3)
G5 IV: ΔDirect
G5 IV: ΔDown
G5 IV: ΔUp
First Stage F Statistics

0.617***

0.0985

0.0684*

(0.102)

(0.0815)

(0.0376)

0.00831

0.873***

0.000472

(0.0438)

(0.0401)

(0.0168)

-0.138

-0.495**

0.404***

(0.259)

(0.197)

(0.101)

127.43

69.76

102.21

Note: The first stage regressions have the same controls as the second stage, and are also weighted by each
commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in
parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

61

Appendix Table 5: First Stage Regressions:
Excluding the Diagonal Elements in the IO Table in Computing Downstream/Upstream Exposures
(a la Growth of Imports from China by Other High Income Countries)

G5 IV: ΔDirect
G5 IV: ΔDown
G5 IV: ΔUp
First Stage F Statistics

ΔDirect

ΔDown

ΔUp

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.605***

-0.00783

0.0284***

(0.0227)

(0.00972)

(0.00399)

-0.179***

0.512***

-0.0358***

(0.0339)

(0.0188)

(0.00882)

0.186

0.0891*

0.654***

(0.133)

(0.0520)

(0.0291)

266.85

100.52

224.87

Note: The first stage regressions have the same controls as the second stage, and are also weighted by
each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states
in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

62

Appendix Table 6: Accounting for Net Imports
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-2.562
(2.201)
0.910
(0.844)
-4.903
(4.969)

6.001
(4.119)
4.273**
(1.840)
-11.33
(10.61)

-3.261
(3.920)
-6.770***
(1.817)
13.16
(9.802)

-0.177
(2.031)
1.586*
(0.823)
3.066
(5.067)

3.439
(5.017)
5.183**
(2.404)
-16.23
(12.86)

Census Divisions Fixed Effects

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Observations
R-squared

722
0.634

722
0.398

722
0.359

722
0.475

722
0.511

Dependent Variable = ΔEmp Share

ΔNetDirect
ΔDown
ΔUp

Implied Labor Market Effects of the China Trade Shock
Manufacturing

Non-Manufacturing

NILF

Unemployment

Total Employment

(For comparison: ADH Specification)
Direct Competition Effect

-0.47%

0.16%

0.21%

0.11%

-0.32%

Net Direct Competition Effect
Downstream Effect
Upstream Effect
Total Effect

-0.21%
0.50%
-0.63%
-0.34%

0.49%
2.33%
-1.46%
1.37%

-0.27%
-3.69%
1.69%
-2.27%

-0.01%
0.87%
0.39%
1.24%

0.28%
2.83%
-2.08%
1.02%

Note: All regressions include a constant and control for the initial employment share in working-age population and census divisions fixed effects. All
models are weighted by each commuting zone’s start of period working-age population. Robust standard errors clustered by states in parentheses. *,
** and *** denote coefficient statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The implied labor market effects are calculated for a
hypothetical commuting zone, whose exposure to the China shock is equal to the mean values across 722 Commuting Zones, relative to another
hypothetical commuting zone that have no exposure to the China shock.
63

Appendix Figure 1: US Unemployment Rate vs. Trade Deficit /Total Trade, 1960-2015

Note: All data are taken from the World Bank WDI database.

Appendix Figure 2: US Unemployment Rate vs. Bilateral Trade Deficit
with China/Total Trade with China, 1991-2015

Note: The US unemployment rate is taken from the World Bank WDI database, or calculated from the U.S.
Census microdata (5% sample for the year 2000) and American Community Survey (ACS) microdata (for
the year 2001-2014). The US-China bilateral trade data is taken from UN COMTRADE database.

64

