NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF PRENATAL CARE ON BIRTH OUTCOMES:
RECONCILING A MESSY LITERATURE
Hope Corman
Dhaval M. Dave
Nancy Reichman
Working Paper 24885
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24885

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

This is a draft version of an article that is intended for publication in the Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. The research was supported in part by the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation through its support of the Child Health Institute of New Jersey at Robert
Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University (grants 67038 and 74260). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy Reichman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes: Reconciling a Messy Literature
Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 24885
August 2018
JEL No. I12,I14,I18
ABSTRACT
Research on the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes has produced a patchwork of findings
that are not easily summarized. Studies have used varying definitions of prenatal care, leading to
estimates that are difficult to compare. The identification of causal effects is particularly
challenging in this literature because women enter pregnancy with varying states of health,
resources and the desire to have a child and it is not feasible to conduct randomized controlled
trials that deny care. The content and quality of prenatal care can vary, even across individuals
initiating care at the same point in their pregnancies and with similar medical and psychosocial
issues. In this chapter, we review the literature on the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes,
highlighting studies with strong research designs and plausible effect sizes. We reconcile the
findings to the extent possible, summarize what is known to date, and point to potentially fruitful
research directions going forward.
Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Nancy Reichman
Rutgers University
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Department of Pediatrics
Child Health Institute of New Jersey
89 French St., Room 3272
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
reichmne@rutgers.edu

Introduction
Prenatal care is one of the most frequently used forms of health care in the United States
(Schappert 1997; Kogan et al. 1998). This type of care involves a series of encounters during the
gestational period, educates women about pregnancy, monitors existing medical conditions, tests for
gestational health conditions, and refers expectant mothers to services such as support groups and
social services (March of Dimes 2009). Owing largely to expansions of Medicaid for pregnant women in
the late 1980s and early 1990s, prenatal care has become quasi‐universal in the U.S., with over 98% of
mothers giving birth in 2016 receiving at least some prenatal care. However, there is variation in the
timing of initiation of that care; e.g., about 23% of births in that same year occurred to mothers who
initiated care after the first trimester of pregnancy, with 4.6% of mothers initiating during the third
trimester of pregnancy. Rates of inadequate care, defined as prenatal care beginning after the fourth
month of pregnancy or having fewer than 50% of the recommended number of visits, are higher among
mothers who are young, low‐educated, and members of minority groups (Osterman and Martin 2018).
Additionally, rates of late and no care are higher among poor and unmarried mothers than among their
non‐poor and married counterparts (Pagnini and Reichman 2000).
It is the received wisdom that prenatal care improves birth outcomes. In a widely cited 1985
report, the Institute of Medicine estimated that for every dollar spent on more adequate prenatal care
for low‐income, low‐educated women, total expenditures for the medical care of their low birthweight
infants during the first year of life would be reduced by $3.38; the savings were attributed to a prenatal
care‐induced reduction in the rate of low birthweight (Institute of Medicine 1988). That report was
based on a relatively weak evidence base; subsequent studies, which have generally been more
methodologically rigorous, have produced a much cloudier picture.
In this paper, we review and synthesize the economics literature on the effects of prenatal care
on birth outcomes. We focus on the economics literature because those studies have generally used

2

quasi‐experimental econometric techniques in an attempt to identify causal effects. We do not
systematically review the broader literature, which would be unwieldy. We do, however, report on
relevant studies in the broader literature that were based on randomized controlled trials (RCTs); those
studies focused on specific aspects of prenatal care—e.g., home visiting and group prenatal care. We
acknowledge that there may be some studies in the broader literature that use quasi‐experimental
methods at least as strong as some studies in the economics literature. We do not expect that the
exclusion of such studies would substantively alter our conclusions.
We focus on studies that built on Michael Grossman’s work on the demand for health and
health production (Grossman 1972), which spawned the economics literature on prenatal care and birth
outcomes beginning with a study by Rosenzweig and Schultz in 1983 (Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983). We
used the EconLit database to identify original published research articles from 1983 to date (the writing
of this chapter) that estimated effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes in developed countries. All of
the studies that turned up in this search focused on the U.S; studies based on the “infant health
production” framework in other developed countries have focused on other prenatal inputs, including
smoking, that are more policy relevant (than prenatal care) in those contexts. The articles we reviewed
in the economics literature are summarized in Table 1. We also conducted a Medline search with the
following key words and no date limitations: prenatal care, pregnancy outcome, and “randomized
controlled trials as topic.” This search yielded several meta‐analyses, which we broadly summarize after
the more detailed review and synthesis of the economics literature.
In the subsequent sections of this chapter, we provide definitions and context vis‐à‐vis prenatal
care and birth outcomes in the U.S.; present a generalized “infant health production function” model,
the theoretical framework used by economists to study the effects of prenatal care on infant health;
provide a review of the empirical studies using the infant health production framework to investigate
effects of prenatal care on infant health, briefly discuss the body of work using RCTs to evaluate specific

3

features of prenatal care, and draw inferences about effect sizes to the extent possible; and conclude
with a section on what we have learned from this research and what still needs to be known.
Definitions and context
In this section, we review how prenatal care and birth outcomes have been measured in
research studies and present relevant context vis‐à‐vis birth outcomes and prenatal care in the US.
Measuring prenatal care and birth outcomes
Because prenatal care is a heterogeneous good, with educational, medical, and social work
components and specific packages of features (beyond basic screeners , tests, and guidance) tailored to
individual clients’ needs (at least, ideally), characterizing its use for quantitative analysis is not
straightforward. As a result, the measures used in population‐based research studies tend to be quite
crude and capture quantity rather than quality. Most studies focus on the timing of prenatal care
initiation (e.g., first trimester versus later care, month of pregnancy in which prenatal care was
initiated). Other studies consider the number of visits, either directly or in indices that incorporate
timing of initiation and number of visits in an attempt to capture prenatal care adequacy. The number of
visits alone can be a problematic indicator of prenatal care use because it conflates preventive care use
with medical need. The indices of prenatal care adequacy that have been used in research studies are
based on somewhat different standards and assumptions, but all combine information on timing of
initiation and number of visits (see Alexander and Kotelchuck 1996 for a critical review of the various
indices). As indicated earlier, randomized controlled studies have focused on specific aspects of prenatal
care—e.g., group prenatal care, home visits—that are much more easily characterized.
An important consideration with the various measures of prenatal care is what the relevant
margin should be. For example, many studies consider whether the mother obtained prenatal care in
the first trimester of pregnancy (roughly during the first three months). The alternative is initiating
prenatal care any time after first trimester or not at all, and the estimates thus conflate effects for

4

women with slightly delayed care with those for women with no care, which would have different
implications for the targeting of programmatic interventions. Continuous measures of prenatal care
(including days/weeks/months of prenatal care delay or number of visits) yield constant average
marginal effects, so that a one month delay, for example, has the same estimated effect on the birth
outcome whether the woman goes from a three month to a two month delay or an eight month to a
seven month delay, which is not necessarily the case. Another consideration is the reliance on self‐
reports of prenatal care in most studies, which can bias the estimates.
The most common birth outcomes in research studies of the effectiveness of prenatal care are
birthweight (in grams) and low birthweight (less than 2500 grams, or about 5.5 pounds). For birthweight
in grams, average effects should be considered in light of the overall distribution of this outcome; e.g.,
increases in birthweight from 2000 to 2100 grams and from 3400 to 3500 grams may not have same
consequences for infant health. Low birthweight is a widely used and much studied marker of infant
health; it is a leading risk factor for infant mortality, and infants who survive are at elevated risk for
many long‐term health conditions and developmental disabilities. Some studies consider very low
birthweight (less than 1500 grams, or about 3.3 pounds), an extreme birthweight‐related outcome that
is associated with particularly adverse health and developmental outcomes. Birthweight is well
measured, reliably recorded, and readily available from vital statistics files and many other data sets.
Some studies consider gestational age‐related outcomes, generally distinguishing between preterm (less
than 37 weeks) and term (37 weeks or more) births. Some consider small‐for‐gestational age (SGA) or
growth retardation as an outcome; SGA infants are typically those in less than the 10th percentile in sex‐
specific birthweight for gestational age. All low birthweight babies are preterm or growth‐retarded (they
can be both), and virtually all very low birthweight babies are preterm.
Finally, although birthweight measures are accurately reported and low birthweight is
correlated with subsequent morbidity and mortality, many infants who are low birthweight end up

5

experiencing no subsequent health problems and some infants who are of normal weight at birth
experience significant morbidities. In this spirit, some studies used measures of neonatal mortality,
abnormal infant health conditions, and newborn hospital costs as outcomes.
Birth outcomes and prenatal care use in the U.S. in context.
Figures 1 and 2 present trends in first trimester and late (third trimester or no) prenatal care,
respectively, in the U.S. from 1970 through 2003. Rates of first trimester care increased substantially
over the three decades, particularly during the 1990s. In 1970, about two thirds of births were to
mothers who initiated care in the first trimester of pregnancy. By 2003, after which changes in the
reporting of prenatal care made it impossible to derive a consistent time series, almost 85% of births
were to women who received first trimester care. During the same period, rates of late or no prenatal
care declined from about 8% of births to 3.5% of births. A major determinant of these trends was a
series of dramatic expansions in Medicaid eligibility for poor pregnant women during the late 1980s and
1990s (Currie and Gruber 1996).
Figure 3 shows the percent of infants born low birthweight (weighing less than 2,500 grams) in
the U.S. from 1970 through 2015. Rates of low birthweight varied little over the 45 years because
numerous (often opposing) forces were at play, including increases in maternal age and education,
increases in women’s labor force participation, advances in reproductive technology, increases in
multiple births, increases in obesity, decreases in cigarette smoking, decreases in fetal mortality, and
changing demographics of the U.S. The rate of low birthweight in the U.S. was slightly higher in 2015
than in 1970, but because of all of the concurrent changes, the higher rate should not necessarily be
interpreted as a worsening problem. The rate of low birthweight is higher in the U.S. than in most other
developed countries—e.g., 8.1% in the U.S. compared to 6.7% among European Union countries in 2015
(OECD Family Database 2018), although there are some reporting inconsistencies across countries that
can distort such comparisons.

6

Economic framework
The economic framework upon which the reviewed studies are based is derived from the
seminal work of Grossman (1972) on the demand for health and health production and focuses
specifically on the production of infant health. A simplified version of this model can be expressed as a
three‐equation system, wherein parents’ utility can be expressed as a function of consumption goods
(C), infant health (Hi), parents’ health (Hp), tastes, and any other relevant arguments as follows:1
(1)

U=U (C, Hi, Hp, tastes)

Infant health is a function of prenatal inputs (which can be favorable, such as prenatal care, or adverse,
such as smoking or drug use) as well as the health endowment of the mother (which reflects Hp and
may affect her reproductive efficiency), as shown in the infant health production function that follows:
(2)

Hi = f (input1, input2, ….inputn, maternal health endowment)

The demand for each input can be expressed as follows:
(3)

Inputi = gi (price and availability of inputi, prices and availability of substitute and
complementary inputs, income, maternal health endowment, tastes, wantedness)

Infant health is an argument in the parent's utility function (Equation 1), and the parents’ utility
maximization is constrained by the process underlying the production of infant health (Equation 2).
Wantedness reflects the relative importance of infant health versus other factors (e.g., the mother’s
own health) in the parent's utility function and therefore impacts prenatal input use (Equation 3) and
other investments in infant health that may be unobserved. Maternal health endowment enters the
infant health production directly (through biological processes) and may also affect infant health
indirectly through the use of prenatal inputs (e.g., mothers with poor health endowments may attempt
to offset an expected unfavorable birth outcome by utilizing more healthy inputs). Maternal risk‐taking
and time preference (taste for risky behaviors) affect maternal engagement in risky prenatal behaviors

1

The model description is borrowed from Reichman et al. (2009).

7

(such as smoking and drug use) and investments in own health, which in turn can impact infant health
production directly through the maternal health endowment (Equation 2) or indirectly through the
maternal health endowment or other inputs (Equation 3).
In the review and synthesis that follows, we focus on studies that specifically investigate the role
of prenatal care in producing infant health using the above framework (specifically, Equation 2).2 In our
review, we highlight studies that took the literature in new directions by applying different methods,
considering new outcomes or measures of prenatal care, or considering heterogeneous effects
according to sociodemographic or health‐related characteristics. A key methodological challenge in this
literature (and many others), often referred to as “endogeneity,” is that direct estimation of Equation 2
may produce biased estimates because the demand for prenatal care and other inputs may be
correlated with unobserved inputs or maternal characteristics that are associated with the infant health
outcome. As we discuss below, methods for addressing this issue have evolved over time in the
economics literature on infant health production. Because randomized controlled trials are considered
the gold standard in this regard, we also discuss the relatively limited literature outside of economics
that has investigated the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes using RCTs.
Broad overview of literature
Table 1 summarizes the 25 studies from the economics literature to date that explicitly focused
on identifying effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes or allowed for inferences to be made in that
regard. For each article, we indicate the measures of prenatal care and birth outcome(s) used, the data
source and type of data (e.g., aggregate, individual‐level), the broad methodology, and the findings,
which include estimated effects of prenatal care, as well as those of prenatal cigarette smoking when

2

We also include two studies that estimated reduced form models that substituted specific determinants of
Equation 3 (i.e., indicators of availability of prenatal care) into Equation 2 in lieu of a measure of prenatal care use,
and separately estimated a version of Equation 3 that included these same indicators, allowing for inferences
about the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes (Currie and Gruber 1996; Gray 2001).

8

considered in the same study, on birth outcomes. The smoking results provide useful context, as
prenatal smoking is the leading known preventable risk factor for poor birth outcomes (Cnattingius
2004; WHO 2013) and has been studied frequently in the economics literature, with fairly consistent
estimates across studies. The most consistent metric for prenatal smoking is birthweight in grams
associated with any smoking during pregnancy, and the estimates have been in the “few hundred
grams” range (reductions in birthweight attributed to smoking) across four decades of research with
evolving methodological sophistication (Corman, Dave and Reichman forthcoming), including a clinical
trial of a smoking cessation program directed at pregnant women (Hamilton 2001).
The literature summarized in Table 1 has evolved in a number of ways. First, studies have
attempted to address the potential endogeneity of prenatal care in increasingly sophisticated ways,
most recently by exploiting relevant policy changes or events as exogenous sources of changes in
prenatal care. Second, studies have considered a widening set of prenatal care and birth outcome
measures. Third, studies have used a growing number of data sources. Fourth, studies have increasingly
considered heterogeneous effects, with some of the early studies stratifying by race and more recent
studies modeling differential effects of prenatal care across the maternal or infant health distribution.
The first paper to apply the infant health production framework to investigate the effects of
prenatal care on birth outcomes was Rosenzweig and Schultz (1983). In addition to being the first study
to investigate the role of prenatal care in an infant health production framework, this paper was also
one of the first in the health production literature more broadly (which was not limited to mothers and
their infants) to acknowledge and attempt to address the potential endogeneity of health inputs. Using
data from the National Natality Followback Survey (1967–69), the authors identified four potentially
endogenous inputs—prenatal care delay, smoking, parity, and maternal age—and implemented two‐
stage models that first estimated all four inputs using a set of individual‐level and state‐or local area‐
level instrumental variables, including availability of hospital beds, family planning services, physicians,

9

and obstetricians/gynecologists; health expenditures; milk and cigarette prices; and economic
characteristics. They then estimated models of birth outcomes (birthweight and birthweight for
gestational age) using the predicted values of the endogenous inputs. Under the identifying assumption
that these factors impact birthweight only through their effects on the endogenous inputs, and are
therefore uncorrelated with the error term in the structural infant health production function (empirical
specification of Equation 2), the two‐stage estimation would identify a consistent causal impact of the
inputs on infant health. Certain specifications of the authors’ two‐stage models (which we henceforth
refer to more generally as instrumental variables (IV) models, given the use of identifying variables for
exclusion restrictions) suggest a roughly 50 gram reduction in birthweight, on average, for each month
of care delay; these estimates were much larger than the corresponding Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
estimates, which the authors suggested reflects adverse selection into early prenatal care (i.e.,
unobserved factors were associated with both worse birth outcomes and early care). In other
specifications, the authors found smaller or statistically insignificant estimated effects of prenatal care.3
Corman, Joyce and Grossman (1987) contributed to this young literature by focusing on
neonatal mortality—an extreme marker of poor infant health—as an outcome and modeling race‐
specific effects. Unlike the Rosenzweig and Schultz study, which used individual‐level data, the authors
used county‐level data, which is useful for studying rare events such as neonatal mortality. They
considered prenatal care, abortion availability, and neonatal intensive care use as endogenous inputs in
IV models, and also considered potential pathways by estimating the effects of prenatal care, which
they characterized as percent receiving first trimester (versus late or no) care, with and without
controlling for low birthweight. They identified all of the endogenous inputs with area‐level measures of
female poverty and education; availability of neonatal care services, family planning services, and

3

Rosenzweig and Schultz (1988) replicated these results with data from a later cohort, and found a somewhat
larger effect size of 91 grams in a linear two‐stage specification with similar identifiers.

10

community health centers; and Medicaid availability and generosity. Their IV estimates suggest that a 1
percentage point increase in women who received first trimester prenatal care reduced neonatal
mortality by 1% for both blacks and whites. The IV estimates were twice those of the corresponding OLS
estimates for whites and four times the corresponding OLS estimates for blacks, again suggesting
adverse selection into early prenatal care.
Grossman and Joyce (1990) addressed the issue of self‐selection of pregnant women into live
births (versus terminating their pregnancies), which could potentially bias the estimated effects of
prenatal care on birth outcomes, even in IV models. Using individual‐level birth data from New York City,
the authors included other health‐related inputs into their models (i.e. tobacco, alcohol and narcotic
use), but modeled only prenatal care as an endogenous input in IV models, using availability of abortion
providers and family planning clinics, poverty rates, individual‐level Medicaid use, and individual‐level
spontaneous and induced abortions to identify the sample selection model, and using prenatal care
clinic and WIC clinic availability, poverty rates in the health area districts, individual‐level parity, and
health insurance status plus the sample selection parameter (inverse of the Mills ratio, lambda, from the
selection model) as identifiers for prenatal care use. This was the first study to focus on one specific
endogenous input in the infant health production function and rigorously model the effect of that one
input. They found that each month of prenatal care delay led to decreases in birthweight that were
quite modest (4 to 37 grams, depending on specification and race) and that these IV estimates were 3–6
times larger than the corresponding OLS estimates.
The empirical issues and difficulties in identifying the causal effects of prenatal care (and other
maternal inputs) on infant health were well‐recognized from the start, as evidenced by these early
studies’ attempts to address potential bias from unobserved heterogeneity and selection. Andrew Jones
(1991) encapsulated some of these and other econometric concerns, including collinearity of multiple
inputs, appropriate functional form, omitted variables and other sources of endogeneity, heterogeneous

11

effects, and the importance of specifying a behavioral model to distinguish exogenous vs. choice
variables, within a study of low birthweight using aggregate state‐level data. He found some beneficial
effects of early (first trimester) prenatal care on the prevalence of low birthweight, though the effect
was marginally significant only for whites and relatively small in magnitude (a 10 percentage point
increase in births among women receiving early prenatal care was associated with a 0.18 percentage
point reduction in the prevalence of low birthweight infants).
Frank et al. (1992) used aggregate county‐level data to estimate fixed‐effects models of effects
of first trimester care on race‐specific rates of low birthweight. State and year fixed effects allowed the
authors to control for variations in potentially confounding factors that varied by state and year. Their
models included measures of first trimester care, smoking, abortion, first birth, and income as inputs in
the production function. The findings from this study suggest that a 1 percentage point increase in first
trimester care led to reductions in low birthweight of 0.007 percentage points for white women and
0.018 percentage points for black women.
Joyce (1994) introduced a new measure of prenatal care into this literature—levels of adequate,
intermediate, or inadequate care, based on the modified Kessner index. Focusing on birthweight as the
outcome, Joyce used individual‐level data on births in New York City to estimate IV models with health
insurance type, poverty rates, and availability of prenatal care clinics, family planning clinics, WIC
centers, and abortion providers as identifiers for adequacy of prenatal care. As in Grossman and Joyce,
this study also focused exclusively on prenatal care as the endogenous input in the infant health
production function. In his preferred model specification (IV models that treated prenatal care, but no
other inputs, as endogenous), he found that adequate (vs. inadequate) care led to increases in
birthweight of 170 grams for blacks, 287 grams for whites, and 249 grams for Hispanics. These effect
sizes were about 3 times higher than the corresponding OLS estimates for blacks and Hispanics and
about 43% higher for whites, suggesting adverse selection into adequate prenatal care. The direction of

12

the selection bias was consistent with the patterns found by Rosenzweig and Schultz and by Grossman
and Joyce.
Currie and Gruber (1996), Gray (2001), and Sonchak (2015) further focused on prenatal care as
an input using variations in Medicaid policies, which are arguably more exogenous and directly relevant
sources of identification than many of the identifiers used in previous studies. Currie and Gruber
estimated the effects of Medicaid eligibility expansions for pregnant women on state‐level rates of low
birthweight and infant mortality using IV models with measures of Medicaid eligibility rules as identifiers
for Medicaid eligibility. Using a separate data set, they found that the Medicaid expansions increased
the use of first trimester prenatal care by up to 47%, allowing for inferences to be drawn about the
effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes in the presence of a strong treatment. The authors found that
the increase of eligible women due to the Medicaid expansions (an increase of about 30 percentage
points) led to a 1.9% reduction in low birthweight and an 8.5% reduction in infant mortality. However,
most of the reduction in infant mortality appeared to be due to postnatal interventions rather than
prenatal care. Thus, the Medicaid expansions, which led to large increases in prenatal care use, had
relatively modest effects on low birthweight.
Gray (2001) and, much later, Sonchak (2015) investigated the effects of Medicaid
reimbursement rates on birth outcomes, allowing inferences to be drawn about effects of prenatal care
on birth outcomes. Gray used individual‐level data from the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health
Survey to estimate difference‐in‐differences models that controlled for unobserved state‐level
characteristics that may have been associated with both Medicaid reimbursement rates (which could
affect not only quantity but also quality of care) and birth outcomes. The author found that a 10%
increase in relative Medicaid fees led to about a one percentage point (2.1%) increase in use of first
trimester prenatal care, a 0.1 percentage point decrease (4.5%) in very low birthweight, a 0.4
percentage point decrease (3.8%) in low birthweight, and no significant changes in preterm birth or

13

infant death among women on Medicaid. By inference, a one percentage point increase in first trimester
care led to the 0.1 and 0.4 percentage point decreases in very low birthweight and low birthweight,
respectively.
Based on Gray’s finding that Medicaid reimbursement rates increased the use of prenatal care
using a single year of data, Sonchak expanded the sample and investigated the effects of reimbursement
rates on a range of measures of prenatal care utilization (number of visits, first trimester care, no
prenatal care, and the Kessner index of prenatal care adequacy) and a range of birth outcomes
(birthweight, low birthweight, gestational age, and preterm birth) using individual level data from 2001–
2010 U.S. birth records within an IV framework. Using state reimbursement rates as identifiers for
prenatal care visits, Sonchak found that additional prenatal visits increased birthweight for white
women with less than a high school education (including teens), but not for black women with less than
a high school education (including teens); for the former, one additional prenatal visit increased
birthweight by between 21 and 25 grams but had no significant effects on low birthweight, gestational
age, or preterm birth. In the first‐stage equation, she found that a 10% increase in reimbursement rates
increased prenatal visits by 0.11 for low‐educated black mothers and about 0.07 for low‐educated white
mothers (about 1% relative to the respective means). Among high school dropouts, there was some
evidence that higher reimbursement rates significantly decreased the likelihood of no prenatal care for
white mothers (but not black mothers), but there were no associations between reimbursement rates
and first trimester care or the Kessner index. For less disadvantaged samples, there were statistically
significant positive associations between reimbursement rates and the Kessner index for white and
black mothers with a high school education and for black mothers with a college education, as well as a
negative association between reimbursement rates and no prenatal care for black mothers with some
college education.

14

Reichman and Florio (1996) and Joyce (1999) investigated the effects of enhanced prenatal care
programs for women on Medicaid that provided more intensive (higher quality) services compared to
standard Medicaid prenatal care. Reichman and Florio focused on New Jersey’s HealthStart program,
which included an increased number of prenatal visits, increased provider reimbursement, case
coordination, integrated health support services, case managers, and community outreach. They used
linked birth/death and hospital discharge records for Medicaid births in New Jersey in 1989 and 1990
and estimated OLS and IV models that used numbers of HealthStart providers in the woman's residence
city at least six months before she gave birth as identifiers for HealthStart participation.
Econometric tests suggested that the OLS estimates were not biased. In their OLS models, the
authors found that enriched prenatal care (compared to standard Medicaid prenatal care) increased
birthweight by 55.7 grams, decreased low birthweight by 3.7 percentage points, decreased very low
birthweight by .9 percentage points, and decreased newborn hospitalization costs by 6.9% for black
women, but had no effects on any of these outcomes for white women. Of the 55.7 gram improvement
in birthweight, 5–15 grams could be explained by prenatal care delay and the rest was attributed to the
program itself, which could have involved the increased number of prenatal care visits or its other
features. In addition, because the program made other services (such as the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children) more available than they would be through
standard Medicaid prenatal care (through intensive case management) , the favorable effects of
prenatal care found in this study could potentially reflect effects of services other than prenatal medical
care.
Joyce studied the effects of the New York State Prenatal Care Assistance Program (PCAP), which
was similar to New Jersey HealthStart program, using linked Medicaid and birth records from New York
City for 1989–1991. He estimated both OLS and IV models, with the latter using proxies for the growth in
PCAP providers as a result of the state’s expansion in Medicaid eligibility (in January 1990) as identifiers

15

for PCAP participation. In OLS models, PCAP (compared to standard Medicaid prenatal care) was found
to increase birthweight by 33–83 grams (depending on year and subsample), decrease low birthweight
by 1.5–3.7 percentage points, and decrease very low birthweight by 0.4 to 1.3 percentage points. The IV
estimates were insignificant and not robust, suggesting that the expansion in PCAP participation had
relatively little impact on birth outcomes. Notably, while Reichman and Florio found significant effects
only for black women in their study of enhanced care under New Jersey’s HealthStart program, Joyce did
not estimate race‐specific models in his study of the PCAP program in New York City.
Abrevaya (2001), Conway and Deb (2005), and Abrevaya and Dahl (2008) looked beyond
average treatment effects and considered heterogeneity in the effects of prenatal care on birth
outcomes by the health of the mother during pregnancy (Conway and Deb) and along the birthweight
distribution (Abrevaya 2001, Abrevaya and Dahl 2008). Using U.S. birth records from 1992 and 1996 and
estimating quantile regressions, Abrevaya found that the impact of prenatal care varied substantially
across the distribution of birthweight, and that the average effect estimated by OLS masked this
considerable heterogeneity. Specifically, he found that no prenatal care (compared to first trimester
care) reduced birthweight by 389 grams for those in lowest decile of the birthweight distribution, with
monotonically declining effects at higher points in the distribution ranging in effect sizes from 100 to
200 grams; in comparison, the OLS estimate indicated a 194 gram reduction in birthweight. Other
trimesters of care (compared to first) had small and inconsistently‐signed effects on birthweight. While
Abrevaya did not account for the endogeneity of prenatal care, the results from this study underscore
that prenatal care may have very different effects depending on the course of the pregnancy and that
the most beneficial effects may be concentrated among births most at risk for adverse birth outcomes.
Conway and Deb used data from the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey and
estimated finite mixture models to assess heterogeneity in the causal effect of prenatal care on
birthweight. Unlike Abrevaya, the authors addressed the endogeneity of prenatal care (measured as

16

weeks of care delay), drawing on earlier studies and using cohabitation status, income, insurance status,
state‐level healthcare price index, and population density as identifiers. They drew attention to the
potential misspecification that arises under the standard assumption (implicit in much of the prior work)
that all births are drawn from the same distribution. Departing from this approach, Conway and Deb
employed a two‐class finite mixture model, wherein the observed birthweight distribution was

assumed to be a “mixture” of two latent classes, or separate distributions, consisting of
“normal” and “complicated” pregnancies. While the latent factors determining the two
distributions were unobserved, the classes were characterized ex post using observed
characteristics. The latent class of “normal” pregnancies included about 86–87% of all births
and had a mean birthweight of 3158 and 3360 grams (for black and white mothers,
respectively), while the latent class of “complicated” pregnancies included about 13–14% of all
births and had a mean birthweight in the very low birthweight range (1200 grams for white
mothers and 1079 grams for black mothers). The authors found that one week of prenatal care
delay led to a 30–35 gram reduction in birthweight for “normal” pregnancies (this finding was robust
across model specifications) and no effects of prenatal care on “complicated” pregnancies. These
findings underscore the importance of considering medical risk of mothers when assessing the effects of
prenatal care. That is, prenatal care may appear to be ineffective when a sample includes complicated
pregnancies that may be relatively unaffected by prenatal care. However, these findings are not
necessarily compatible with those of Abrevaya , who found larger effects for infants with lower
birthweights (which could reflect mothers’ higher medical risk). This apparent disparity in findings may
reflect the treatment of the endogeneity of prenatal care or the different approaches to modeling the
heterogeneity. While quantile regression methods identify heterogeneity specifically across the
outcome (in this case, birthweight) distribution, finite mixture models do not fully capture this source of

17

heterogeneity (e.g., while the latent class denoted “normal pregnancies” had a mean birthweight of
3200–3400 grams, this class could have included some births that are low birthweight).
Abrevaya and Dahl (2008) expanded this line of inquiry even further by not only allowing the
effect of prenatal care to vary depending on the point in the birthweight distribution, but also by
considering differential effects by trimester of care. Using birth records from Washington State and
Arizona between 1992 and 2002 and estimating quantile regressions, they found that no prenatal care
reduced birthweight by 323 grams at the 10th percentile of birthweight, had no significant effects at the
25th to 90th percentiles, and increased birthweight by 271 grams at the 90th percentile of birthweight.
Extending Abrevaya (2001), which had also applied quantile regression methods to assess differential
responses but with cross‐sectional data and not addressing unobserved selection, this study used linked
data on newborns and mothers to control for unobserved heterogeneity by embedding correlated
random effects (at the level of the mother) within the quantile regression framework. This study also
found a counter‐intuitive result that third trimester care (versus first trimester care) increased
birthweight by 62 to 72 grams at the 10th and 25th percentiles of birthweight (but had no effects at
higher percentiles).
Evans and Lien (2005) exploited what economists often refer to as a “natural experiment” – a
random shock that, in this case, had the potential to limit prenatal care. Specifically, the authors used
birth records from Allegheny County, PA from 1990–1994 to investigate the effects of the number of
prenatal care visits on birthweight and gestational age by exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in
care as a result of a bus strike in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Based on reduced visits associated with the
strike, they inferred that the number of prenatal visits did not significantly affect birthweight for all
pregnant women. However, they found some suggestive evidence of an effect size of 57 grams for
women early in their pregnancies (i.e., one less prenatal care visit led to a 57 gram reduction in

18

birthweight, suggesting that one more prenatal care visit increased birthweight by 57 grams in this
group).
Reichman et al. (2009) used a unique and rich data source that allowed them to include many
typically unobserved but theoretically important variables that affect the demand for prenatal care in
OLS models of the production of infant health, including wantedness of the child and detailed measures
of the mothers’ prenatal physical and mental health. The data were from the Fragile Families and Child
Wellbeing (FFCWB) study of U.S. urban births in 1998–2000, from which individual‐level postpartum
survey records were linked to the mothers’ and infants’ medical records from the birth hospitalization.
The survey data included rich sociodemographic measures for both mothers and fathers, including
religious attendance, non‐marital cohabitation, and length of parents’ relationship, and the medical
record module included detailed information from the mother’s prenatal care records and the infants’
newborn records. The FFCWB study oversampled non‐marital births by design in order to study a policy‐
relevant population, whereas administrative birth records (which were used in many of the previously
discussed studies) are available for all births in the U.S. However, the sociodemographic information is
much more limited in birth records than in the FFCWB and the medical information in birth records has
low rates of accuracy (Reichman and Hade 2001). The authors found, using self‐reports of first trimester
care from the mother’s postpartum survey, that first trimester prenatal care (versus later than first
trimester care) increased birthweight by about 50 grams, reduced low birthweight by 2 percentage
points, and reduced abnormal infant health conditions (a composite measure coded by a professional
from the newborns’ medical charts) by 3 percentage points. However, they found no effects of first
trimester care on any of the birth outcomes using information on the timing of initiation of prenatal care
from the medical records, which represents the gold standard source of such information.
Finally, we now consider the broader literature that has used RCTs in developed countries. We
focus on meta‐analyses, all of which focus on specific aspects of prenatal care. Withholding standard

19

care would not be ethical, and there are therefore no published RCT studies focusing on timing of
prenatal care initiation. Blondel and Breart (1995) reviewed eight RCTs that evaluated the effects of
prenatal home visits and found no reductions in preterm birth. Carter et al. (2016) reviewed four studies
comparing group versus standard prenatal care, and found no differences in preterm birth or neonatal
intensive care admissions, while Lathrop (2013) reviewed three studies and found that group prenatal
care (versus standard prenatal care) increased gestational age. Dowswell et al. (2018) covered four
studies that investigated effects of a reduced‐visits regimen and did not find compelling evidence that
fewer visits increased the risk of preterm birth, small‐for‐gestational age, or low birthweight. Similarly,
Carroli et al (2001) reviewed seven studies and found no effects of reduced visits on low birthweight.
Finally, Fiscella (1995) reviewed eleven RCTs that evaluated the effects of enhanced (quantitatively and
qualitatively more intensive) prenatal care on gestational age, birthweight, preterm birth, low
birthweight, and small‐for‐gestational age, and found no statistically significant improvements in birth
outcomes with the receipt of enhanced care. However, many of the studies in the Fiscella review, which
covered a variety of years, settings, programs, and populations, were limited by a lack of statistical
power. Overall, the available evidence from RCTs indicates small effects of variations in prenatal care
visits and enhanced services on birth outcomes.
Effect magnitudes
It is difficult to compare estimates of the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes across
existing studies because they often used different measures of prenatal care and considered different
birth outcomes. Even studies that seemingly should produce similar estimates often produce widely
divergent findings. For example, two of the major studies used the same measures of prenatal care
(months of delay) and infant health (birthweight) and studied older cohorts produced different
estimates. Rosenzweig and Schultz (1988) found that each month of prenatal care delay reduced
birthweight by about 91 grams, while Grossman and Joyce (1990) found that each month of care delay

20

reduced birthweight ‐37 grams (this was significant) for blacks and ‐23 grams (this was insignificant) for
whites. Effect magnitudes also often diverged even within the same study, depending on functional
form or estimation method (Rosenzweig and Schultz 1988). Both of these studies found evidence of
unobserved heterogeneity in prenatal care use.
Below, we condense the literature in Table 1 to provide ranges of magnitudes of effects of
prenatal care on birth outcomes. We focus on input and outcome combinations for which there are at
least two studies and, when there are several estimates, exclude those that are clearly outliers. Of the
25 studies we reviewed, many also estimated the effects of prenatal smoking, the leading known
modifiable risk factor for adverse birth outcomes, and those findings are presented in Table 1. The
average effect of smoking (some measured as smoking at all, others estimating effects of smoking a
pack per day) across the studies that also focused on smoking was about 160 to 230 grams in
birthweight, which corresponds to a 5 to 7% decrease. Only one study (Reichman et al. 2009) estimated
effects of both prenatal care and smoking at the individual level, and that study found that smoking
during pregnancy reduced low birthweight by 5–7 percentage points, while first trimester care did not
increase birthweight using their preferred measure of first trimester care (from medical records) and by
2 percentage points using self‐reported first trimester care (which the authors argued was likely an
overestimate). The estimated effects of prenatal smoking on birthweight are less variable than those of
prenatal care on birthweight, and the average effect sizes are much larger—providing useful context for
interpreting the practical significance of the effect sizes for prenatal care on that outcome.


First trimester care (versus not first trimester care) on low birthweight: Estimates varied from
no effect to (perhaps) a 1 to 3.8% decrease.



Prenatal care delay (months) on birthweight in grams: This was the combination with the
greatest variability in estimates, which ranged from no effect to about 130 to 150 grams for

21

each month of delay; the more recent studies indicate a narrower range of 0 to about 40 grams
for each month of delay. These estimates are generally trivial compared to those for smoking.


Number of prenatal care visits on birthweight: Estimates range from no effect to 46 grams per
visit. The recommended number of prenatal visits for an uncomplicated pregnancy is about 15
(American Academy of Pediatrics/ American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2012).
For a healthy pregnancy, a one‐month delay in the first 6 months of pregnancy would result in
one fewer visit. Thus, the range of estimates here appears to be at odds with the bulk of the
evidence on the effects of prenatal care delay on birthweight (synthesized above), with
estimates of the effect of a one‐month delay on birthweight in the triple digits.



Effects across the distribution of infant health outcomes: This literature is still in its infancy,
and the results are too inconsistent to draw any conclusions.



Effects of enriched prenatal care: The two studies that focused on Medicaid enhanced prenatal
care programs compared to standard Medicaid prenatal care found modest increases in average
birthweight and more sizable reductions in low birthweight (on the order of 1.5 to 3.7
percentage points for some sub‐samples) and very low birthweight (0.4 to 1.3 percentage
points). Reichman and Florio (1996) estimated that only a small fraction of the effects appeared
to be due to decreased prenatal care delay and inferred that it was other aspects of the
enhanced prenatal care program that explained the observed effects.



Effects of first trimester care on neonatal mortality: Zero to about 1–2% reduction.

Discussion
This review indicates that the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes are modest. Existing
studies used a variety of different measures, techniques, and samples, producing estimates that are not
straightforward to compare. That said, studies in the 1990s and beyond generally found smaller effect
sizes than were found by Rosenzweig and Schultz for an earlier (pre‐Medicaid expansion) cohort. It is
22

plausible that the effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes changed over time (i.e., as prenatal care
became more widely used as a result of the Medicaid eligibility expansions in the 1980s, the effects on
birth outcomes may have become smaller as women most likely to benefit gained access to care). Rous
et al. (2004) found some suggestive evidence of concavity and diminishing returns in the effects of
prenatal care visits on birthweight. Figure 1 showed that about 8% of infants born in the U.S. in 1970
(close to the Rosenzweig and Schultz cohort) had mothers who initiated prenatal care after the second
trimester of pregnancy, while the corresponding figure in 1999 was about 4%—representing a decrease
of 50 percent.
Studies that included multiple endogenous inputs (e.g., Rosenzweig and Schultz 1983, Li and
Poirier 2003a&b) and that had more ambitious modeling strategies tended to produce estimates that
were the largest but not robust with respect to specification or alternative measures. For example, the
finding in the Rosenzweig and Schultz study of a 52 gram reduction in birthweight for each month of
prenatal care delay was based on a Cobb‐Douglas production function, while a translog functional form
indicated no significant effects. Li and Poirier (2003b), which estimated a simultaneous equations model
with seven endogenous variables, found that first trimester care increased birthweight by 505 grams,
which is enormous compared to all other estimates, and had less dramatic effects on gestational age.
Studies that exploited variations in policies or natural experiments (e.g. Medicaid expansions, variations
in Medicaid fees, a bus strike) tended to find smaller effects than earlier studies that relied on a host of
state‐level and/or individual‐level instrumental variables. This difference in effect magnitudes may
partly reflect differences in the populations studied, differences in the margins being affected, and how
well the two match up within studies. For example, with multiple state‐ and individual‐level instruments,
it is unclear who the compliers are that are identifying the effect, which “local average treatment effect”
or margin is being estimated, and how this margin compares with those being captured in studies that
exploit policy variation or natural experiments. In addition, the choice of IVs and exclusion restrictions in

23

the early studies, as well as in later studies that considered multiple endogenous inputs, was often
questionable and possibly contributed to some of the inconsistencies across estimates.
The issue of self‐reporting bias for prenatal care is very consequential for estimating the effects
of prenatal care but has been largely ignored in the literature. Validation studies have shown that
prenatal care use is over‐reported in birth records (e.g., Reichman and Hade 2001). Only three of the 25
non‐RCT studies we reviewed constructed measures of prenatal care from medical records, and
comparisons of estimates using self‐reported prenatal care versus prenatal care use from medical
records in these studies indicated significant and moderate “effects” of prenatal care on birth outcomes
only when using self‐reported prenatal care. That is, when using measures of prenatal care from medical
records, considered the “gold standard” source for prenatal care information, no significant effects of
prenatal care on birth outcomes were apparent.
Heterogeneity of effects may be important, but such variations have not been sufficiently
explored to allow for generalized inferences. For example, several of the studies found differential
effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes by race and ethnicity, but patterns were inconsistent across
studies. In addition, average effects across the population of births may not always be meaningful—e.g.,
for birthweight as an outcome. For example, Sonchak (2015), which was based on millions of births,
found that an additional prenatal visit increased birthweight by about 23 grams, or 0.6%, which is trivial
compared to the estimates in the literature for prenatal smoking; however, that average effect may
mask substantively important effects at critical margins. In this vein, the few studies that investigated
effects of prenatal care on infant health across the (maternal or child) health distribution have produced
seemingly conflicting results. Abrevaya and Dahl (2008) found a large (323 gram) negative effect of no
prenatal care (compared to first trimester care) for infants in the lowest 10% of the birthweight
distribution, but that initiating care in the second or third trimester (versus first trimester) increased
birthweight by 27–63 grams. Conway and Deb (2005) found seemingly opposite results—that prenatal

24

care improved birthweight for a latent class of “normal” pregnancies, which have a higher likelihood of
being full‐term and resulting in normal birthweight births, and the magnitude of their estimate suggests
that first trimester care increased birthweight by 390 to 455 grams. In contrast, and seemingly more
consistent with the findings of Abrevaya and Dahl, Mukhopadhyay and Wendel (2008) found that
prenatal visits had a favorable effects on infant health (proxied by newborn hospital costs) for women
with pre‐existing health conditions.
Although the effects of prenatal care appear to be modest, it is important to consider the scope
of prenatal care more broadly. First, the quality of prenatal care may be more important than the
quantity. The Reichman and Florio (1996) study of augmented Medicaid prenatal care (versus standard
Medicaid prenatal care), which included an increased number of visits, increased provider
reimbursement, case coordination, integrated health support services, case managers, and community
outreach, found some evidence of improvements in birth outcomes above and beyond what could
plausibly be attributed to the timing of care initiation (although the effects could potentially reflect the
increased number of visits). The effects were concentrated among black mothers and may reflect the
integrated support, case coordination, and case management features of the program, which perhaps
reduced stress from dealing with discrimination in the healthcare system as described anecdotally in a
recent New York Times article on black infant mortality (Villarosa 2018). Additionally, prenatal care may
operate through indirect channels, wherein greater or more intensive contact between expectant
mothers and health care providers could lead to decreases (increases) in health‐compromising (health‐
promoting) behaviors such as smoking or better diet and nutrition. For example, it appears that some of
the favorable effect of enhanced prenatal care on birth outcomes in the Reichman and Florio study
reflected referrals to the WIC program (Reichman and Teitler 2003). Of note, if changes in health
behaviors are a mechanism through which prenatal care improves birth outcomes, then studies that

25

control for prenatal behaviors may underestimate the effects of prenatal care on infant health
outcomes (depending on the timing of the measurement of the behaviors).
Second, prenatal care may be “too little too late” to improve birth outcomes for some women,
who may enter pregnancy with a host of physical, mental, and psychosocial problems, the effects of
which cannot be addressed within the confines of a pregnancy. Women’s pre‐pregnancy mental and
physical health are important predictors of birth outcomes above and beyond pregnancy‐related health
(Almond, Currie, and Herrmann 2012; Reichman et al. 2009), suggesting that healthcare access and
quality for women of reproductive age (and even young girls) is a more promising strategy than prenatal
care for improving infant health. Furthermore, the availability of abortion services also appears to be an
important predictor of infant health (e.g., Corman, Joyce and Grossman 1988; Joyce and Grossman
1990, Walker and Wallace 1998), suggesting the importance of access to family planning services—
ideally as part of comprehensive and multifaceted health care. In other words, prenatal care should not
start at conception.
Third, prenatal care may have beneficial effects not necessarily reflected in measures of
birthweight or gestational age. Most of the studies reviewed here focused on birthweight‐ or gestational
age‐related outcomes. Although birthweight is a widely used and well‐measured index of subsequent
morbidity, it is not a direct measure of infant health. That is, many low birthweight children have no
serious health problems (Reichman 2005) and not being low birthweight is no guarantee of favorable
health status at birth. Thus, it is possible that using birthweight or low birthweight to proxy infant health
can lead to incorrect inferences about the effects of prenatal care on infant health. Reichman et al.
(2009) complemented birthweight outcomes with a direct measure of infant morbidity and found
similar results vis‐à‐vis the effects of first trimester care (i.e., no effects using prenatal care from medical
records), which was validating. Additionally, as pointed out by Grossman (2017) and others, prenatal

26

care could identify high‐risk deliveries and refer those women to deliver in hospitals with high‐level
neonatology, reducing neonatal deaths and morbidities.
Fourth, prenatal care can have beneficial effects not necessarily reflected in infant health.
Reichman et al. (2010), using a multi‐pronged approach to address the potential endogeneity of the
timing of prenatal care, found that first trimester prenatal care led to decreased maternal postpartum
smoking, increased use of well‐baby care, and possibly increased breastfeeding, which can favorably
impact child health, and Teitler et al. (2012) found that late or inadequate prenatal care was associated
with short subsequent birth intervals, which are associated with adverse perinatal outcomes. That said,
Noonan et al. (2011), using rich linked survey and medical data, found no associations between prenatal
care and four markers of child health at age 5—maternal‐reported health status, asthma diagnosis,
overweight, and height. Conway and Kutinova (2006) found that receiving early and adequate prenatal
care led mothers to maintain a healthy postpartum weight and may have reduced lengthy maternal
birth hospitalizations. Finally, benefits of prenatal care may take generations to become apparent. For
example, Miller and Wherry (forthcoming) found that the expansions of Medicaid coverage for pregnant
women and infants led to lower rates of chronic conditions and fewer hospitalizations related to
diabetes and obesity among individuals who gained access to coverage in utero and during infancy.
Overall, although we conclude that the estimated effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes are
modest at best, we argue that the question being asked may be too narrow. Implications that arise from
this review and synthesis are that more attention should be paid to the characterization of infant health,
characterization of the content and quality of prenatal care, potential heterogeneous effects, potential
indirect effects, potential long‐term effects, spillover effects (i.e., on mothers and their subsequent
children), effects of pre‐conceptional and lifetime care, and intergenerational effects.

27

References
Abrevaya, J. (2001). The effects of demographics and maternal behavior on the distribution of birth
outcomes. Empirical Economics, 26(1), 247–257.
Abrevaya, J., Dahl, C.M. (2008). The effects of birth inputs on birthweight. Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 26(4), 379–397.
Alexander, G., Kotelchuck, M. (1996). Quantifying the adequacy of prenatal care: a comparison of
indices. Public Health Reports, 111, 408–418.
Almond, D., Currie, J., Herrmann, M. (2012). From infant to mother: early disease environment and
future maternal health. Labour Economics, 19(4), 475–483.
American Academy of Pediatrics/ American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2012).
Guidelines for perinatal care, 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: AAP: Washington, DC.
Blondel, B., Bréart, G. (1995). Home visits during pregnancy: consequences on pregnancy outcome, use
of health services, and women's situations. Seminars in Perinatology, 19(4), 263–271.
Carroli, G., Villar, J., Piaggio, G., Khan‐Neelofur, D., Gülmezoglu, M., Mugford, M., ..., WHO Antenatal
Care Trial Research Group. (2001). WHO systematic review of randomised controlled trials of
routine antenatal care. Lancet, 357(9268), 1565–1570.
Carter, E.B., Temming, L.A., Akin, J., Fowler, S., Macones, G.A., Colditz, G.A., Tuuli, M.G. (2016). Group
prenatal care compared with traditional prenatal care: a systematic review and meta‐
analysis. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 128(3), 551.
Cnattingius S. (2004).The epidemiology of smoking during pregnancy: smoking prevalence, maternal
characteristics, and pregnancy outcomes. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 6(Supplement 2), S125–
S140.
Conway, K.S., Deb, P. (2005). Is prenatal care really ineffective? or, is the 'devil' in the
distribution? Journal of Health Economics, 24(3), 489–513.
Conway, K. S., Kutinova, A. (2006). Maternal health: does prenatal care make a difference? Health
Economics, 15, 461–488.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Reichman, N.E. (forthcoming). Evolution of the infant health production function.
Southern Economic Journal. Previous version available as National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 24131 (December 2017).
Corman, H., Joyce, T.J., Grossman, M. (1987). Birth outcome production function in the United
States. Journal of Human Resources, 22(3), 339–360.
Corman, H., Joyce, T., Grossman, M. (1988). A cost‐effectiveness analysis of strategies to reduce infant
mortality. Medical Care, 26(4), 348–360.
Currie, J., Gruber, J. (1996). Saving babies: the efficacy and cost of recent changes in the Medicaid
eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263–1296.
Dowswell, T., Carroli, G., Duley, L., Gates, S., Gülmezoglu, A. M., Khan‐Neelofur, D., Piaggio, G.G. (2010).
Alternative versus standard packages of antenatal care for low‐risk pregnancy. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 6(10),CD000934.
Evans, W.N., Lien, D.S. (2005). The benefits of prenatal care: evidence from the PAT bus strike. Journal of
Econometrics, 125(1–2), 207–239.
Fiscella, K. (1995). Does prenatal care improve birth outcomes? A critical review. Obstetrics &
Gynecology, 85(3), 468–479.
Frank, R.G. , Strobino, D.M., Salkever, D.S., Jackson, C.A. (1992). Updated estimates of the impact of
prenatal care on birthweight outcomes by race. Journal of Human Resources, 27(4), 629–642.
Gray, B. (2001). Do Medicaid physician fees for prenatal services affect birth outcomes? Journal of
Health Economics, 20(4), 571–590.

28

Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
Economy, 80(2), 223–255.
Grossman, M. (2017). Determinants of health: an economic perspective. Columbia University Press.
Afterword to part 3, 450–466.
Grossman, M., Joyce, T.J. (1990). Unobservables, pregnancy resolutions, and birth weight production
functions in New York City. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 983–1007.
Hamilton, B.H. (2001). Estimating treatment effects in randomized clinical trials with non‐compliance:
the impact of maternal smoking on birthweight. Health Economics, 10(5), 399–410.
Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Committee to Study Outreach for Prenatal Care; Brown S.S., editor. Prenatal
Care: Reaching Mothers, Reaching Infants. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (U.S.);
1988.
Jones, A.M. (1991). An econometric investigation of low birth weight in the United States. Journal of
Health Economics, 10(1), 81–99.
Joyce, T. (1994). Self‐selection, prenatal care, and birthweight among Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics in
New York City. Journal of Human Resources, 29(3), 762–794.
Joyce, T. (1999). Impact of augmented prenatal care on birth outcomes of Medicaid recipients in New
York City. Journal of Health Economics, 18(1), 31–67.
Joyce, T., Grossman, M. (1990). The dynamic relationship between low birthweight and induced
abortion in New York City: an aggregate time‐series analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 9(3),
273–288.
Kogan, M. D., Martin, J. A., Alexander, G. R., Kotelchuck, M., Ventura, S. J., Frigoletto, F. D. (1998). The
changing pattern of prenatal care utilization in the United States, 1981–1995, using different
prenatal care indices. Journal of the American Medical Association, 279, 1623–1628.
Li, K., Poirier, D. J. (2003a). An econometric model of birth inputs and outputs for Native
Americans. Journal of Econometrics, 113(2), 337–361.
Li, K., Poirier, D. J. (2003b). Bayesian analysis of an econometric model of birth inputs and
outputs. Journal of Population Economics, 16(3), 597–625.
Liu, G.G. (1998). Birth outcomes and the effectiveness of prenatal care. Health Services Research, 32(6),
805–823.
March of Dimes. (2009). During your pregnancy: Prenatal care. Pregnancy and newborn health
education center. http://www.marchofdimes.com/pnhec/159_513.asp.
Mukhopadhyay, S., Wendel, J., Lee, W., Yang, W. (2008). Analyzing the impact of prenatal care on infant
health: do we have useful input and output measures? Economics Bulletin, 9(22), 1–14.
Mukhopadhyay, S., Wendel, J. (2008). Are prenatal care resources distributed efficiently across high‐risk
and low‐risk mothers? International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 8(3), 163–
179.
Miller, S, Wherry, L.R. (forthcoming). The long‐term effects of early life Medicaid coverage. Journal of
Human Resources; published ahead of print January 30, 2018.
http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/early/2018/01/25/jhr.54.3.0816.8173R1.abstract
Noonan, K., Corman, H., Schwartz‐Soicher, O., Reichman, N.E. (2013). Effects of Prenatal Care on Child
Health at Age 5. Maternal and Child Health Journal ,17(2), 189–199.
OECD Family Database. Chart CO1.3A. Retrieved on 7/11/18 from:
http://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm
Osterman, M.J.K., Martin, J.A. Timing and adequacy of prenatal care in the United States, 2016. (2018).
National Vital Statistics Reports, 67(3). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Pagnini, D., Reichman, N.E. (2000). Psychosocial factors and the timing of prenatal care among women
in New Jersey's HealthStart Program. Family Planning Perspectives, 32(2), 56–64.
Reichman, N. (2005). Low birth weight and school readiness. The Future of Children, 15(1), 91–116.
29

Reichman, N.E., Florio, M.J. (1996). The effects of enriched prenatal care services on Medicaid birth
outcomes in New Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 15(4), 455–476.
Reichman, N.E., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Dave, D. (2009). Infant health production functions: what a
difference the data make. Health Economics, 18(7), 761–782.
Reichman, N.E., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Schwartz‐Soicher, O. (2010). Effects of prenatal care on
maternal postpartum behaviors. Review of Economics of the Household, 8(2), 171–197.
Reichman, N.E., Hade, E. (2001). Validation of birth certificate data: a study of women in New Jersey's
HealthStart Program. Annals of Epidemiology, 11(3), 186–193.
Reichman, N.E., Teitler, J.O. (2003). Effects of psychosocial risk factors and prenatal interventions on
birth weight: evidence From New Jersey’s HealthStart Program. Perspectives on Sexual and
Reproductive Health, 35(3), 130–137.
Rosenzweig, M.R., Schultz, T.P. (1983). Estimating a household production function: heterogeneity, the
demand for health inputs, and their effects on birth weight. Journal of Political Economy, 91(5),
723–746.
Rosenzweig, M.R., Schultz, T.P. (1988). The stability of household production technology: A
replication. The Journal of Human Resources, 23(4), 535–549.
Rous, J.J., Jewell, R.T., Brown, R.W. (2004). The effect of prenatal care on birthweight: a full‐information
maximum likelihood approach. Health Economics, 13(3), 251–264.
Schappert, S.M. (1997). Ambulatory care visits to physician’s offices, hospital outpatient departments,
and emergency departments: United States, 1996. Vital Health Stat, 13, 1–37.
Sonchak, L. (2015). Medicaid reimbursement, prenatal care and infant health. Journal of Health
Economics, 44, 10–24.
Teitler, J., Das, D., Kruse, L., Reichman, N.E. (2012). Prenatal care and subsequent birth intervals.
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 44(1), 13–21.
Villarosa, L. Why America’s black mothers and babies are in a life‐or‐death crisis: The answer to the
disparity in death rates has everything to do with the lived experience of being a black woman in
America. New York Times. April 11, 2018.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/11/magazine/black‐mothers‐babies‐death‐maternal‐
mortality.html
Walker, M.B., Wallace, S. (1998). The implications of current policies on the production of infant
health. Applied Economics, 30(9), 1177–1186.
Warner, G. (1998). Birthweight productivity of prenatal care. Southern Economic Journal, 65(1), 42–63.
Warner, G. L. (1995). Prenatal care demand and birthweight production of black mothers. The American
Economic Review, 85(2), 132–137.
World Health Organization (WHO). WHO recommendations on prevention and management of tobacco
use and second‐hand smoke exposure in pregnancy. Geneva: World Health Organization;2013

30

Figure 1: Percentages of Births with First Trimester Prenatal Care, United States, 1970–2003
90.0

85.0

80.0

75.0

70.0

65.0

60.0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Notes: 1971–1974 and 1976–1979 data are interpolated; after 2003, reporting of prenatal care was
changed so that data are not comparable after that year.
Sources of Data (all accessed on 7/10/18):
1970, 1975, 1995–1999: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/data_acces_files/hus01cht.pdf
980–1994: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_21/sr21_054.pdf
2000–2003: Annual National Vital Statistics Reports: Births, Final Report

31

Figure 2: Percentages of Births with Third Trimester or No Prenatal Care, United States, 1970–2003

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Notes: 1971–1974 and 1976–1979 data are interpolated; after 2003, reporting of prenatal care was
changed so that data are not comparable after that year.
Sources of Data (all accessed on 7/10/18):
1970, 1975, 1995–1999: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/data_acces_files/hus01cht.pdf
980–1994: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_21/sr21_054.pdf
2000–2003: Annual National Vital Statistics Reports: Births, Final Report

32

Figure 3: Percentages of Infants that were Low Birthweight, United States, 1970–2015

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

.
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Notes: Data for 1971–1974 and 1975–1979 are interpolated; low birthweight is defined as less than
2500 grams
Data Source: Health, United States, 2016 – Individual Charts and Tables: Spreadsheet, PDF, and
PowerPoint files
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus/contents2016.htm#005 (accessed on 7/10/18)

33

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
1
Rosenzweig, M.R.,
(Ln) months
Individual‐level
National
IV
Schultz, T P. (1983).
delayed
BW and GA‐
Natality
Estimating a household prenatal care
related
Followback
Identifiers (for 4
production function:
outcomes:
Survey, 1967– endogenous inputs,
heterogeneity, the
Ln BW;
69
including prenatal care):
demand for health
BW/Predicted
Parents’ education,
inputs, and their effects
BW based on GA
income, and 15 area‐
on birth weight. Journal
level measures capturing
of Political Economy,
input and good prices,
91(5), 723–746.
provider supply, public
spending and labor
market conditions

2

3

Corman, H., Joyce, T.J.,
Grossman, M. (1987).
Birth outcome
production function in
the United States.
Journal of Human
Resources, 22(3), 339–
360.

Rosenzweig, M R.,
Schultz, T.P. (1988).
The stability of
household production
technology: A
replication. The Journal
of Human

% first trimester
prenatal care

(Ln) months
delayed
prenatal care

County‐level
neonatal
mortality, LBW
(3 yr. average)

Individual‐level
BW

Natality and
mortality data,
U.S., 1976–
1978

National
Natality
Followback
Survey, 1967–
69, plus 1980

IV
Identifiers (for prenatal
care and other endog.
Inputs): 7 area‐level
measures plus Medicaid
availability and
generosity measures

Same as #1 above

Findings
 10% increase in months of prenatal care delay
reduced BW by 0.68% (from their preferred
specification: Cobb Douglas, 2SLS)
 Effect sizes imply that a 5 month delay reduces
BW by between 260 – 410 grams.
 2SLS elasticity estimates are 40 times OLS
estimates (latter not statistically significant);
other specification (translog) produced
insignificant results
 Prenatal care was never significant in predicting
small‐for‐GA
 Prenatal smoking reduced BW by 230 grams
(nonsmoker versus average smoker)
 1 percentage point increase in women who
received first trimester prenatal care reduced
neonatal mortality by 1% for both blacks and
whites (2SLS results)
 For whites, 2SLS effects < twice corresponding
OLS estimates; for blacks, 2SLS ~ 4 times > OLS
estimates
 A one unit increase in average daily number of
cigarettes per capita in state (mean about 7.4
cigarettes per day) increased neonatal mortality
by 6% for blacks and whites in 2SLS specification
 For whites, OLS result for smoking similar to
2SLS; for blacks. 2SLS estimates about 75%
larger
 1 month delay in prenatal care reduced BW by
40–91 grams
 Smoking 14 cigarettes per day reduced
birthweight by 112–227 grams

34

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
Resources, 23(4), 535–
549.
4
Grossman, M., Joyce, T. Months of
Individual‐level
Birth records,
IV w/ sample selection
J. (1990).
prenatal care
BW
NYC, 1984
Unobservables,
delay
Identifiers for prenatal
pregnancy resolutions,
care: prenatal care clinic
and birth weight
and WIC center
production functions in
availability, poverty,
New York City. Journal
Medicaid and self‐pay
of Political Economy,
status
98(5), 983–1007.
Identifiers in sample
selection model:
abortion providers and
family planning clinics,
spontaneous and
induced abortions

5

6

Jones, A.M. (1991). An
econometric
investigation of low
birth weight in the
United States. Journal
of Health Economics,
10(1), 81–99.
Frank, R.G. , Strobino,
D.M., Salkever, D.S.,
Jackson, C.A. (1992).
Updated estimates of
the impact of prenatal
care on birthweight
outcomes by race.
Journal of Human

% infants born
to women who
received first
trimester
prenatal care

State‐level LBW

Children's
Defense Fund
publication,
1984

OLS

% infants born
to women who
received first
trimester
prenatal care

County‐level
LBW

Natality data,
U.S., 1975–
1984

Fixed effects (pooled,
time series, cross‐
sectional study)

Findings

 From preferred specification–sample selection
(birth probability) plus 2SLS for prenatal care:
Each month of prenatal care delay led to a (not
statistically significant) 23 gram reduction in BW
for whites and a (statistically significant) 37
gram reduction in BW for blacks
 From selection model without 2SLS:
Corresponding estimates were ~4 grams for
whites and 12 grams for blacks
 From OLS specification: Estimates similar to
those from selection specification
 2SLS estimates 3–6 times larger than OLS
estimates
 Smoking (vs. not smoking) leads to a 42–44
gram reduction in BW for whites and a 187–189
gram reduction in BW for blacks; estimates
stable across specifications
 First‐trimester prenatal care was negatively
associated with LBW, with unstable and very
small magnitude effects
 Range of estimates: ‐0.005 to 0.018 ppt., or
elasticities of ‐0.03 to ‐0.26
 Association was significant only for whites
 Outcome elasticities of first trimester prenatal
care were ‐0.10 to ‐0.11; 1 ppt increase in first
trimester care led to reduction in LBW of .007
ppt for whites and 0.018 ppt for blacks

35

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
Resources, 27(4), 629–
642.
7
Joyce, T. (1994). Self‐
Inadequate,
Individual‐level
Birth records,
Endogenous switching
selection, prenatal
intermediate,
BW
NYC, 1984
and IV models
care, and birthweight
or adequate
among Blacks, Whites,
prenatal care
Identifiers for prenatal
and Hispanics in New
using modified
care: Insurance type;
York City. Journal of
Kessner index
area poverty; measures
Human Resources,
of area availability of
29(3), 762–794.
prenatal care clinics,
family planning clinics,
WIC centers, abortion
providers, maternal
schooling, ethnicity (in
Hispanic equation)

8

9

Warner, G. L. (1995).
Prenatal care demand
and birthweight
production of black
mothers. The American
Economic Review,
85(2), 132–137.

Days of
prenatal care
delay; number
of prenatal
visits adjusted
for GA

Individual‐level
BW, GA

Currie, J., Gruber, J.
(1996). Saving babies:
the efficacy and cost of
recent changes in the

Medicaid
eligibility, which
could affect
prenatal care of

State‐year rates
of LBW and
infant mortality

Birth records,
NYC, 1980–
1990
(black women
only)

IV

Natality and
mortality data,
U.S., 1979–
1992

IV (endogenous variable
was Medicaid eligibility)

Identifiers for prenatal
care: Method of
financing (Medicaid, self‐
pay); father’s education;
mother’s age; health‐
area variables:
availability of prenatal
and family planning
clinics; unemployment
and poverty rates; drug
deaths

Findings

 Adequate (vs. inadequate) care led to increases
in birthweight of 151 grams for blacks, 288
grams for whites, and 229 grams for Hispanics
(from preferred specification, which only
treated prenatal care as endogenous whereas
other specifications treated multiple inputs as
endogenous)
 Very modest effects between intermediate and
adequate care (21 grams for whites, 11 grams
for blacks, 46 grams for Hispanics); larger
effects between inadequate and intermediate
care
 IV‐based two‐stage effect sizes about 3 times
higher than OLS estimates for blacks and
Hispanics and about 43% higher for whites
 Each additional day of prenatal care delay
reduced BW by 1 gram
 No significant effects of number of prenatal care
visits
 Suggestive evidence that delay of prenatal care
and number of visits may be substitutes (based
on interacted measure of visits divided by delay)
 First‐trimester care initiation (reducing delay by
about 75 days) raises BW by ~ 170 grams
(interpolated from authors’ assumptions)
 No comparison OLS equations

 30 ppt increase in pregnant women eligible for
Medicaid led to a 1.9% reduction in LBW
 The Medicaid expansions also reduced infant
mortality by 8.5%, but most of this reduction

36

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
Medicaid eligibility of
mothers or
Identifier: Eligibility for
pregnant women.
postnatal care
Medicaid according to
Journal of Political
of infants
welfare rules of the state
Economy, 104(6),
1263–1296.
10 Reichman, N.E., Florio,
Enriched
Individual‐level
Linked
OLS and IV (tested and
M.J. (1996). The effects prenatal care
BW, LBW, VLBW, birth/death
found OLS to be
of enriched prenatal
for Medicaid
newborn
and hospital
unbiased)
care services on
recipients
hospitalization
discharge
Medicaid birth
(program
costs
records, New
Identifiers for
outcomes in New
included
Jersey, 1989 & HealthStart enrollment:
Jersey. Journal of
increased #
1990
Numbers of HealthStart
Health Economics,
prenatal visits,
providers in the
15(4), 455–476.
increased
woman's city of
provider
residence at least six
reimbursement,
months before she gave
case
birth
coordination,
integrated
health support
services, case
managers,
community
outreach)
11 Liu, G.G. (1998). Birth
Months of
Individual‐level
Birth and
IV w/ sample selection
outcomes and the
prenatal care
BW
abortion
model
effectiveness of
delay
records,
prenatal care. Health
Virginia, 1984
Identifiers (unclear
Services Research,
which instrumental
32(6), 805–823.
variables were used
specifically for prenatal
care): Mother’s marital
status; previous early
termination; area‐level
abortion providers,
family planning clinics,

Findings
appeared to reflect increased use of postnatal
resources rather than prenatal care

 Enriched prenatal care (compared to standard
Medicaid prenatal care) increased BW by 55.7
grams, decreased newborn hospitalization costs
by 6.9%, decreased LBW by 3.7 ppts, and
decreased VLBW by .9 ppts for black women;
no evidence that enriched care was associated
with improved birth outcomes or lower costs
for white women (using preferred
specifications: OLS estimates)
 Of the 55.7 gram improvement, 5–15 grams
could be explained by prenatal care delay;
attributed rest of the effect to the program
itself

 Each month of prenatal care delay resulted in a
36–197 gram reduction in BW for urban blacks,
a 86–160 gram reduction for rural blacks, a 75–
139 gram reduction for urban whites, and a
107–143 gram reduction for rural whites (using
preferred specifications: 2SLS)
 2SLS estimates 6–20+ times larger than OLS
estimates

37

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Findings
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
WIC clinics, and poverty
rates
12 Warner, G. (1998).
Weeks of
Individual‐level
National
IV
 Each additional prenatal visit increased BW by
Birthweight
prenatal care
BW
Maternal &
35 grams for whites and 46 grams for blacks
productivity of prenatal delay,
Infant Health
Identifiers for prenatal
(using linear 2SLS model with both delay in
care. Southern
standardized
Survey 1988
care: Household
weeks and number of visits included); inferred
Economic Journal,
visits (based on
income; source of
that prenatal care increased BW through # of
65(1), 42–63.
a term
income; paternal
visits, not timing of initiation
pregnancy)
education; payment
 No OLS comparison equations
source for prenatal care;
number of children in
 Each cigarette smoked daily during pregnancy
the household; mother’s
reduced BW by 3–4 grams for whites and 8
pregnancy work status;
grams for blacks; each pack smoked daily
urban residence; marital
reduced BW by 60–80 grams for whites and 160
/ cohabitation status;
grams for blacks
and 6 state‐level
variables
13 Joyce, T. (1999). Impact Augmented
Individual‐level
Linked
IV
 PCAP (compared to standard Medicaid prenatal
of augmented prenatal prenatal care
BW, LBW, VLBW Medicaid
care) increased BW by 33–83 grams (depending
care on birth outcomes for Medicaid
administrative Identifiers for PCAP
on year and subsample), decreased LBW by 1.5–
of Medicaid recipients
recipients (NY
files and birth
enrollment: Numbers of
3.7 ppts, and decreased VLBW by .4 to 1.3 ppts.
in New York City.
State Prenatal
records, NYC,
PCAP providers by health
(from OLS result); IV estimates were
Journal of Health
Care Assistance
1989–1991
area; interactions
insignificant and not robust
Economics, 18(1), 31–
Program;
between health district
67.
PCAP)—similar
and year; interactions
to NJ
between hospital of
HealthStart
delivery and year
program
(Reichman and
Florio 1996)
14 Abrevaya, J. (2001). The Dummy
Individual‐level
Birth records,
Quantile regression
 No prenatal care (compared to first trimester
effects of
variables for
BW
U.S., 1992 &
care) reduced BW by 389 grams for those in
demographics and
trimester
1996
lowest 10% of BW distribution but only by 100–
maternal behavior on
prenatal care
200 grams at other points in the BW
the distribution of birth began: none,
distribution; other trimesters of care
outcomes.
third, or second

38

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
Empirical Economics,
(compared to
26(1), 247–257.
first)

15

Gray, B. (2001). Do
Medicaid physician fees
for prenatal services
affect birth outcomes?
Journal of Health
Economics, 20(4), 571–
590.

Indirect effect
of first
trimester care
via Medicaid
reimbursement
rates

Individual level
VLBW, LBW,
preterm birth,
infant death

National
Maternal &
Infant Health
Survey 1988

DD

16

Li, K., Poirier, D.J.
(2003a). An
econometric model of
birth inputs and
outputs for Native
Americans. Journal of
Econometrics, 113(2),
337–361.

First trimester
prenatal care

Individual level
BW, GA, birth
length

National
Longitudinal
Survey of
Youth 1979,
1979–1994

Bayesian estimation of a
non‐linear simultaneous
equations model,
comprising 4 inputs and
3 outputs
Identification is based on
numerous exclusions
restrictions (restricting
coefficients to be zero
for elements of both the
endogeneous and
exogenous variables);
identifying instruments
include region of
residence, calendar
time, Air Force
Qualifying Test (AFQT)
score, household

Findings
(compared to first) had small and inconsistently
signed effects on BW
 Average effect of any smoking on BW: 161
grams; effect sizes ranged from 171 at lowest
quantile of BW to 147 at highest quantile
 10% increase in relative Medicaid fees led to 1
ppt increase in use of first trimester prenatal
care
 10% increase in fees led to approximate 0.1 ppt
lower risk of VLBW and 0.4 ppt lower risk of
LBW among women on Medicaid (4.5% and
3.8%, respectively); no significant effects on
preterm birth or infant death
 Infer that the 1 ppt increase in use of first
trimester care led to 0.1 ppt lower risk of VLBW
and 0.4 ppt lower risk of LBW
 Prenatal care not found to have any substantive
or consistent effects on gestational age, birth
length, or birthweight
 Smoking also not found to have any substantive
effects on the birth outputs; point estimates
suggest that prenatal smoking reduces
gestation by 0.2 weeks, birth length by 0.2 cm,
and BW by 114 grams

39

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
income, health
insurance, mother’s
work status during
pregnancy, # of adults in
households, cigarette
price, alcohol price,
medical services price,
food price
17 Li, K., Poirier, D.J.
First trimester
Individual‐level
National
Baysesian estimation of
(2003b). Bayesian
prenatal care
BW, GA, birth
Longitudinal
a non‐linear
analysis of an
length
Survey of
simultaneous equations
econometric model of
Youth 1979,
model, comprising 4
birth inputs and
1979–1994
inputs and 3 outputs
outputs. Journal of
Population Economics,
Identification based on
16(3), 597–625.
numerous exclusions
restrictions (restricting
coefficients to be zero
for elements of both the
endogeneous and
exogenous variables);
identifying instruments
include region of
residence, calendar
time, AFQT score,
household income,
health insurance,
mother’s work status, #
of adults in household,
cigarette price, alcohol
price, medical services
price, food price
18 Rous, J.J., Jewell, R.T.,
Number of
Individual‐level
Birth records,
3‐equation system that
Brown, R.W. (2004).
prenatal care
BW
Texas, 1993
treated prenatal care as
The effect of prenatal
visits
endogenous and
care on birthweight: a
modeled pregnancy

Findings

 First trimester prenatal care increased BW by
505 grams, increased GA by 2.4 weeks, and
increased birth length by 2.2cm
 OLS results: First trimester prenatal care
increased BW by 67 grams, had negligible
effects on GA, and increased birth length by
0.34cm
 Smoking during pregnancy significantly reduced
BW by 402 grams; did not have significant
effects on GA or length at birth
 OLS: Smoking reduced BW by 196 gram (effects
on GA not reported);reported “sizeable
negative” effects on birth length

 Marginal effect of one additional prenatal care
visit (at the mean of 11.4 visits) was 14.4 grams;
marginal effects of going from no care to one
visit was 52.7 grams

40

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
full‐information
resolution to account for
maximum likelihood
sample selection, jointly
approach. Health
estimated using discrete
Economics, 13(3), 251–
factor method (full
264.
information maximum
likelihood – FIML)

19

20

Conway, K.S., Deb, P.
(2005). Is prenatal care
really ineffective? or, is
the 'devil' in the
distribution? Journal of
Health Economics.
24(3), 489–513.

Weeks of
prenatal care
delay

Evans, W.N., Lien, D. S.
(2005). The benefits of
prenatal care: evidence
from the PAT bus
strike. Journal of
Econometrics, 125(1–
2), 207–239.

Number of
prenatal care
visits

Individual‐level
BW

Individual‐level
BW and GA

National
Maternal &
Infant Health
Survey 1988

Birth records,
Allegheny
County, PA,
1990–1994

Identifiers for prenatal
care: # of Ob/Gyns per
capita in county
Finite mixture models
with endogeneity
correction
Identifiers for prenatal
care: State‐level
healthcare price index,
population density;
individual‐level
cohabitation status,
income, insurance status
IV
Identifier for prenatal
care: Whether affected
by Port Authority Transit
bus strike in Allegheny
county, based on
geography and timing

Findings
 OLS: marginal effect of one additional visit (at
the mean) was 28.2 grams; marginal effect of
the first visit was 52.7 grams
 Smoking a pack a day (compared to no prenatal
smoking) reduced BW by 285 grams in preferred
(FIML estimation) model; similar results (289
grams) using OLS
 One week of prenatal care delay led to a 30–35
gram reduction in BW for the latent class of
pregnancies comprising approximately 86–87%
of all births, denoted ‘normal’ pregnancies
(robust to model specification)
 Effect magnitudes were generally similar for
white and black mothers

 Did not find significant effects of visits on
birthweight or gestational age
 Bus strike significantly reduced the number of
prenatal care visits; magnitude varied across
subsamples
 Similar results in OLS estimations
 Suggestive (but inconclusive) evidence of a 57
gram decrease in BW for those early in
pregnancy, through decreased number of
prenatal visits

41

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
21 Abrevaya, J., Dahl, C.M. Dummies for
Individual‐level
Birth records,
Quantile regression with
(2008). The effects of
no, care,
BW (quantiles)
Washington
correlated mother
birth inputs on
second
at 10th, 25th,
State (1992–
random effects applied
birthweight. Journal of
trimester
50th, 75th, and
2002) &
to panel data (preferred
Business and Economic initiation, and
90th percentiles
Arizona
specification)
Statistics, 26(4), 379–
third trimester
(1993–2002),
397.
initiation
with links
(compared to
between
first trimester
mothers’ first
initiation)
& second
births

22

Mukhopadhyay, S.,
Wendel, J., Lee, W.,
Yang, W. (2008).
Analyzing the impact of
prenatal care on infant
health: do we have
useful input and output
measures? Economics
Bulletin, 9(22), 1–14.

Numbers of
provider‐
reported and
maternal‐
reported
prenatal care
visits

Individual‐level
BW, LBW,
marginal cost of
providing infant
hospital care

Linked data
from one U.S.
hospital, its
subsidized
prenatal care
clinic, and
birth records

OLS

Findings
 Washington State (estimates similar in panel
and cross‐sectional models): No prenatal care
reduced BW by 323 grams at the 10th
percentiles of BW, no significant effects at the
25th to 90th percentiles, and increased BW by
271 grams at 90th percentile; third trimester
care (versus first trimester care) had positive
effects o 72 grams at 25th percentiles and no
effects at higher percentile
 Washington State: OLS estimates of average
effects for 2nd or third trimester care versus first
trimester care were positive (counter‐intuitive
result)
 Arizona results similar
 Smoking (Washington State only): Negative
effects of any smoking during pregnancy,
ranging from 25 grams for lowest quantile to 57
for highest quantile of BW in panel models.
Average effect was 57 grams, with strongest
effect (81 grams) at median BW, in panel
regressions
 Cross‐sectional effects of smoking (Washington
State) were 150–200 grams
 Built upon working paper version of Reichman
et al. (2009)
 Each additional self‐reported prenatal care visit
reduced marginal cost of care by .6% and LBW
by .3 ppts; no effects of provider‐reported visits
on either outcome

42

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)
23 Mukhopadhyay, S.,
Numbers of
Marginal cost for Linked data
IV
Wendel, J. (2008). Are
provider‐
the infant
from one U.S.
prenatal care resources reported
hospital delivery hospital and
Identifiers for prenatal
distributed efficiently
prenatal care
stay
its subsidized
care: Individual‐level
across high‐risk and
visits and
prenatal care
health insurance status
low‐risk
months of care
clinic
and maternal age
mothers? International
Journal of Health Care
Finance and
Economics, 8(3), 163–
179.
24

Reichman, N.E.,
Corman, H., Noonan,
K., Dave, D. (2009).
Infant health
production functions:
what a difference the
data make. Health
Economics, 18(7), 761–
782.

Medical record
and self‐
reported first
trimester
prenatal care

Individual‐level
BW, LBW,
abnormal infant
health
conditions

Fragile
Families and
Child
Wellbeing
survey linked
to medical
records, 1998–
2000

OLS

25

Sonchak, L. (2015).
Medicaid
reimbursement,
prenatal care and
infant health. Journal of
Health Economics, 44,
10–24.

Prenatal visits,
first trimester
care, no
prenatal care,
Kessner index

Individual‐level
BW, LBW, GA,
preterm

Birth records,
U.S., 2001–
2010

IV
Identifier for prenatal
care visits: State
Medicaid
reimbursement rate for
obstetric care

Findings
 OLS results: 1% increase in months of prenatal
care significantly reduced newborn hospital
costs by .013%, and a 1% increase in number of
prenatal visits reduced newborn hospital costs
by .03%
 OLS results: Prenatal care had significant effects
on hospital costs only for mothers at high risk
due to poor obstetrical histories or other pre‐
pregnancy health conditions
 IV results: No effects of prenatal care on
hospital costs, once controlling for positive
selection into prenatal care
 First trimester prenatal care increased BW by
about 50 grams, reduced LBW by 2 ppts, and
reduced abnormal infant health conditions by 3
ppts using self‐reported measure of first
trimester care; no effects of first trimester care
on any birth outcome using prenatal
information from medical records
 Smoking reduced BW by 213–230 grams,
increased LBW by 5 to 7 ppts, and had no effect
on abnormal conditions using self‐reported
smoking; smoking reduced BW by 174 to 186
grams, increased LBW by 5 to 7 ppts, and had
no effect on abnormal conditions using medical
records in combination with self reports
 Additional prenatal visits increased BW for
unmarried white women with < high school
education but not similar black mothers; for the
former, one visit increased BW by 23 grams but
no effects on LBW, GA, or preterm birth
 OLS: Estimates similar to IV estimates for
whites, but indicate a significant effect of
prenatal care visits on birthweight of 23 grams
for blacks

43

Table 1: Studies of effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes from the economics literature
Measure(s) of
Birth
#
Article
Data Source
Method(s)
Prenatal Care
Outcome(s)

Findings

 10% increase in fees increased prenatal visits by
.11 for blacks, .07 for whites, and smaller
amounts for more educated mothers; no
significant effects of fees on first trimester
prenatal care, but some effect on Kessner index
and no prenatal care measures among select
groups of mothers
Notes: 2SLS = Two‐stage Least Squares; BW = Birthweight (grams); DD = Difference in differences; GA = Gestational Age (weeks); IV = Instrumental Variables; LBW =
Low Birthweight (< 2500 grams); OLS = Ordinary Least Squares; Preterm birth = < 37 completed weeks GA; ppt = Percentage point; VLBW = Very Low Birthweight (<
1500 grams); WIC = The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children. Findings include estimates for prenatal care, followed by
estimates for prenatal smoking (in italics, and for comparative purposes) when available.

44

