                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE PERSISTENT EFFECT OF INITIAL SUCCESS:
                         EVIDENCE FROM VENTURE CAPITAL

                                         Ramana Nanda
                                         Sampsa Samila
                                         Olav Sorenson

                                       Working Paper 24887
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24887


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




We thank Shai Bernstein, Michael Ewens, Joan Farre-Mensa, Will Goetzmann, Arthur Korteweg,
Christos Makridis, Aksel Mjos, David Robinson, Antoinette Schoar, Chris Stanton, Joel
Waldfogel, Ayako Yasuda, and seminar participants at Aalto University, Boston University, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Copenhagen Business School, ESMT, ESSEC, IE, IESE,
London Business School, the National University of Singapore, the NBER Summer Institute, the
University of Luxembourg, the University of Minnesota, and the VATT Institute for Economic
Research for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Division of Research and Faculty Development at HBS, the Centre for
Law and Business at the National University of Singapore, and the Yale School of Management.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24887.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ramana Nanda, Sampsa Samila, and Olav Sorenson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Persistent Effect of Initial Success: Evidence from Venture Capital
Ramana Nanda, Sampsa Samila, and Olav Sorenson
NBER Working Paper No. 24887
August 2018
JEL No. G24,M13

                                            ABSTRACT

We use investment-level data to study performance persistence in venture capital (VC).
Consistent with prior studies, we find that each additional IPO among a VC firm's first ten
investments predicts as much as an 8% higher IPO rate on its subsequent investments, though this
effect erodes with time. In exploring its sources, we document several additional facts: successful
outcomes stem in large part from investing in the right places at the right times; VC firms do not
persist in their ability to choose the right places and times to invest; but early success does lead to
investing in later rounds and in larger syndicates. This pattern of results seems most consistent
with the idea that initial success improves access to deal flow. That preferential access raises the
quality of subsequent investments, perpetuating performance differences in initial investments.


Ramana Nanda                                       Olav Sorenson
Harvard Business School                            Yale School of Management
Rock Center 317                                    olav.sorenson@yale.edu
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

Sampsa Samila
IESE Business School
Av Pearson 21
08034 Barcelona
Spain
SSamila@iese.edu
                                 I.    Introduction

One of the distinctive features of private equity as an asset class has been long-term per-
sistence in the relative performance of private equity partnerships. Kaplan and Schoar
(2005), for example, found correlations of nearly 0.5 between the returns of one fund and

the next within a given private equity firm. Among venture capital (VC) funds, they report
even higher levels of persistence, with correlations approaching 0.7 (see also, Phalippou and
Gottschalg, 2009; Robinson and Sensoy, 2013; Harris et al., 2014; Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf,
2015; Korteweg and Sørensen, 2017). By contrast, persistence has been almost non-existent
among asset managers operating in the public equity markets, such as mutual funds and

hedge funds (for reviews, see Ferson, 2010; Wermers, 2011).

   The most common interpretation of this persistence has been that private equity fund
managers di↵er in their quality. Some managers, for example, may have a stronger ability
to distinguish better investments from worse ones. Or, they may di↵er in the degrees to
which they add value post-investment—for instance, by providing strategic advice to their

portfolio companies or by helping them to recruit able executives. Consistent with this
interpretation, even within venture capital partnerships, Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015)

reported large and persistent di↵erences in investment performance across the individual
partners of those funds.
   This inference of quality di↵erences across private equity investors, however, has been
only indirect. Although Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015) documented persistence at the
level of the individual partner, they did not attempt to decompose the sources of that

individual-level persistence. Fund-level studies, moreover, have had limited ability to account
for investment-level factors that influence performance. Persistence might, for example,
occur simply because managers focus their investments in particular regions and industries
(Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). If those segments di↵er in terms of their positions in long-run
cycles or in their levels of competition among private equity firms (e.g., Gompers and Lerner,

2000), then one could observe serial correlation due to inertia in the contexts in which firms

                                              2
invest rather than because some venture capitalists prove better than others at selecting,
monitoring or advising their portfolio companies.
   To gain greater insight into the sources of persistence, we shift the unit of analysis to the

individual investment, similar to Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015). But whereas they do so
to estimate persistence at the partner level, we do so, in large part, to decompose the extent
to which persistence stems from specific target companies versus from investing in particular
industries and regions at particular points in time. Examining persistence in performance
at the individual investment level also allows us to include all investors over an extended
period of time, as opposed to considering only the subset of firms and time periods for which

fund-level returns have been available.
   We focus our analysis on the venture capital segment of private equity for two reasons.
First, it has had the highest levels of performance persistence (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Har-
ris et al., 2014). Second, our shift in unit of analysis requires an investment-level performance

measure. Although information on investment-level – as opposed to fund-level – returns has
been available for select subsets of investors, one can determine for all startups whether they

went public or were acquired. Since these forms of investment exits produce nearly all of
the positive returns in venture capital (Cumming and MacIntosh, 2003; Cochrane, 2005),
the rates of these events within a particular VC fund correlate highly with fund returns
(Phalippou and Gottschalg, 2009).
   Consistent with prior studies of returns at the fund-level, we find high levels of perfor-

mance persistence at the investment-level across VC firms. For example, a 10 percentage
point higher IPO rate among a VC firm’s first ten investments – that is, one additional IPO
– predicts a more than 1.6 percentage point higher IPO rate for all subsequent investments
by that firm, relative to a VC firm with one fewer IPO among its first 10 investments. Given
that fewer than one in five investments in our sample resulted in an IPO, that amounts to

an 8% higher likelihood of a public o↵ering over the baseline.
   Year-state-industry-stage intercepts at the investment level absorb roughly half of this


                                               3
gross persistence. In other words, di↵erences in where, when, and how venture capital firms
invest account for much of the overall persistence in performance across VC firms. But even
among VC firms investing in the same stages in the same industries in the same states in the

same years, a 10 percentage point higher IPO rate among a VC firm’s first ten investments
predicts a roughly 4.3% higher IPO rate for the firm’s subsequent investments.
   The strength of this persistence in success rates nevertheless attenuates over time. Some
of this attenuation stems from attrition: VC firms with few IPOs or exits among their initial
investments presumably find it difficult to raise a subsequent fund (Kaplan and Schoar,
2005). Long-term convergence in performance across VC firms nevertheless accounts for

most of the attenuation. Using a number of di↵erent estimation techniques, our investment-
level results reveal that venture capital exhibits mean reversion, just as one finds in other
asset classes (for similar results at the fund level, see Harris et al., 2014).
   But performance di↵erences still persist for long periods of time, on the order of a decade

or more. What might account for that persistence? Analyzing performance at the invest-
ment level allows us to document a number of additional facts that provide insight into the

probable source of the persistence. Initial success, for example, appears to stem in large part
from investing in the right places at the right times. Indeed, our analyses reveal that the
average IPO and exit rates for all investments made by other VC firms in the same year-
state-industry-stage segments as the focal VC firm’s initial investments strongly predict the
observed success rates for the focal VC firm’s initial investments. Initial success therefore

stems not so much from idiosyncratic choices or from nurturing a set of companies but from
investing in the right places at the right times.
   Interestingly, initial success, itself, rather than some underlying characteristic of the VC
firms appears to account even for the apparent within-segment persistence. Regressions
using the average rates of success among other VC firms as an instrument for a focal VC

firm’s initial success – thereby purging the focal VC firm’s unobserved ability in choosing
and cultivating specific investments from the estimates – generated as large estimates of


                                                4
persistence as the naı̈ve linear regressions. Although venture capitalists add value to startups
through the provision of capital and through mentoring and monitoring (e.g., Hellmann and
Puri, 2002; Bernstein et al., 2016), di↵erences across venture capitalists in their ability to

select and nurture specific companies appears to play little if any role in accounting for
performance persistence.
   VC firms may nevertheless di↵er in their ability to select investments based not on identi-
fying specific promising startups but on spotting emerging trends and technologies. In other
words, VC firms may vary in their aptitude for choosing attractive segments. However, we
find no evidence that venture capitalists persist in their selection of attractive segments. VC

firms that had invested initially in attractive industries and regions often continue to do
so as those segments experience above-average exit rates for extended periods. But when
choosing industries and regions in which they had not previously invested, VC firms that
had enjoyed initial success displayed no better ability than those that had not in selecting

promising segments.
   Initial success does, however, lead to changes in how venture capitalists invest. VC firms

experiencing initial success invested more and in larger groups of investors. They became
more central in the co-investment network, allowing them to see a larger selection of deals
(Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). VC firms with higher levels of initial success also shifted their
investments away from the first round of financing, where assessing the potential of a startup
proves most difficult. Firms without access to syndicated rounds may need to focus more

on early stages to “get into” promising startups, while those with access have the luxury
of investing later, after some of the uncertainty surrounding the startup’s prospects has
been resolved. Adjusting for these di↵erences eliminates most of the remaining performance
persistence within a particular region, industry, investment stage, and year.
   This pattern of results appears most consistent with access to deal flow accounting for

performance persistence in venture capital. One of the unusual aspects of the asset class is
that venture capital operates to some extent as a two-sided market. O↵ering the best price


                                               5
or the first bid may not allow a venture capitalist to invest in a startup. Entrepreneurs often
have a choice of investors. Venture capitalists have a say in selecting their syndicate partners.
To the extent that entrepreneurs and other venture capitalists believe that VC firms di↵er in

their ability to add value to firms, they prefer partners perceived as more able. Hsu (2004),
in fact, found that entrepreneurs accept lower valuations and less attractive terms from more
prestigious VC firms when choosing between o↵ers. Prominent VC firms also gain access to
a wider and better range of investment opportunities through syndicate partners who want
to co-invest with them (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001; Hochberg et al., 2007).
   Despite their beliefs about the importance of these quality di↵erences, entrepreneurs and

other venture capitalists have little on which to base their assessments of VC firm quality
(Korteweg and Sørensen, 2017). Even ex post they cannot determine whether another VC
firm might have generated more value for a particular venture. In such situations, initial
di↵erences in success – even due to chance events – could lead others to perceive a venture

capitalist as higher quality, allowing that investor to access attractive deals. Even with no
unusual ability to select investments or to nurture them to success, matching with more

promising ventures improves the quality of a venture capitalist’s realized deals, thereby
perpetuating initial success.
   Our results connect to several strands of the finance literature. Most directly, they
advance the literature examining persistence in the performance of venture capital firms.
Our investment-level analyses suggest that initial success matters for the long-run success of

VC firms, but that these di↵erences attenuate over time and converge to a long-run average
across all VC firms. Although these early di↵erences in performance appear to depend on
being in the right place at the right time, they become self-reinforcing as entrepreneurs
and others interpret them as evidence of di↵erences in quality, giving successful VC firms
preferential access to and terms in investments. This fact may help to explain why persistence

has been documented in private equity but not among mutual funds or hedge funds, as firms
investing in public debt and equities need not compete for access to deals. It may also


                                               6
explain why persistence among buyout funds has declined as that industry has become more
competitive (Harris et al., 2014; Braun et al., 2017).
   Interestingly, even if persistence emerges from access advantages rather than from di↵er-

ences in ability, investors in the asset class – the limited partners – would still prefer to invest
in the historically-successful firms, especially in terms of performance net of the industries,
regions, and stages in which they invested. Persistence due to where venture capitalists
invest might simply reflect di↵erences in the underlying risks associated with the VC firms’
portfolios, the betas. But preferential access to deal flow could not only raise the expected
returns of funds but also reduce the uncertainty associated with them. Not surprisingly

then, VC firms that have enjoyed success in their earlier funds raise larger funds and raise
them more frequently (Gompers et al., 1998; Kaplan and Schoar, 2005).
   More broadly, our results contribute to a recent literature on how initial di↵erences, even
if largely due to exogenous events, can have long-lasting consequences. Oyer (2008), Kahn

(2010), Oreopoulos et al. (2012) and others, for example, have found that graduating during
a recession can lead individuals to pursue di↵erent career paths, with those entering the

labor market during these downturns never reaching the income trajectories of their peers
who entered during better economic times. Schoar and Zuo (forthcoming) have similarly
demonstrated that CEOs who began their careers in recessions lead smaller firms and manage
them more conservatively, in terms of investing less in capital expenditures and research and
development and in terms of more aggressively managing costs and avoiding taxes. Our

results point to a similar sort of long-term e↵ect associated with VC firms being in the right
place at the right time. In part, initial di↵erences in success lead VC firms to pursue di↵erent
investing paths, moving away from the first round and into larger, syndicated investments.
But in part, these initial di↵erences create beliefs about the ability of the venture capitalists
that become self-confirming as investors, entrepreneurs, and others act on them.




                                                 7
                                             II.      Data

We analyze data drawn from the VentureXpert database maintained by Thomson Reuters,
which includes round-level information on venture capital investments around the world.
VentureXpert has unique investor- and portfolio company-identifiers that allow us to trace

the outcomes of individual portfolio companies and to construct the entire investment histo-
ries of nearly all VC firms. Although no data source o↵ers complete coverage of all venture
investments, Kaplan and Lerner (2017) noted that VentureXpert has better coverage than
the primary alternatives at the level of individual investment rounds.1
       We limit our analysis to investments made between 1961 and 2008. Two factors dictated
our choice of starting year: On the one hand, since our core analysis correlates the success of

a VC firm’s initial investments with success in the same VC firm’s subsequent investments,
a later start date, such as 1980, would exclude several prominent investors, such as Kleiner-

Perkins and Sequoia (which began their investing before 1980). On the other hand, the
earliest information on investments might have been collected retrospectively and therefore
open to survival bias. Kaplan and Lerner (2017) reported that the firm that initiated the
VentureXpert survey and database, which Thomson Reuters later acquired, began collecting

information in 1961. Given that information prior to that year would have been collected

retrospectively, we exclude VC firms that began investing prior to 1961 from the analysis.2
We should note, however, that the results remain the same even if we restrict the sample to
only VC firms that began investing after 1980. (Table 3 also demonstrates that these results
remain robust over shorter sub-periods.)
       Our choice of ending year similarly balances the long time required for a venture to

achieve a successful exit with the smaller samples arising from earlier end dates. Although our
   1
     Although VentureXpert under reports the proportion of companies that have failed (leaving them coded
as ongoing concerns), this fact should not bias our results as we focus only on successful exits, through IPOs
and through trade sales.
   2
     The first documented VC firm, American Research and Development Corporation, began investing in
1946. However, since most of the prominent players in venture capital emerged in the 1970’s or later, this
restriction does not exclude any of the elite firms.



                                                      8
download of the data includes information through 2016, we limit the analysis to investments
made by 2008 so that we have sufficient time to observe whether those portfolio companies
went public or were acquired. That is, we include outcomes observed through 2016, for all

investments made in the 1961 to 2008 period.
       Within this date range, we restrict our focus to firms headquartered in and investing in
the United States. We also limit the analysis to firms involved in venture capital investing.
VentureXpert includes the entire spectrum of private equity firms, from early stage venture
investors to those engaged in leveraged buyouts (LBOs). As noted above, our focus on
performance at the investment level requires an investment-level performance measure. For

those engaged in venture capital investing, exits – whether through IPOs or through trade
sales – provide a good measure of investment-level performance. But for firms engaged
in other forms of investment, such as distressed debt and LBOs, these outcomes have less
relevance. We therefore limit the sample (i) to VC firms classified as private partnerships,

(ii) to funds classified as venture capital, and (iii) to investments in the four investment
stages related to venture capital (seed, early, expansion, and later).

       Because many follow-on investments – additional investments made by a VC firm in one
of its existing portfolio companies – occur almost de facto if the target company has another
investment round, we limit our analysis to the initial investments by particular VC firms in
specific startup companies.3 In other words, a portfolio company can appear in our sample
multiple times, once for each VC firm that invested in it. Any given VC firm will also appear
many times in our sample, once for each portfolio company in which it has invested. But,
if a VC firm invests in the same portfolio company across multiple rounds, only the first
investment by that VC firm – which might not represent the first round of investment in the
portfolio company – appears in our sample. This restriction also prevents us from counting
the same successful outcome more than once for any particular investor.
   3
    VC firms often invest in all subsequent rounds pro rata to their initial investment, in part to protect the
value of their equity position and in part because they become psychologically attached to their investments
(Guler, 2007).



                                                      9
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our sample. On average, 20% of the portfolio
companies in which VC firms had invested eventually went public (i.e. had an IPO) and
51% of the companies experienced either an IPO or a trade sale, allowing the VC firms

to “exit” their investments (i.e. sell their equity positions).4 These represent the two most
profitable outcomes for VC investors. Using hand-collected information on 246 investments
in Canada and the United States, for example, Cumming and MacIntosh (2003) reported
that investments that resulted in IPOs had average gross returns of more than 400% in the

United States while investments that ended in trade sales had average gross returns of 143%.5
By contrast, write-o↵s, the single most common outcome, generally resulted in a near total
loss of the original investment. Given the bimodal nature of these outcomes, it has become

common for researchers to treat IPOs and acquisitions (trade sales) as successful events and
all other outcomes as unsuccessful (e.g., Cochrane, 2005; Hochberg et al., 2007). Phalippou

and Gottschalg (2009), moreover, reported that the proportion of target companies that had
a successful exit in a fund has a very high correlation to the ratio of distributed funds to
funds paid in by the limited partners, a common measure of returns.



                                      III.       Persistence

A.       Investment-Level Persistence

We begin by documenting persistence in the performance of venture capital investors at
the investment level. Our approach involves assessing the strength of association between

the success of a VC firm’s prior investments to its success in subsequent investments. An
   4
     Note that successful startups attract more venture capital investors. Thus, while 14% of startups in
our sample experience an IPO and 43% have either an IPO or are acquired, the average investment has
higher rates of success. Those success rates still exceed those typically reported at the investment level. The
disparity emerges because VC firms with fewer than 11 portfolio companies – not included in our sample –
have lower IPO and exit rates than those with more than 10 portfolio companies.
   5
     Although one might worry that VC firms would attempt to embellish their apparent success by disguising
unsuccessful investments as acquisitions, Puri and Zarutskie (2012) found no evidence that VC firms pursued
such a strategy. Other exit events, such as a buy back by management, could also result in positive returns,
but they represent relatively rare outcomes.


                                                      10
alternative approach would treat performance persistence essentially as an invariant property
of the firm, similar to a firm-specific alpha. Korteweg and Sørensen (2017), for example,
decomposed performance persistence into that associated with the firm and that associated

with the period of the investment. Their approach has advantages for estimating the signal-
to-noise ratio in fund performance (and consequently in the extent to which investors may
have the ability to identify correctly better-performing firms). But their approach also has
a couple of disadvantages with respect to our interests. First, it essentially assumes that
firm-level advantages remain constant over time. Second, it does not allow one to explore
the sources of these firm-level di↵erences.

       Our core analysis estimates a series of linear probability models with fixed e↵ects:


                                                        i 10      i
                                  Yvi =    0   +   1 Ȳv       + ⌘ysjg + ✏vi ,                         (1)

where Yvi refers to the dichotomous outcome – either an IPO or any exit – of the investment

made by VC firm v in the ith startup company in which it invested. We report these results

in Table 2. Our main predictor of interest is Ȳvi         10
                                                                , the share of VC firm v’s ten investments
prior to its investment in startup i that resulted in the outcome Y . The choice of 10 prior

investments is somewhat arbitrary, but our results remain robust to using 3, 5, 7, 10, or 15
prior investments to measure past success.6 The ⌘ysjg
                                                 i
                                                      represents the fixed e↵ects included in
the regression related to the context of investment i. Our most stringent fixed e↵ects control
for the year⇥state⇥industry⇥stage of investment i, in other words, comparing VC firm v 0 s
investment in startup i to other investments in the same year-state-industry-stage segments
as the focal investment. We report standard errors clustered at both the level of the VC firm
and at the level of the startup company.7
       Column (1) of Table 2 shows a positive and statistically significant association between
the share of a VC firm’s prior 10 investments that succeeded and the probability that the
   6
     All of the results presented in Tables 2 through 11 remain robust to measuring success based on window
lengths from 3 to 15 investments.
   7
     We have repeated observations of the same startup company if more than one VC firm invested in it.


                                                      11
focal investment will succeed. Panel A, for example, reports that every additional IPO among
the previous ten investments – a 10 percentage point increase in the rate – corresponded to a
2.53 percentage point higher IPO rate for the next investment (about a 14% increase over the

baseline IPO rate). In other words, as with prior work, we find persistence in performance
across VC firms, even at the deal-level.
       Although this persistence appears lower than that found in prior studies based on returns
– Kaplan and Schoar (2005), for example, reported correlations of 0.69 (PME) and 0.57 (IRR)
between one VC fund and the next and Diller and Kaserer (2009) found similar levels of
persistence for funds investing in Europe – our estimations di↵er in at least three important

respects from those calculated in prior research. First, aggregation to the fund level probably
reduces the noisiness of the performance measures, resulting in larger correlations. Second,
our focus on initial investments in target companies means that any di↵erentials associated
with some VC firms “doubling down” more e↵ectively than others, or systematically being

better at abandoning worse performing investments, would not appear in our estimates.8
Third, despite sampling on only VC firms that invested in at least 11 companies, our sample
includes more than twice as many VC firms as any of these earlier studies, in part because

our sample covers a longer period, in part because the database has fewer missing values for
target company exits than for fund returns.9
       This simple serial correlation points to persistence in performance, but it might stem
from a variety of factors, some of which would have little to do with the ability or quality of
the venture capitalists. For example, returns and average IPO and exit rates might vary over
time, across industries and regions, and by investment stage. Sorenson and Stuart (2001,
   8
      Many practitioners see the ability to “pull the plug” as one of the most important di↵erences between
the best venture capitalists and the average ones. Consistent with this idea, Guler (2007) found that highly
regarded VC firms renewed their investments in companies at lower rates than others. This factor may
therefore account for some of the higher performance persistence in studies examining fund returns.
    9
      The VentureXpert data used both here and by Kaplan and Schoar (2005) have a much higher proportion
of missing data for fund returns than for the success of portfolio companies. If only the more successful funds
reported their returns, that could have led to an upward bias in the serial correlations reported by Kaplan
and Schoar (2005). Kaplan and Schoar (2005) nevertheless provided extensive evidence that any selection
in the reporting of returns appeared relatively uncorrelated with performance and therefore should not have
biased their estimates of persistence.


                                                      12
2008) found that VC firms had a strong tendency to invest in companies located close to
their offices, to focus on a narrow range of industries, and to invest in particular stages of
target company maturity, even after accounting for the supply of high-quality investments

available in any particular quarter. If returns and success rates do di↵er across industries,
regions, or investment stages, then persistence might emerge as an artifact of these consistent
investing styles rather than because some VC firms enjoy better performance for a particular
sort of investment. Examining success at the level of the individual investment allows us to
adjust for these potential di↵erences due to investing focus.10
       Column (2) of Table 2 reveals that a large share of the persistence observed in Column
(1) appears to stem from di↵erences in the kinds of investments made by firms. Column

(2) includes year⇥state⇥industry⇥stage intercepts. These fine-grained fixed e↵ects absorb
roughly half of the persistence observed in the models accounting only for vintage. Even after

adjusting for these fine-grained di↵erences in kinds of investments, however, the proportion
of IPOs (and of exits) in the previous ten investments by a VC firm still correlates strongly
with the success of its next investment.
       Columns (3) and (4) repeat the estimations in Columns (1) and (2) but with the addition

of VC-firm fixed e↵ects. Instead of comparing performance across firms, these regressions

therefore examine how the success of a specific VC firm’s prior 10 investments relate to the
success of its next one. Interestingly, the coefficients switch signs. For any given VC firm,
greater success in its prior 10 investments predicts a lower likelihood of success in its next
investment. In other words, while we find persistence in performance across VC firms, we

find evidence of mean-reversion in performance within VC firms. Although they did not
emphasize the importance of this result, Harris et al. (2014) similarly found regression to
the mean in fund-level returns when estimated with firm-level fixed e↵ects.
       Venture capital as an industry has evolved substantially over the past 60 years. Table
3 nevertheless reveals that these patterns have been fairly stable across the history of the
  10
    Kaplan and Schoar (2005) did adjust for industry and stage di↵erences but their focus on the fund as
the unit of analysis required them to allocate all investments within a fund to a single industry and stage.


                                                    13
industry. The columns estimate performance persistence across and within VC firms for
investments made before 1990, from 1985-1995, from 1990-2000, from 1995-2005, and from
2000-2008. Panels A and B report the results without VC fixed e↵ects while Panels C and

D present them with them. Looking across the columns, one can see that the pattern of
performance persistence across VC firms but mean reversion within VC firms has been highly
consistent over time.
   The results in Tables 2 and 3 document that mean reversion exists, but they do not
necessarily imply that di↵erences in the performance across VC firms erode to zero over
time. Mean reversion to di↵erent intercepts would also be consistent with the results in

Tables 2 and 3. To test this possibility more explicitly, Table 4 shifts to examining how
the success of the initial 10 investments by VC firms relates to performance di↵erences in
the subsequent investments of those firms. We again estimate Equation (1), but replace our
key explanatory variable – the share of successful outcomes in the previous 10 investments

– with the share of successful outcomes in the initial 10 investments:


                                                    10      i
                               Yvi =   0   +   1 Ȳv     + ⌘ysjg + ✏vi ,               (2)

Note that our key explanatory variable, Ȳv10 now remains constant across all investments

by a particular VC firm. We therefore can no longer include VC-firm fixed e↵ects. This

approach nevertheless has the benefit of allowing us to study the duration of performance
persistence in a more transparent manner.
   Column (1) of Table 4 reports the results from regressions that only include year fixed
e↵ects. The coefficients are statistically significant and economically meaningful. Panel
A indicates that every additional IPO among the first ten investments – a 10 percentage
point increase in the rate – corresponded to a 1.5 percentage point higher IPO rate among
all subsequent investments, an 8% di↵erence relative to the average IPO rate. Similarly,

Panel B implies that every additional exit among the same ten investments predicts a 1.8
percentage point higher exit rate (a 3.6% di↵erence relative to the average). Column (2)

                                                 14
adds year⇥state⇥industry⇥stage fixed e↵ects. Even after adjusting for these fine-grained
di↵erences in kinds of investments, however, the proportion of IPOs (or exits) in the first ten
investments by a VC firm still correlates strongly with the success of that firm’s subsequent

investments. Column (2) of Panel A, for example, implies that every additional IPO among
the first ten investments predicts a 0.8 percentage point higher IPO rate among all subsequent
investments, a 4.2% increase over the average IPO rate.


B.     Time Path of Persistence

Columns (3)-(5) of Table 4 investigate the duration of this persistence. Column (3) examines
the 11th to the 30th target companies financed by a VC firm, Column (4) the 31st to the

60th companies, and Column (5) the 61st to the 100th companies. As with Column (2),
all of the models incorporate year⇥state⇥industry⇥stage fixed e↵ects. Panel A reports the
results for IPOs only and Panel B for all exits. The estimates consistently reveal a decline

with experience in the extent to which success in the first ten investments predicted success
in subsequent investments. The point estimates suggest little, if any, persistence beyond the

60th portfolio company, implying long-term convergence to a common mean.
     Selection o↵ers one potential explanation for this attenuation. In other words, perhaps
those with less success in their initial investments found it difficult to raise subsequent funds
and therefore left the sample. In Table 5, we therefore re-estimate the results from Table 4
for the sub-sample of VC firms with investments in at least 31 target companies. Comparing
the results from Table 4 to those in Table 5 suggests that selection does account for some

of the attenuation. The sample of VC firms that survived long enough to invest in at least
31 companies exhibits slightly lower levels of persistence than the full sample. But even

among this subsample – which corresponds to roughly the top quartile of all VC firms in
the VentureXpert data (in terms of number of startups backed), initial success predicts
continuing success through the 11th to 60th target companies backed but then performance
persistence falls precipitously. Convergence in performance across firms therefore appears


                                               15
more important than selection to producing the attenuation in persistence.
   This convergence might also reflect learning, where those with the worst performance
improve with experience. Kempf et al. (2014), for example, found that learning-by-doing

appears to occur even among mutual fund managers investing in public equities. Within the
venture capital industry, Sørensen (2007) used the number of investments that a VC firm had
made as a proxy for its quality and found positive associations between this experience and
the rates at which portfolio companies had successful exits. With learning, initial success
might stem from some venture capitalists having a head-start in their understanding of how
to operate but less successful firms would eventually catch up if they survived long enough

to improve their investing.
   To assess this possibility, Table 6 reports estimates of the relationship between the cu-
mulative (logged) number of investments made by a VC firm prior to a focal investment
and the success of that investment, in terms of the probability of an IPO (Panel A) and

the probability of exit (Panel B). In Column (1), both panels show positive relationships
between cumulative investing experience and expected success. In Panel A, for example, a

doubling in experience corresponds to a 0.6 percentage point increase in the rate of IPOs
associated with future investments, a 3% rise over the base rate. To account for the e↵ects of
selection on the population of VC firms, the second column introduces VC firm fixed e↵ects,
which again flips the sign of the coefficient: success rates appear to decline with experience.
   Column (3) reports mixed models, where we allow each individual VC firm to have a

di↵erent learning rate as well as a di↵erent base level of success. In other words, we allow
these variables to have random coefficients. The base level of success refers to the intercept—
that is, the expected performance for VC firms with no investing experience. It therefore
e↵ectively captures initial performance di↵erences. In these mixed models, experience, on
average, has an estimated coefficient close to zero. But it varies substantially across firms

(see the standard deviation of the estimated experience coefficient), meaning that many
VC firms do better with investing experience and many others do worse. Interestingly, the


                                              16
correlation between these estimated firm-specific learning coefficients and those of the firm-
specific intercepts ranges from   0.9 to   0.94 across the various models, meaning that the
firms with the highest initial performance declined the most over time while those with the

lowest initial performance improved the most.
   Consistent with the results in Tables 2 and 3, this decline in performance for those who
had high initial success and improvement in performance for those who had lower initial
success points to a mean-reverting process. Figure 1, in fact, reveals that mean reversion
appears even in the unadjusted data. Each dot on this plot represents the entire history of
one VC firm in our sample. The x-axis depicts the total number of startups that the VC firm

backed during our sample period, while the y-axis reports the proportion of those startup
companies that had either an IPO (upper panel) or any exit (lower panel). Apart from one
or two outliers, the graph illustrates strong convergence to the mean: VC firms with larger
numbers of investments converge to the industry average success rate.



                       IV.        Sources of Persistence

Despite the convergence in performance over time, VC firms that enjoyed higher initial
success continued to see higher subsequent success until they invested in more than 60

companies. Since the average fund in our sample invests in about 18 portfolio companies
(median = 12), our results imply that the advantages of success in the first fund persist well

into the third or fourth fund.
   We explored three potential mechanisms that might account for this persistence. (1) VC
firms may di↵er in their ability to select promising startups or promising sectors. (2) Even
if they do not di↵er in their ability to select the right investments, some venture capitalists

may prove better than others at monitoring their portfolio companies and at mentoring
founding teams to success. (3) Even if VC firms do not di↵er meaningfully in their ability to
select startups or to mentor and monitor portfolio companies, some venture capitalists may



                                              17
have preferential access to deals, allowing them to invest in the most attractive startups and
potentially to gain better terms in those deals.


Selection: Venture capitalists spend a great deal of time screening and doing due diligence
on potential investments, trying to understand which ones have the greatest potential for
growth and profit. These e↵orts appear e↵ective: Research, for example, has found that VC-
backed firms patent at higher rates, operate more efficiently, grow faster, survive longer, and
more commonly experience profitable exits than seemingly similar firms that did not receive

venture capital financing (Hellmann and Puri, 2000; Engel and Keilbach, 2007; Chemmanur,
2010; Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). Some of these di↵erences may reflect value added by the
venture capitalist but some of it likely stems from the e↵ective selection of promising startups

(Gompers et al., 2016). VC firms, moreover, may vary in this selection ability.


Monitoring: A substantial body of research also suggests that VC firms add value post-

investment to their portfolio companies in a variety of ways. Hellmann and Puri (2002),
for example, found that companies that received investments from VC firms adopted more
professional management practices earlier in their lives. Bottazzi et al. (2008) reported that

more active VC firms appeared to increase the odds of a successful exit more than less active
ones. Bernstein et al. (2016), meanwhile, found that, when VC firms could monitor and
advise their portfolio companies more closely, those companies went public at higher rates.

Given the numerous ways in which VC firms can add value post-investment, it would not
seem surprising if some VC firms proved better at these activities than others.


Access: A third factor involves preferential access to deal flow. Venture capitalists select

portfolio companies but entrepreneurs often also have a choice of investors. The venture
capitalists already invested in a startup, moreover, have substantial influence over who gets
invited to invest in subsequent investment rounds for a promising prospect (Sorenson and
Stuart, 2008). When startups have multiple suitors, venture capitalists with better reputa-


                                              18
tions will more likely win a deal when they bid the same price. In fact, entrepreneurs often
prefer them even when they o↵er a lower price (Hsu, 2004). Presumably, the entrepreneurs
and existing investors believe it in their own interest to bring prominent venture capitalists

into the deal, either because they believe that these investors have acumen or connections
that could increase the value of the startup or because they believe that an investment from
a prominent investor will signal to others the quality of the startup (Cong and Xiao, 2017).


     We investigate these mechanisms in three steps. We begin by considering whether per-
formance persistence stems from the better performance of the specific targets selected by

successful VC firms, which could arise either because these firms can better select promising
investments or because they can advise them more ably. We then explore whether some VC
firms appear better able to select the right industries, regions, or times to invest. Finally,
we examine the relationship between initial success and a variety of variables measuring

investment behavior that should relate to access to deal flow.


A.     Target-Specific Persistence

Before delving into the additional analyses, note that the patterns reported in Section III
already suggest that di↵erences in the ability to select specific startups or in the ability

to mentor and monitor them to success may not matter much in producing performance
persistence. The value of these activities should only accrue to the specific companies in
which a venture capital firm actually invests. One might also expect these abilities either
to remain relatively stable over time or perhaps to improve with experience. But neither of
those patterns play out in data. Where and when VC firms invest accounts for more than
half of the overall persistence. And, rather than improving with experience, VC firms exhibit
mean reversion.

     One of the difficulties inherent in trying to determine whether di↵erences in ability might
account for performance persistence stems from the fact that one cannot readily assess


                                               19
investor ability independently from their investments. In examining this possibility further,
we therefore took an indirect approach, estimating the extent to which one could predict
early success on the basis of the average success of other investors in the same sorts of

investments, and whether that average success for a particular kind of investment, in turn,
predicted persistence in investment success.
   To see why this approach gives us insight into this question, note that if some venture
capital firms simply have a better ability to choose more promising companies or to nurture
them to successful exits, then they should succeed at higher rates than their peers investing
in similar sorts of companies. But if common segment-specific factors account for initial

success, then the performance of any particular VC firm should correlate highly with that
of other VC firms investing in the same industries, regions, and stages at the same times.
   We therefore shift to using the success of peers investing in the same year-state-industry-
stage segments as the focal VC firm did in its initial 10 investments as the key explanatory

variable. This shift should eliminate from the persistence estimates the e↵ects of any initial
success that stems from the focal VC firm’s ability to select or nurture specific startups. We

estimated:


                                                   10      i
                               Yvi =   0   +   1 Ȳ v   + ⌘ysjg + ✏vi ,                    (3)

where, as above, Yvi refers to the dichotomous outcome – either an IPO or any exit – of the

investment made by VC firm v in the ith startup company in which it invested. Our main

variable of interest, Ȳ 10v now refers to the mean outcome of all other startup companies that
received venture capital investments in the same year-state-industry-stage segments as the
focal VC firm’s first ten investments, but that did not include the focal VC as an investor.
            i
As before, ⌘ysjg represents the fixed e↵ects related to the focal investment by VC v in startup
i. In other words, Equation 3 estimates the same model as Equation 2, but where we replace
the share of the focal VC firm’s initial investments that resulted in an IPO or acquisition
with the share of all other investments in the same cells (not backed by the focal VC firm).

                                                 20
      Table 7a reports the results of these models. The results in both Panel A and Panel B
reveal strong positive correlations between the success of the focal investment and the average
success experienced by other VC firms in these segments. The magnitudes imply that a VC

firm whose initial 10 investments occurred in segments with a 10 percentage point higher
IPO rate of other startups (not backed by that VC) had a 4% higher chance of an IPO for
all its subsequent investments, after controlling for the fine-grained fixed e↵ects of the year-
state-industry-stage segments for each of its subsequent investments. Given the similarity
of this magnitude to that seen in Table 4, our results suggest that the early success of VC
firms depends almost entirely on having been “in the right place at the right time”—that is,

investing in industries and in regions that did particularly well in a given year. Moreover, the
results in Table 7A document the same decline in persistence over subsequent investments
as seen in Table 4.
      Table 7b reports a parallel set of models but where we use the success of other startups

– those not funded by the focal VC firms but in the same initial segments in which the focal
VC firms invested – as an instrument for the initial success of the VC firm.11 The first stage
of this instrumental variable regression is:



                                         Ȳv10 =   0   +        10
                                                            1 Ȳ v   + ⇠v ,                             (4)

where Ȳv10 denotes the share of VC firm v’s first ten investments that resulted in the outcome

in question, either an IPO or any exit, and Ȳ 10v refers to the mean outcome of all other startup
companies that received venture capital investments in the same year-state-industry-stage
segments as the focal VC firm’s first ten investments. The coefficient               1   therefore captures
initial success driven not by the focal firm’s choices and activities but by factors common to
the contexts in which the VC firm has been investing.
      The first stages reveal a strong positive partial correlation between the success of the
focal investor and that of other VC firms who invested in the same fine-grained year-state-
 11
      Table 7a, in other words, provides the reduced form version of the IV estimation in Table 7b.


                                                       21
industry-stage segments, on the order of 0.5.12 The instrumented results reveal patterns
consistent with, though larger in magnitude than, those in Table 7a.13 The fact that the IV
regression can account for all of the within-segment persistence suggests that initial success
itself – due to investing initially in the right places at the right times – explains even the
di↵erences in subsequent success across VC firms within particular industries and regions.

       In our IV strategy, the exclusion restriction requires that, after controlling for these
                        i
stringent fixed e↵ects ⌘ysjg , the average success of other portfolio companies in the same
segments as the focal VC firm’s initial investments does not influence the success of the focal
VC firm’s subsequent investments, except through the e↵ect that the success predicted by it

has on the focal VC firm – for example, by enhancing the focal VC firm’s reputation (which

might, in turn, have advantages in terms of preferential access to deals). The fine-grained
fixed e↵ects should address most concerns regarding the exclusion restriction but one might
still worry that some residual correlations could arise: For example, perhaps high quality
VC firms have a tendency, in their initial investments, to cluster in certain segments.

       Figure 2 explores the extent to which the IV result depends sensitively on the exclusion

restriction. To determine whether a small-to-modest violation of this exclusion restriction
would threaten this result, we implemented the “local-to-zero” (LTZ) approach, proposed
by Conley et al. (2012). In essence, the exclusion restriction assumes that the coefficient for
the instrument in the second stage has a value of zero ( = 0). The LTZ method relaxes this

assumption by allowing one to treat             as though it comes from a distribution ( ⇠ U (0, )).
To establish a range of values for , it seems reasonable to assume that the coefficient
for the instrument in the second-stage regression should not exceed that obtained in the
reduced form regression. In other words, adding the endogenous variable should not increase
  12
     The Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F -statistic (Kleibergen and Paap, 2006) assesses the strength of the first
stage. It has the benefit of being robust to non-i.i.d. errors and thus suitable for clustered standard errors (as
used here). Across all of the regressions except one, this F -statistic has a value higher than the benchmark
of roughly 16 for the instrument to have sufficient strength to eliminate at least 90% of the bias in the naı̈ve
regressions (Stock and Yogo, 2005).
  13
     The IV regression may yield larger magnitude results because it reduces downward bias due to measure-
ment error.



                                                       22
the coefficient of the instrument, given that the instrument, the endogenous variable, and
the dependent variable all have positive pairwise correlations. Given that the coefficients for
the instrument in the reduced form estimations range from 0.10 to 0.11 (see Table 7A), we

explore values for   up to 0.12. Even at quite high values of                 – cases that would involve
substantial violations of the exclusion restriction – the IV produces point estimates equal
to or larger than the OLS estimates (the red dot-dash lines). This result therefore does not
appear sensitive to potential violations of the exclusion restriction.


B.     Segment Selection

The analysis above runs counter to the view that some VC firms have a better ability to
select specific companies or have more aptitude in cultivating their success (even if venture

capitalists on average play an important role in selecting and governing startups). VC firms
may nevertheless di↵er in their ability to select investments at a more macro level. Perhaps
some venture capitalists can foresee the industries and regions about to emerge as hotspots.

If so, then being in the right place at the right time may depend not just on chance but also
on the ability to anticipate these emerging trends.

     We explored this issue by examining whether VC firms exhibited persistence in choosing
attractive segments. We measured the attractiveness of a year-state-industry-stage segment
as above (in defining the instrumental variable); that is, for each investment, we calculated

the attractiveness of the segment as the average IPO rate (or exit rate) experienced by all
startup companies in the same year-state-industry-stage receiving an investment from an-
other VC firm. We regressed this measure of segment attractiveness on the average segment
attractiveness of the first ten investments in which the VC firm invested. We estimated:


                                Ȳ i v =   0   +       10
                                                   1 Ȳ v   +   y   + ⇠vi ,                          (5)

where Ȳ i v represents the attractiveness of the year-state-industry-stage segment in which



                                                   23
the VC firm v invested in startup company i and Ȳ 10v denotes the average attractiveness of
the segments of the first ten investments made by VC firm v. The                     y   specify fixed e↵ects
for the year in which VC firm v made the investment in startup company i.
       Table 8 reports the results of these models. Panel A treats only IPOs as a successful
outcome while Panel B includes all exits. The first column examines the extent to which

VC firms continue to invest in attractive segments when they invest in the same segments
as they had initially invested (i.e. when they invest in companies in the same industries,
regions, and stages as their first 10 portfolio companies). The coefficient suggests a fairly
high degree of persistence. But note that this estimate essentially captures serial correlation

in the performance of particular segments. Given that the segment fixed e↵ects absorb such

a large proportion of the raw persistence (in Tables 2 and 4), one would probably expect
some persistence in the performance of particular segments.
       That persistence, however, might stem from factors that all investors could easily spot
(Gompers and Lerner, 2000). It took little special insight, for example, to understand that

Internet-related businesses seemed a good place to invest in the late-1990’s. To assess whether
persistence in the performance of sectors might stem from factors that all VC firms could

observe, Column (2) introduces a number of control variables to account for these factors.14
Their inclusion reduces the serial correlation in continuing to invest in attractive segments
by more than half.

       But even that persistence in investing in attractive segments could stem from inertia in
where venture capitalists invest combined with serial correlation in the performance of those
segments. It does not point to an ability to spot trends in those segments. Columns (3)-(7)

therefore examine only cases in which the VC firm invested in state-industry-stages in which
  14
     These models adjust for the popularity of the segment with nine measures: (i) the count of startup
companies, in the segment, in which the focal VC firm did not invest; (ii) the average number of VC firms
investing per round in these other startups; (iii) the average size, in 2017 dollars, of VC investments in them;
(iv) the average number of rounds these other startups had received; (v) the number of central VC firms
investing in these startups; (vi) IPOs and (vii) acquisitions in the same state-industry segment among startup
companies that received their last investment in the previous five years; and (viii) IPOs and (ix) acquisitions
in the same industry among startup companies that received their last investment in the previous five years.



                                                      24
it had not invested in its first ten investments. In other words, did VC firms that invested
in attractive segments in their initial investments appear able to select attractive segments
in the future? In Column (3), even without accounting for observable factors that might

signal the attractiveness of a segment, VC firms demonstrated no consistent ability to choose
attractive segments. After adjusting for these factors in Column (4), moreover, the point
estimates for persistence in selecting sectors end up being close to zero.


C.     Investing Behavior

We turn finally to examining preferential access to deal flow. The difficulty with examining
this potential mechanism stems from the fact that our data do not allow us to see who had

the opportunity to invest in a particular target company or who would have liked to have
invested but who could not get into the deal. We therefore explored how the characteristics
of later investments correlated with initial success, controlling for the characteristics of the

initial investments. In other words, we examined how VC firms changed in their investing
behavior in response to initial success.

     We have one observation per later investment (i.e. the 11th and subsequent target com-
panies). The dependent variables reflect the characteristics of those investments or of the
VC firm at the time of that investment – round of the investment, the syndication of the
investment, the amount of the investment, and the centrality of the focal VC firm in the
syndication network – and the level of initial success enjoyed by the VC firm again serves as
the primary explanatory variable of interest. We estimated:


                                                  10
                             Cvi =   0   +   1 Ȳv     + C̄v10 +       y   + ✏vi ,                     (6)


where Cvi refers to the characteristic of interest for VC firm v at the time of the investment
in target company i, C̄v10 denotes the average value of the characteristic in question across
the first ten investments made by the VC firm v, and               y   represents fixed e↵ects for the year


                                                  25
of the investment.
       Table 9 first considers the probability of investing as part of a syndicate and the average
size of those syndicates. Columns (1) and (2) examine whether the investment round involved

more than one investor. Initial success appeared to lead to more syndicated investments.
Each additional initial exit corresponded to a 0.9 to 1 percentage point increase in the
probability of syndication. Given the roughly 12% baseline probability of a solo investment,
this e↵ect amounts to a 7% to 8% decline in the probability of a solo investment for each
initial exit. Columns (3) and (4) then explore whether initial success also corresponded to
investing in larger syndicates. It did, with each additional initial exit predicting a roughly

4% increase in the number of co-investors in subsequent investment rounds. Columns (5)
and (6) finally consider whether initial success led to firms becoming more central in the
co-investment network.15 These models reveal the largest correlates of initial success, with a
10 percentage point higher success rate among the initial five or ten investments predicting

an 8% to 14% increase in centrality. We should note that all of these changes hold in
models where we instrument initial success using the same instrument as in Table 7b. These
changes therefore appear to stem from initial success itself rather than from unobserved

factors related to both early success and investing strategies.
       Table 10 considers the investment round and investment size of the VC firm’s initial

investments in companies. As a startup matures, more information becomes available about
its chances of success. Investors can therefore more easily discriminate the wheat from the
cha↵, the companies with the highest potential from the also-rans. Columns (1) and (2)

consider only whether the first investment by the focal VC firm occurred in the first round
of investing in the target company (by any venture investor). All of the models suggest
that VC firms reduced the proportion of investments made in the first round in response to
initial success. Each additional initial exit predicted a 0.7 to 0.8 percentage point drop in
  15
     We use the standard eigenvector centrality measure pioneered by Bonacich (1987)—this measures weights
the sum of connections a VC firm has with other firms according to the centrality of those VC firms. Not
only has prior research on the industry generally used eigenvector centrality (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001) but
this centrality measure appears most strongly associated with fund performance (Hochberg et al., 2007).


                                                     26
the probability of a first round investment. Columns (3) and (4), then, consider whether
initial success led to larger investments.16 Initial success predicted larger future investments,
with each additional initial exit corresponding to a 5.6% increase in the amount invested per
syndicate participant.
       But do these changes in investing behavior account for performance persistence? Table

11 examines the extent to which the positive long-term e↵ects of performance associated
with initial success depend on these mechanisms, by adjusting for them in our persistence
models. Panel A reports the results for only IPOs while Panel B considers both IPOs and
trade sales as successful forms of exit. Overall, these changes appear to account for 57%

to 74% of the persistence remaining after adjusting for investing focus (i.e. after including

the YSIG fixed e↵ects). Access to deal flow therefore would appear to explain most of the
residual persistence in performance.



                                     V.       Discussion

To understand better what channels might account for persistence in the performance of
venture capital firms, we examine how the performance of VC firms’ investments – in terms

of having successful exits, either through IPOs or trade sales – depend on their initial success.
Although the performance of VC firms converges with increasing numbers of investments,

we find that initial success predicts future success for as many as 50 subsequent investments.
We find that both initial and future success depend in large part on being in the right places
at the right times but also that VC firms do not appear to persist in their ability to select
those attractive segments. We further find that di↵erences in the selection or nurturing of
specific portfolio companies appear to contribute little to explaining this persistence. VC

firms enjoying early success did, however, shift their investments to later stages and to
syndicated investments. Initial success also allowed these firms to move into more central
  16
     VentureXpert only records the total amount invested in a round and the number of investors in the
round but not how much each individual participant invested. We therefore can only estimate the average
size of these investments.

                                                  27
positions in the co-investment network.
   The picture that emerges then is one where initial success gives the firms enjoying it
preferential access to deals. Both entrepreneurs and other VC firms want to partner with

them. VC firms therefore get to see more deals, particularly in later stages, when it becomes
easier to predict which companies might have successful outcomes. Even if venture capitalists
do not di↵er in their abilities to identify more promising ventures (but they all have some
ability to distinguish the entrepreneurs and startups with better odds of success), the access
channel could perpetuate di↵erences in initial success over extended periods of time.
   Although this conclusion may seem at odds with the usual interpretation of persistence in

the finance literature, it seems consistent with the perspectives o↵ered by many practitioners.
Chris Dixon, a prominent partner at Andreessen Horowitz (a16z), for example, notes that:
“The popular view of venture investing is that it is about picking good companies, because
that’s what’s important with public equities. But you can’t apply the logic of public equity

markets, where by definition anyone can invest in any stock. Success in VC is probably 10%
about picking, and 90% about sourcing the right deals and having entrepreneurs choose your

firm as a partner.” (Eisenmann and Kind, 2014, p. 8)
   An open question concerns whether these access advantages accrue at the level of the
VC firm or the level of the individual venture capitalist. Although our data do not include
information on which partners led these deals, Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf (2015) provided
convincing evidence that most of the persistence in performance occurred at the level of

individual rather than the level of the VC firm. Given the importance that entrepreneurs
often place on having board representation from specific partners at these firms and the fact
that the underlying social relationships in the venture capital community connect individuals
rather than firms, partners within VC firms probably vary considerably in their personal
access to deal flow. They probably also carry these access advantages with them if they

move to another VC firm or decide to start their own funds. That movement of individuals
across firms therefore may contribute to the dissipation of persistence over time (Ewens


                                              28
and Rhodes-Kropf, 2015). It also means that some VC firms, those founded by partners
with strong existing reputations in the industry, may enter with access advantages, thereby
contributing to the initial success of these funds in an almost self-confirming prophecy.

   Although our results suggest that VC firms do not di↵er in their relative ability to select
and govern startups, they do not imply that VC firms do not create value on average. Our
findings seem entirely consistent with the long literature documenting the many ways in
which VC firms can increase the value of the firms in which they invest. We would also
note that our analysis cannot say anything about whether ability or access to deal flow
might drive performance persistence on the intensive margin of returns. Some investors, for

example, might become good at experimentation—investing in a large number of firms and
doubling down or abandoning investments in a way that leads to better overall returns.
   Our results also seem relevant to the debate on the extent to which the horse (the business
idea) or the jockey (the team) contributes to the success of a venture. Kaplan et al. (2009),

studying the evolution of fifty firms from business plans to successful exits, found that the
business ideas remained relatively stable even though the management teams did not. They

therefore argued that investors should place more weight on the business idea than on the
management team. Our results would appear to add some additional weight to this horse
side of the scale. To the extent that performance, in large part, depends on investing in the
right industries and regions at the right times, it has less to do with the specific venture –
and therefore with any particular team – and more to do with a particular investing space

(the business).
   But jockeys may still matter. Note that the importance of the access channel to perfor-
mance depends on the idea that many investors can see that these companies have strong
chances of success. What signals or creates that potential remains an open question. In-
vestors – surprisingly, given the apparent importance of the business idea to success – appear

to weight teams more heavily than business ideas when choosing early-stage investments
(Gompers et al., 2016; Berstein et al., 2017). Perhaps the characteristics of founding teams


                                             29
account for that potential success that many investors can see. If so, it could help to explain
both why so many investors focus on founding teams in their choices and on why access
would matter to gaining entry into those promising deals.

   The importance of access to deals for performance in venture capital could also help
to explain why persistence appears in venture capital but not in most other asset classes,
such as mutual funds and hedge funds. For investors primarily purchasing and selling public
securities, access depends only on price. When multiple firms perceive an opportunity they
therefore compete away the returns associated with it. But, in venture capital, access often
depends on more than price. It operates as a two-sided market. Because entrepreneurs and

other investors believe that they might benefit from affiliating with prominent investors –
who they believe have the ability to create more value for them – they willingly accept lower
prices from these individuals and firms, allowing them to earn rents on their reputations.
   Because this mechanism depends to some extent on the idea that the supply of capital

exceeds the demand for it, at least for deals with less uncertainty, it also implies that the
returns to past success – and the prestige associated with it – should become more pro-

nounced during periods when venture capital becomes plentiful. Indeed, consistent with this
expectation, Shi et al. (2017), exploring the temporal sensitivity of the results in Hochberg
et al. (2007), found that VC firms central in the co-investment network only enjoyed greater
success during booms. During busts, central firms performed no better than more peripheral
ones.

   Even though these di↵erences do not emerge from heterogeneity in the abilities of VC
firms, investors in venture capital, limited partners, can potentially still invest in them to
earn excess returns. Whether they can do so, however, depends in large part on whether
investors have enough information about the performance of previous funds at the time that
they must decide whether to invest in future ones. Phalippou (2010), for example, notes

that a large share of the correlation in returns across funds stems from investments made
within only a few years of one another, when the outcomes of the earlier ones would not


                                              30
necessarily have yet been realized. Our results, nevertheless, suggest that at least a small
portion of the performance persistence associated with early success lasts long enough for
investors to react to it—if only they could discern the signal from the noise (Korteweg and

Sørensen, 2017).



                                 REFERENCES

Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard Townsend, 2016, The impact of venture capital
  monitoring, Journal of Finance 71, 1591–1622.

Berstein, Shai, Arthur Korteweg, and Kevin Laws, 2017, Attracting early stage investors:
  Evidence from a randomized field experiment, Journal of Finance 72, 509–538.

Bonacich, Phillip, 1987, Power and centrality - a family of measures, American Journal of
  Sociology 92, 1170–1182.

Bottazzi, Laura, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas Hellmann, 2008, Who are the active investors?
  Evidence from venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 488–512.

Braun, Reiner, Tim Jenkinson, and Ingo Sto↵, 2017, How persistent is private equity per-
  formance? Evidence from deal-level data, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 273–291.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., 2010, How does venture capital financing improve efficiency in
  private firms? A look beneath the surface, Review of Financial Studies 24, 4037–4090.

Cochrane, John H, 2005, The risk and return of venture capital, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 75, 3–52.

Cong, Lin William, and Yizhou Xiao, 2017, Persistent blessings of luck, Working paper,
  University of Chicago.

Conley, Timothy G., Christian B. Hansen, and Peter E. Rossi, 2012, Plausibly exogenous,
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 260–272.

                                            31
Cumming, Douglas J, and Je↵rey G MacIntosh, 2003, A cross-country comparison of full
  and partial venture capital exits, Journal of Banking and Finance 27, 511–548.

Diller, Christian, and Christoph Kaserer, 2009, What drives private equity returns? – Fund
  inflows, skilled GPs, and/or risk?, European Financial Management 15, 643–675.

Eisenmann, Thomas, and Liz Kind, 2014, Andeessen horowitz, Case 9-814-060.

Engel, Dirk, and Max Keilbach, 2007, Firm-level implications of early stage venture capital
  investment - an empirical investigation, Journal of Empirical Finance 14, 150–167.

Ewens, Michael, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2015, Is a VC partnership greater than the

  sum of its partners?, Journal of Finance 70, 1081–1113.

Ferson, Wayne, 2010, Investment performance evaluation, Annual Review of Financial Eco-

  nomics 2, 207–234.

Gompers, Paul, Will Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2016, How do

  venture capitalists make decisions?, NBER Working Paper No. 22587.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows
  on private equity valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 281–325.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, Margaret M. Blair, and Thomas Hellmann, 1998, What drives
  venture capital fundraising?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 149–204.

Guler, Isin, 2007, Throwing good money after bad? Political and institutional influences

  on sequential decision making in the venture capital industry, Administrative Science
  Quarterly 52, 248–285.

Harris, Robert S, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N Kaplan, and Ruediger Stucke, 2014, Has per-
  sistence persisted in private equity? Evidence from buyout and venture capital funds,
  Working Paper, University of Virginia.


                                            32
Hellmann, Thomas F., and Manju Puri, 2000, The interaction between product market and
  financing strategy: The role of venture capital, Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–984.

Hellmann, Thomas F., and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of
  start-up firms: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169–197.

Hochberg, Yael V, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, Whom you know matters:
  Venture capital networks and investment performance, Journal of Finance 62, 251–301.

Hsu, David H, 2004, What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?, Journal of
  Finance 59, 1805–1844.

Kahn, Lisa B., 2010, The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college
  in a bad economy, Labour Economics 17, 303–316.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Josh Lerner, 2017, Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
  Knowledge and Challenges, chapter Venture capital data: Opportunities and challenges
  (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns,
  persistence, and capital flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.

Kaplan, Steven N., Berk Sensoy, and Per Stromberg, 2009, Should investors bet on the
  jockey or the horse? evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to
  public companies, Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.

Kempf, Elisabeth, Alberto Manconi, and Oliver Spalt, 2014, Learning by doing: The value
  of experience and the origins of skill for mutual fund managers, Working paper, Tilburg
  University.

Kleibergen, Frank, and Richard Paap, 2006, Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular
  value decomposition, Journal of Econometrics 133, 97–126.



                                            33
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sørensen, 2017, Skill and luck in private equity performance,
  Journal of Financial Economics 124, 535–562.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till van Wachter, and Andrew Heisz, 2012, The short- and long-term ca-
  reer e↵ects of graduating in a recession, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics

  4, 1–29.

Oyer, Paul, 2008, The making of an investment banker: Stock market shocks, career choice,
  and lifetime income, Journal of Finance 63, 2601–2628.

Phalippou, Ludovic, 2010, Venture capital funds: Flow-performance relationship and per-
  formance persistence, Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 568–577.

Phalippou, Ludovic, and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009, The performance of private equity firms,
  Review of Financial Studies 22, 1747–1776.

Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2012, On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital and

  non-venture-capital-financed firms, Journal of Finance 67, 2247–2293.

Robinson, David, and Berk Sensoy, 2013, Do private equity fund managers earn their fees?
  Compensation, ownership, and cash flow performance, Review of Financial Studies 26,

  2760–2797.

Schoar, Antoinette, and Luo Zuo, forthcoming, Shaped by booms and busts: How the econ-
  omy impacts ceo careers and management styles, Review of Financial Studies .

Shi, Yuan, David Waguespack, and Olav Sorenson, 2017, Temporal issues in replication: The

  stability of centrality-based advantage, Sociological Science 4, 107–122.

Sørensen, Morten, 2007, How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture
  capital, Journal of Finance 62, 2725–2762.

Sorenson, Olav, and Toby E. Stuart, 2001, Syndication networks and the spatial distribution
  of venture capital investments, American Journal of Sociology 106, 1546–1588.

                                             34
Sorenson, Olav, and Toby E. Stuart, 2008, Bringing the context back in: Settings and the
  search for syndicate partners in venture capital investing, Administrative Science Quarterly
  53, 266–294.

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, Testing for weak instruments in linear IV re-
  gression, in D. W. K. Andrews, and J. H. Stock, eds., Identification and Inference for
  Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, 80–108 (Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, Cambridge).

Wermers, Russ, 2011, Performance measurement of mutual funds, hedge funds, and institu-
  tional accounts, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 537–574.




                                             35
                                 Figure 1: VC Experience and Performance.
Notes: In both panels, each dot represents the entire history of a single venture capital (VC) firm in the
sample and the horizontal axis counts the total number of startup companies in which the VC firm invested.
In the upper panel, the vertical axis is the proportion of IPOs in all of the startup companies in which the
VC invested. In the lower panel, the vertical axis is the proportion of exits, IPOs or acquisitions, in all of the
startup companies in which the VC invested.




                            1

                            .8
          Total IPO Rate




                            .6

                            .4

                            .2

                            0
                                 0          200              400                600                 800
                                     Total Number of Companies Invested In


                            1

                            .8
          Total Exit Rate




                            .6

                            .4

                            .2

                            0
                                 0          200              400                600                 800
                                     Total Number of Companies Invested In


                                                       36
                                                                                              Figure 2: Plausible Exogeneity.
                                                         Notes: This figure replicates the estimation of Table VI using the “local-to-zero” (LTZ) method of Conley
                                                         et al. (2012). The graphs correspond to Model 1 of Table 7B. The parameter , representing the e↵ect of the
                                                         instrument in the second stage, has the assumed distribution ⇠ U (0, ) (normal approximation). The solid
                                                         line represents the point estimate of the second stage coefficient for the endogenous variable and the dotted
                                                         lines the 90% confidence intervals. The dash-dot line denotes the OLS estimate from Model 1 of Table 4.



                                                                                    IPOs                                                                                                                 All Exits
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                       .4
2nd Stage Coeff of Share of IPOs in 1st 10 Investments




                                                                                                                          2nd Stage Coeff of Share of Exits in 1st 10 Investments
                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                             .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                                            .1
   0




                                                                                                                            0
                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                       -.1




                                                          0      .02        .04       .06     .08   .1         .12                                                                  0   .02        .04       .06     .08   .1         .12
                                                                                       δ                                                                                                                      δ

                                                                       Point Estimate (LTZ)         CI (LTZ)                                                                                  Point Estimate (LTZ)         CI (LTZ)




                                                                                                                     37
                                                                     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics on the sample used for the analysis. The sample is drawn from the VentureXpert database of Thomson‐Reuters and consists of
venture capital (VC) firms based in the United States and their investments in U.S.‐based startups. The data covers the period from 1961 to 2008 and includes only VC firms
who made their first investment in 1961 or later and who invested in at least 11 startups between 1961 and 2008. All outcomes are measured as of the end of 2016. When
a VC firm invests in multiple rounds for a given startup, only the first investment by the VC firm in that startup enters the sample. Only VC firms classified as private
partnerships and funds classified as venture capital are included and only first investments in stages classified as 'seed', 'early', 'expansion', and 'later' are included.
Descriptive statistics are reported separately for the first ten investments (used to determine the VC's level of initial success ‐‐‐ the key regressor in the analysis) and for all
subsequent investments‐‐‐ which form the basis of the estimation sample.

                                                                                                                                                 First 10           Subsequent
                                                                                                                           Full Sample
                                                                                                                                               investments          investments

 Number of VC firms making an investment                                                                                       895                  895                  895
 Number of unique startups receiving an investment                                                                            19,802               6,809               17,492
 Number of VC‐startup pairs, corresponding to the initial investments by a VC in a given startup                              46,013               8,950               37,063
 Probability that initial investment has an IPO                                                                               19.7%                22.4%                19.0%
 Probability that initial investment has an Exit                                                                              51.0%                48.9%                51.5%
 Proportion of unique startups that had an IPO                                                                                13.7%                18.5%                13.8%
 Proportion of unique startups that had an Exit                                                                               42.8%                47.0%                44.3%
                              Table 2: Performance Persistence in Proximate Investments
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying performance persistence at the deal‐level. The sample consists of the first
investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC firm invested. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A) or any exit, that is, an IPO or a trade sale (Panel B).
Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and startup company. Columns (1) and (3) include Year fixed effects, noted below as Y. Columns (2)
and (4) include Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted below as YSIG. Columns (3) and (4) further include VC firm fixed effects. *,
** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                                (1)               (2)                   (3)              (4)
                            Panel A: IPOs                                   Without VC fixed effects                 With VC fixed effects

Share of previous 10 investments with IPO                                      0.253***          0.117***              ‐0.010         ‐0.036*
                                                                              (0.022)           (0.018)               (0.020)         (0.019)
Additional Fixed Effects                                                         Y               YSIG                     Y             YSIG
Number of Observations                                                        37,063            37,063                37,063          37,063
Number of VC firms                                                              895               895                   895             895
                          Panel B: All Exits                                Without VC fixed effects                 With VC fixed effects

Share of previous 10 investments with an Exit                                  0.251***          0.145***             ‐0.064***       ‐0.083***
                                                                              (0.018)           (0.017)               (0.020)          (0.019)
Additional Fixed Effects                                                         Y               YSIG                    Y              YSIG
Number of Observations                                                        37,063            37,063                37,063           37,063
Number of VC firms                                                             895               895                   895              895
                   Table 3: Performance Persistence in Proximate Investments ‐ different time periods
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying performance persistence at the deal‐level. The sample consists of the first investment made by a
venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC firm invested. The dependent variable is an indicator for
whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A and C) or any exit, that is, an IPO or a trade sale (Panel B and D). Each column is a different subsample
time period. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and startup company. All columns include Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted below as
YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                             (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)
                                                                        Before 1990       1985‐1995         1990‐2000        1995‐2005         2000‐2008

                              Panel A                                                            IPOs without VC fixed effects

Share of previous 10 investments with IPO                                   0.060            0.094***           0.130***           0.129***      0.094***
                                                                           (0.043)          (0.036)            (0.027)            (0.023)       (0.021)

                              Panel B                                                          All Exits without VC fixed effects

Share of previous 10 investments with an Exit                              0.071*            0.104***           0.162***           0.153***      0.143***
                                                                           (0.038)          (0.034)            (0.027)            (0.021)       (0.023)
                              Panel C                                                                IPOs with VC fixed effects

Share of previous 10 investments with an Exit                               ‐0.148***        ‐0.147***          ‐0.070***          ‐0.040        ‐0.129***
                                                                           (0.047)          (0.045)            (0.030)            (0.026)       (0.029)
                              Panel D                                                            All Exits with VC fixed effects
Share of previous 10 investments with an Exit                               ‐0.167***        ‐0.175***          ‐0.158***          ‐0.121***     ‐0.216***
                                                                           (0.045)          (0.042)            (0.033)            (0.025)       (0.030)
Additional Fixed Effects                                                    YSIG             YSIG               YSIG               YSIG          YSIG
Number of Observations                                                      8,057            8,264             16,096             21,074        17,965
Number of VC firms                                                           254              296               566                734           785
                                     Table 4: Performance Persistence of Initial Investments
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying performance persistence at the deal‐level. The sample consists of the first investment made by
a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC firm invested. The dependent variable is an indicator
for whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A) or any exit, that is, an IPO or a trade sale (Panel B). Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and
startup company. Column (1) includes Year fixed effects, noted below as Y. Columns (2) ‐ (5) include Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted
below as YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.
                                                                  (1)                    (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)
                                                                                               Panel A: IPOs
                                                           All subsequent         All subsequent    Investments          Investments      Investments
                                                            investments            investments          11‐30               31‐60            61‐100
Share of first 10 investments with IPO                           0.153***               0.079***           0.073***          0.047*           0.025
                                                                (0.016)                (0.013)             (0.025)          (0.026)          (0.036)

Fixed Effects                                                      Y                    YSIG                YSIG             YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                          37,063                 37,063              12,207            8,717            6,174
Number of VC firms                                               895                    895                 895               399              208
                                                                                                Panel B: All Exits

                                                           All subsequent         All subsequent        Investments      Investments      Investments
                                                            investments            investments             11‐30            31‐60            61‐100

Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                       0.184***               0.084***            0.155***         0.120***         0.059
                                                                (0.024)                (0.021)             (0.031)          (0.039)          (0.048)

Fixed Effects                                                      Y                    YSIG                YSIG             YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                          37,063                 37,063              12,207            8,717            6,174
Number of VC firms                                               895                    895                 895               399              208
  Table 5: Performance Persistence of Initial Investments ‐ VCs with at least 31 investments
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying performance persistence at the deal‐level. The sample consists of the
first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC firm
invested but is restricted to the 399 VCs that invested in at least 31 companies in our sample period. The dependent variable is an
indicator for whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A) or any exit, that is, an IPO or a trade sale (Panel B). Standard
errors are clustered by VC firm and startup company. All columns include Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted
below as YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                  (1)                  (2)           (3)                 (4)
                                                                                       Panel A: IPOs
                                                            All subsequent       Investments      Investments       Investments
                                                             investments            11‐30            31‐60             61‐100
Share of first 10 investments with IPO                           0.077***            0.059*             0.047*          0.025
                                                                (0.015)              (0.030)          (0.026)          (0.036)

Fixed Effects                                                     YSIG               YSIG              YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                           32,836              7,980             8,717            6,174
Number of VC firms                                                399                 399               399              208
                                                                                     Panel B: All Exits

                                                            All subsequent       Investments      Investments       Investments
                                                             investments            11‐30            31‐60             61‐100

Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                       0.079***             0.147**           0.120***        0.059
                                                                (0.026)              (0.037)          (0.039)          (0.048)

Fixed Effects                                                     YSIG               YSIG              YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                           32,836              7,980             8,717            6,174
Number of VC firms                                                399                 399               399              208
                           Table 6: VC Firm Experience and Performance
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying the relationship between investing experience and
performance. The sample consists of the first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a startup company.
The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether the startup company in question had an IPO in Panel A
or any exit in Panel B. All estimations include either Year (=Y) or Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted
below as YSIG. Column (2) further includes VC firm fixed effects. Models 3 is a mixed model where the cumulative
number of investments by the VC and the constant have random coefficients. The standard deviations of the random
coefficients and the estimated correlations are reported below. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and startup
company in columns (1) and (2), and by VC firm in column (3). Note the number of observations are higher than those
in other tables as this table also includes investments from VC firms that invested in fewer than 11 companies. *, **
and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.
                                                                            (1)             (2)               (3)
                                                    Panel A: IPOs
                                                                           OLS             VC FE            Mixed

Cumulative Num of investments                                            0.006***         ‐0.014***        ‐0.005**
                                                                          (0.002)          (0.004)          (0.002)
Constant                                                                                                     1.106***
                                                                                                            (0.034)
stdev(Cumulative Num of investments)                                                                         0.032***
                                                                                                            (0.004)
stdev(Constant)                                                                                              0.150***
                                                                                                            (0.010)
corr(Cum Num of Investments, Constant)                                                                       ‐0.944***
                                                                                                            (0.013)
stdev(Residual)                                                                                              0.360***
                                                                                                            (0.004)
Fixed Effects                                                              YSIG            YSIG                Y
Number of Observations                                                    46,013          46,013            46,013
Number of VC firms                                                         895             895               895
                                                  Panel B: All Exits
                                                                           OLS             VC FE            Mixed

Cumulative Num of investments                                              0.009***       ‐0.015***         ‐0.001
                                                                          (0.003)          (0.005)          (0.003)
Constant                                                                                                     1.136***
                                                                                                            (0.044)
stdev(Cumulative Num of investments)                                                                         0.034***
                                                                                                            (0.003)
stdev(Constant)                                                                                              0.164***
                                                                                                            (0.010)
corr(Cum Num of Investments, Constant)                                                                       ‐0.885***
                                                                                                            (0.026)
stdev(Residual)                                                                                              0.484***
                                                                                                            (0.001)

Fixed Effects                                                              YSIG            YSIG                Y
Number of Observations                                                    46,013          46,013            46,013
Number of VC firms                                                         895             895               895
                                       Table 7a: Studying performance persistence by excluding focal VC's initial investments
This table reports the results of regressions where the sample consists of the first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which
the VC firm invested. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A ) or any exit (Panels B). The key regressor is the relevant success outcome (IPO or
Exit) for all other starups in the YSIG segments as the focal VC firm's initial 10 investments ‐‐ that is, excluding any company backed made by the focal VC firm in the YSIG segments of its first 10
investments. This measure captures the degree to which contextual factors in that segment ‐ rather than the focal VC firm's ability to select and govern specific companies ‐ were responsible for the
success experienced by the focal VC firms initial 10 investments. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and startup company. All estimations include either Year fixed effects, noted below as Y, or
Year x State x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted below as YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                                            Panel A: IPOs
                                                                                                                 (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)
                                                                                                                 All
                                                                                                                                 All subsequent
                                                                                                             subsequent                                  11‐30             31‐60            61‐100
                                                                                                                                  investments
                                                                                                            investments

IPO Rate for other startups (not backed by focal VC) in same YSIG as initial investment                          0.112***               0.073***         0.070***          0.016             0.052
                                                                                                                 (0.022)              (0.016)            (0.041)           (0.039)          (0.044)

Fixed Effects                                                                                                      Y                   YSIG               YSIG              YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                                                                           37,006               37,006             12,187            8,687             6,167

                                                                                          Panel B: All Exits
                                                                                                                   All           All subsequent
                                                                                                                                                         11‐30             31‐60            61‐100
                                                                                                               subsequent         investments

Exit Rate for other startups (not backed by focal VC) in same YSIG as initial investment                         0.101***               0.055***         0.121***          0.062             ‐0.032
                                                                                                                 (0.031)              (0.025)            (0.049)           (0.053)          (0.056)

Fixed Effects                                                                                                      Y                   YSIG               YSIG              YSIG             YSIG
Number of Observations                                                                                           37,006               37,006             12,187            8,687             6,167
      Table 7b: Studying performance persistence by excluding focal VC's initial investments ‐ ‐ Instrumental Variable estimations
This table reports the results of regressions where the sample consists of the first investment made by VC firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC
firm invested. The dependent for IV regressions is an indicator for whether the target company had an IPO (Panel A) or any exit (Panel B). IV regressions use the relevant success outcome
(IPO or Exit) for all other starups in the YSIG cells as the focal VC firm's initial 10 investments as an instrument for the success of the focal VC firm's initial 10 investments. The coefficient
on the first stage regression and the related F‐statistic are reported below the respective IV coefficients. All estimations include either Year fixed effects, noted below as Y, or Year x State
x Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted below as YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                                         Panel A: IPOs
                                                                                                       (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                                                                                     IV: All               IV: All          IV: 11‐30           IV: 31‐60          IV: 61‐100

Share of first 10 investments with IPO                                                              0.217***             0.139***             0.147*               0.041              0.179
                                                                                                     (0.031)               (0.027)            (0.085)             (0.097)            (0.160)

                                                                                                  First Stage           First Stage         First Stage        First Stage        First Stage

IPO Rate for other startups in same YSIG as VC's initial 10 investments                             0.517***             0.527***            0.480***            0.394***           0.288***
                                                                                                     (0.087)               (0.077)            (0.069)             (0.093)            (0.102)
Kleibergen‐Paap Wald rk F‐statistic                                                                  35.445                 47.08              47.941             17.944              7.946

Fixed Effects                                                                                           Y                   YSIG                YSIG               YSIG               YSIG
Number of Observations                                                                               37,063                37,063              12,207              8,717              6,174
                                                                                       Panel B: All Exits
                                                                                                     IV: All               IV: All          IV: 11‐30           IV: 31‐60          IV: 61‐100

Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                                                          0.240***             0.127***             0.230**              0.135              ‐0.065
                                                                                                     (0.064)               (0.058)            (0.095)             (0.113)            (0.116)
                                                                                                  First Stage           First Stage         First Stage        First Stage        First Stage

IPO Rate for other startups in same YSIG as VC's initial 10 investments                             0.423***             0.429***            0.526***            0.456***           0.495***
                                                                                                     (0.076)               (0.074)            (0.060)             (0.072)            (0.088)

Kleibergen‐Paap Wald rk F‐statistic                                                                   31.28                 33.62              75.777              40.19             31.842

Fixed Effects                                                                                           Y                   YSIG                YSIG               YSIG               YSIG
Number of Observations                                                                               37,063                37,063              12,207              8,717              6,174
                                                                                    Table 8: Persistence in Segment Selection
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying the degree to which VC firms can consistently select 'good' segments Panel A considers IPOs and Panel B considers all exits. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
IPO rate among companies that received VC investment in the same year‐state‐industry‐stage segment in which the focal VC firm invested, but excluding all companies in which the focal VC firm ever invested. The
dependent variable in Panel B is constructed similarly but includes all exits. All models include Year fixed effects, noted below as Y. Columns (1) and (2) consider State‐Industry‐Stage investments corresponding to the initial
10 investmental made by the focal VC firm. Models 3‐7 look at the mirror image of these, and exclude any State‐Industry‐Stage segments in which the VC firm had invested in its first investments. Standard errors are
clustered by VC firm and by year‐state‐industry‐stage segments *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.
                                                                                    (1)                 (2)                     (3)                  (4)                  (5)                   (6)                    (7)
                                                                                                          Panel A IPOs

                                                                             Investments in      Investments in          Investments in       Investments in     11‐30 that were in 31‐60 that were in 61‐100 that were
                                                                              Initial Sectors     Initial Sectors         New Sectors          New Sectors          new sectors        new sectors      in new sectors

IPO Rate for other startups in same YSIG as initial investments                  0.119**              0.053**                 0.014                0.006                 0.036                 0.027                ‐0.037*
                                                                                 (0.029)              (0.023)                 (0.012)              (0.008)              (0.022)               (0.026)               (0.021)

Fixed Effects                                                                        Y                   Y                       Y                    Y                    Y                     Y                      Y
Controls for attractiveness of the segment                                          No                  Yes                     No                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Number of Observations                                                             5,647               5,647                  27,388               27,388                8,122                 6,185                 4,665
Number of VC firms                                                                  693                 693                     875                 875                   875                   393                   207
                                                                                                        Panel B: All Exits
                                                                             Investments in      Investments in          Investments in       Investments in     11‐30 that were in 31‐60 that were in 61‐100 that were
                                                                              Initial Sectors     Initial Sectors         New Sectors          New Sectors          new sectors        new sectors      in new sectors

Exit Rate for other startups in same YSIG as initial investments                 0.130**              0.073**                 0.022                ‐0.001                0.001                 0.015                  0.009
                                                                                 (0.028)              (0.024)                 (0.014)              (0.010)              (0.025)               (0.020)                (0.019)

Fixed Effects                                                                        Y                   Y                       Y                   Y                     Y                     Y                     Y
Controls for attractiveness of the segment                                          No                  Yes                     No                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Number of Observations                                                             5,647               5,647                  27,388               27,388                8,122                 6,185                 4,665
Number of VC firms                                                                  693                 693                     875                 875                   875                   393                   207
                                      Table 9: Change in Syndication and Network Centrality based on Initial Success
This table reports the results of OLS regressions where the sample consists of the first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with the eleventh
company in which the VC firm invested and including all subsequent 'first investments'. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator for whether the initial investment by
the focal VC firm was syndicated with another VC firm. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is the log of the syndicate size of the VC firm's first investment in a company. The
dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the Eigenvector Centrality of the VC firm. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and startup company. *, ** and *** refer to significance at
0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

                                                                        (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)                    (5)                 (6)
                                                                    Round is           Round is                                                         Network              Network
                                                                                                           Syndicate Size      Syndicate Size
                                                                   Syndicated         Syndicated                                                        Centrality           Centrality

Share of first 10 investments with IPO                                 0.109***                                  0.195***                                   0.077***
                                                                      (0.020)                                   (0.051)                                    (0.012)

Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                                                0.095***                                   0.262***                                    0.046***
                                                                                         (0.023)                                    (0.052)                                    (0.010)
Share of first 10 investments that were syndicated                    0.234***            0.222***
                                                                      (0.039)            (0.040)
Average syndicate size of first 10 investments                                                                   0.253***            0.247***
                                                                                                                (0.030)             (0.029)
Eigenvector Centrality at 10th investment                                                                                                                  0.219***             0.275***
                                                                                                                                                           (0.059)             (0.066)
Fixed Effects                                                            Y                  Y                      Y                   Y                      Y                   Y
Number of Observations                                                37,063             37,063                 37,063              37,063                 37,063              37,063
Number of VC firms                                                     895                 895                    895                 895                   895                  895
                  Table 10: Change in Round and Size of First Investments based on Initial Success
This table reports the results of OLS regressions where the sample consists of the first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target
company, starting with the eleventh company in which the VC firm invested. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator for
whether the initial investment by the focal VC firm occurred in the first round of financing for the company. The dependent variable in columns (3)
and (4) is the log of the round size (in dollars) in which the VC firm's first invested in the company. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and
startup company. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.


                                                                            (1)                  (2)                     (3)                (4)

                                                                     First investment     First investment          Size of first      Size of first
                                                                       is in Round 1        is in Round 1           investment         investment

Share of first 10 investments with IPO                                    ‐0.072**                                      0.800***
                                                                          (0.036)                                      (0.081)
Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                                                     ‐0.058*                                    0.433***
                                                                                               (0.034)                                    (0.094)
Share of first 10 investments that were Round 1                            0.344***              0.341***
                                                                          (0.031)              (0.031)
Average size of first 10 investments                                                                                    0.306***           0.248***
                                                                                                                       (0.038)            (0.041)
Fixed Effects                                                                Y                    Y                       Y                  Y
Number of Observations                                                    37,063               37,063                  36,243              36,243
Number of VC firms                                                          895                  895                     892                892
  Table 11: Persistence of Initial Success Controlling for Changes in Investing
                                     Behavior
This table reports the results of OLS regressions studying performance persistence at the deal‐level. The
sample consists of the first investment made by a venture capital (VC) firm in a target company, starting with
the eleventh company in which the VC firm invested. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the
target company had an IPO (Panel A) or any exit (Panel B). Standard errors are clustered by VC firm and
startup company. Control variables correspond to the round number, round size, syndicate size in the given
round and eigenvector centrality of the VC at the time of the given round. All estimations include Year x State x
Industry x Stage fixed effects, noted below as YSIG. *, ** and *** refer to significance at 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01
respectively.

                                                                                 (1)                  (2)
                                                 Panel A: IPOs

Share of first 10 investments with IPO                                          0.079***            0.034***
                                                                               (0.014)             (0.013)
Round number (log)                                                                                  0.011
                                                                                                   (0.008)
Round size (log)                                                                                    0.035***
                                                                                                   (0.003)
Syndicate size (log)                                                                                0.053***
                                                                                                   (0.006)
Eigenvector Centrality                                                                              0.198***
                                                                                                   (0.071)
Fixed Effects                                                                   YSIG                 YSIG
Number of Observations                                                         37,063               36,243
Number of VC firms                                                               895                 892
                                               Panel B: All Exits

Share of first 10 investments with an Exit                                      0.084***            0.022
                                                                               (0.021)             (0.018)
Round number (log)                                                                                  0.034***
                                                                                                   (0.010)
Round size (log)                                                                                    0.050***
                                                                                                   (0.005)
Syndicate size (log)                                                                                 0.085***
                                                                                                   (0.008)
Eigenvector Centrality                                                                               0.383***
                                                                                                   (0.090)
Fixed Effects                                                                   YSIG                 YSIG
Number of Observations                                                         37,063              36,243
Number of VC firms                                                              895                  892
