                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            STICKING TO YOUR PLAN:
              THE ROLE OF PRESENT BIAS FOR CREDIT CARD PAYDOWN

                                        Theresa Kuchler
                                        Michaela Pagel

                                      Working Paper 24881
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24881


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018

Previously circulated as “Sticking to Your Plan: Hyperbolic Discounting and Credit Card Debt
Paydown”. Numerous seminar participants at Stanford, UNC Kenan-Flagler, Yale SOM, Notre
Dame, Kellogg, Minnesota Carlson, Brown, Olin, MSU, NYU Stern, the Federal Reserve Board,
the New York Federal Reserve, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, Harvard Business School, LMU Munich, Cornell University, Princeton University, the
CFPB, as well as conference participants at the Aspen Conference on Economic Decision
Making, the SITE Summer Workshop, the Red Rock Finance Conference, and the Christmas
Meeting of the German Economists Abroad provided insightful comments. We thank Liran
Einav, Caroline Hoxby and Jonathan Levin for their tremendous advice and guidance. We also
benefited from conversations with Sumit Agarwal, Juliane Begenau, Doug Bernheim, Tim
Bresnahan, George Bulman, Dominic Coey, Xavier Gabaix, Simon Hilpert, Harrison Hong,
Alejandro Molnar, Juliana Salomao, Paulo Somaini, Denis Sosyura, Charles Sprenger, Luke
Stein, Johannes Stroebel, and Jeremy Tobacman. We are grateful to the team at ReadyForZero for
providing the data and making this research possible, especially to Rod Ebrahimi and Ignacio
Thayer. Financial support to Theresa Kuchler from the B.F. Haley and E.S. Shaw Fellowship
through SIEPR is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Theresa Kuchler and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Sticking to Your Plan: The Role of Present Bias for Credit Card Paydown
Theresa Kuchler and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 24881
August 2018
JEL No. D03,D14,G02

                                            ABSTRACT

Using high-frequency transaction-level income, spending, balances, and credit limits data from an
online financial service, we show that many consumers fail to stick to their self-set debt paydown
plans and argue that this behavior is best explained by a model of present bias. Theoretically, we
show that (i) a present-biased agent's sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck receipt
reflects his or her short-run impatience and that (ii) this sensitivity varies with available resources
only for agents who are aware (sophisticated) rather than unaware (naive) of their future
impatience. In turn, we classify users in our data accordingly. Consistent with present bias, we
find that (i) sophisticated users' average paydown falls with higher measured impatience and that
(ii) their planned paydown is more predictive of actual paydown than that of naives. We are the
first to provide a theoretically-founded empirical methodology to measure sophistication and
naivete from spending and income data and to validate this measure using our information on
planned versus actual debt paydown. Moreover, our results highlight the importance of
distinguishing between sophisticated and naive present-biased individuals in understanding their
financial decision making.


Theresa Kuchler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu

Michaela Pagel
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mpagel@columbia.edu
    In the United States, the majority of households have at least one credit card and more than half
carry balances from month to month. With interest-bearing debt in the thousands of dollars per
balance-carrying household and median interest rates at 12% in 2013, the monthly cost of interest
to the average household is substantial (Bricker et al., 2014). At such cost, the extent of credit card
debt is puzzling and previous work has documented a variety of behaviors in credit markets that are
hard to reconcile with standard motives for borrowing (see, for instance, Laibson, Repetto and Tobac-
man, 2003; Agarwal et al., 2015; Keys and Wang, 2016; Agarwal and Mazumder, 2013; Agarwal et al.,
2010, 2008).
    Behavioral economists have proposed a potential explanation for the observed extent of house-
hold borrowing: present bias (e.g., Strotz, 1955; Akerlof, 1991; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999; Angele-
tos et al., 2001; Ausubel, 1991; Meier and Sprenger, 2010). According to this explanation, individuals
are overly impatient in the short run relative to their long-run preferences. They borrow excessively
and often fail to repay later, despite a genuine intention to reduce their debt. Moreover, the prior
literature has argued that whether individuals are aware (sophisticated) or unaware (naive), follow-
ing the terminology of O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999), about the difference in their short-run and
long-run preferences can matter substantially for the behavior predicted by models of present bias.
Additionally, the distinction between sophistication and naivete is of crucial importance for policy
considerations and regulation. In this paper, we propose an empirical measure that captures both
aspects of an individual’s present bias - the extent of short-run impatience and her sophistication. We
apply and validate our proposed measures in a sample of consumers struggling with credit card debt
and show that present bias plays an important role in understanding debt paydown behavior.
    We use a unique dataset on planned and actual debt paydown to document that many consumers
fail to follow through with self-set debt paydown plans. We then present a theoretical model that
suggests empirical measures for both features of an individual’s present bias: the level of short-run
impatience and the individual’s awareness of her impatience. Using these measures of both features of
present bias, we estimate their role in individual debt paydown behavior. We find that debt paydown
decreases with higher measured impatience for sophisticated individuals and that planned paydown
is substantially more predictive of actual paydown for sophisticated than for naive individuals. Our
results show that considering an individual’s potential present bias and, importantly, the individual’s
awareness of their own present bias (sophistication), significantly improves our understanding of his
or her debt repayment patterns.
    We study a sample of consumers who signed up for an online financial management service. The
data contain the daily balances and transactions on all of their bank accounts and credit cards. Upon
joining the service, users make a plan of how much they would like to reduce their debt balances each
month. This feature allows us to evaluate success in debt paydown relative to a user’s original plan.
We find that planned debt paydown is predictive of actual paydown. In fact, no other characteristic,
such as monthly income or original debt levels, significantly affects actual paydown once the user’s
original plan is controlled for. However, most users fall substantially short of their original paydown
plans. For each dollar of planned paydown, the average user only reduces debt by 25 to 30 cents.
    To understand whether present bias can explain this shortfall in actual relative to originally planned
paydown, we suggest a novel way to use the information on high-frequency consumption spending


                                                   1
in the data to measure an individual’s present bias. We present a model to theoretically found our
methodology to measure individual short-run impatience as well as the degree to which individuals
are aware of their impatience, classifying them as aware (sophisticated) or unaware (naive).
     Our theoretical model of present bias suggests an empirical test for the degree of short-run impa-
tience based on the co-movement of consumption and income: more impatient individuals consume
more immediately after receiving their paycheck, and then their consumption declines until the next
paycheck.1 To measure each individual’s level of impatience, we thus estimate the degree of such be-
havior using expenditures for goods which are instantly consumed, such as restaurant meals. More-
over, we filter out the impact of other possible explanations, such as short-term credit constraints.
Our model further suggests an empirical test for sophistication: unlike naive consumers, sophisti-
cated consumers act more patiently when they have more available resources, and their consumption
between paychecks becomes more even. To estimate how consumption sensitivity to paycheck varies
with the level of resources for each user, we exploit within-individual variation in resources over time.
We address the potential endogeneity of available resources to consumption patterns by instrument-
ing with hypothetical balances based on regular, non-discretionary payments such as monthly rent.
Based on these estimates, we classify individuals as sophisticated or naive. We then relate these mea-
sures of both features of individual present bias, short-run impatience and sophistication, to their debt
paydown behavior.
     Our model and the previous literature on present bias also predict that it is attractive for present-
biased individuals to delay paying down debt from the current to the next pay cycle. This behavior
allows them to avoid reducing consumption in the current pay cycle, when it is particularly valued.
At the same time, the long-run cost of debt paid off one paycycle (two weeks) later is small. Since
delaying repayment for one paycycle is attractive, individuals may be tempted to repeatedly delay
making their payments and naive agents are particularly prone to do so. They are unaware of their
future impatience, so they plan to repay their debt in the next pay cycle when they (incorrectly) believe
they will be more patient. They do not realize that, when faced with the same decision in the future,
they will repeatedly want to delay debt paydown. Thus, naive individuals will often not actually suc-
ceed in paying off their debt, despite their plans and intentions to do so. Unlike naives, sophisticated
agents are aware of their future impatience, allowing them to recognize and avoid the temptation to
repeatedly delay, making them more successful at following through with their debt paydown plans.
     Empirically, we find that planned paydown is indeed significantly more predictive of actual pay-
down for users classified as sophisticated relative to naive users. For sophisticated individuals, higher
impatience leads to lower debt paydown. Naive agents often do not adhere to their paydown plans
irrespective of their degree of impatience. This behavior is consistent with the notion that these house-
holds repeatedly delay debt paydown. We thus empirically validate our theoretical methodology for
classifying users into sophisticated versus naive. Furthermore, our findings for both types of con-
sumers suggest that both features of an individual’s present bias – her level of short-run impatience
    1 Other papers have documented the sensitivity of consumption to the receipt of a paycheck (e.g., Zhang, 2017; Baugh

et al., 2017; Shapiro, 2005; Stephens, 2006; Hastings and Washington, 2010; Gelman et al., 2014; Olafsson and Pagel, 2016)
or other expected payments (e.g., Souleles, 1999; Browning and Collado, 2001; Hsieh, 2003; Parker, 1999; Scholnick, 2013;
Baugh, Ben-David and Park, 2014). In a field experiment, Kaur, Kremer and Mullainathan (2010) randomize when workers
are paid and find evidence for self control problems with respect to work effort. Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) survey this
literature on consumption responses to income changes.


                                                             2
as well as her sophistication – are key factors in explaining her debt repayment behavior.
    In general, it is hard to detect time-inconsistent behavior because an agent’s initial intent and
preferences are unobserved. Our ability to measure success in debt paydown relative to each indi-
vidual’s intent strengthens the interpretation of failure to reduce debt levels as an actual deviation
from planned behavior, rather than an ex-ante optimal behavior given unobserved factors. The ability
to follow through with their plans is a key theoretical distinction between sophisticated and naive
agents. Empirically confirming this behavior difference validates not only our theoretical measure
of sophistication, but also reinforces the importance of distinguishing between the two types when
studying the effect of present bias, either theoretically or empirically. Finally, the large differences in
following through with their paydown plans between those users classified as naive and those clas-
sified as sophisticated is one of the strongest pieces of evidence in favor of interpreting our results
as evidence for present bias since no alternative explanation would predict this relationship with our
measure of sophistication.
    We consider a number of alternative explanations for both the individual consumption sensitiv-
ity to paycheck receipt, and the observed debt repayment behavior. While some possible explanations
might be consistent with either one of the observed patterns, no competing explanation can explain the
joint behavior of consumption and debt repayment observed in the data. For example, some people
might have developed a habit of going out for “date night” every two weeks. This behavior might, by
chance, overlap with the receipt of their paycheck in a way that is unrelated to short-run impatience.
However, if such behavior was driving observed consumption responses to paycheck receipt, one
would not expect these agents to also have differential debt repayment behavior. We discuss that for
similar reasons, the following factors also fail to explain the joint patterns of consumption spending
behavior and debt paydown: Non-separabilities in consumption or social coordination of consump-
tion spending, time consistent preferences with high discount factors, loss of income, differences in the
interpretation of what a plan means (e.g., aspirational versus realistic planning), overoptimism, a lack
of planning skills, and financial literacy. The empirical results are also robust to different approaches
to filtering out confounding factors, such as credit constraints and variations in measuring short-run
impatience and sophistication. Specifically, we show that the consumption patterns used to measure
short-run impatience and sophistication do not affect debt paydown other than through present bias.
When estimating the sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck receipt, our measure of short-
run impatience, the results are robust to varying the number of days of spending required for sample
inclusion and to alternative specifications, such as using debit card spending only or using levels or
weekly spending instead of daily log spending. Finally, as predicted by present bias, differences in
behavior between sophisticated and naive users are driven by those with substantial levels of im-
patience, and excluding users who are noisily classified strengthens the results. We also illustrate
the difference between using IV estimates, our preferred specification, rather than OLS estimates, to
classify users as sophisticated or naive.
    Several papers have explored the role of present-biased preferences in explaining a wide range of
financial and non-financial decisions. They show that models with present-biased agents, or quasi-
hyperbolic discounting as in Laibson (1997), can often rationalize the data better than models with
standard agents. For instance, Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman (2007) estimate a life-cycle model


                                                    3
with liquid and illiquid wealth, and find that the simultaneous holdings of both types of assets can
be explained by a model with present bias. Shui and Ausubel (2005) show that present bias can
explain consumer choices between different credit card offers.2 Meier and Sprenger (2010) conduct
experiments to measure consumer impatience and find that more present-biased individuals have
higher levels of credit card debt. Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006) elicit time preferences via a survey,
and find that consumers with a lower discount rate were more likely to use a savings commitment
product offered.3
      The current paper complements this literature by showing that cross-sectional variation in re-
payment behavior corresponds to cross-sectional differences in measured short-run impatience and
sophistication. Rather than determining impatience experimentally or through a survey, we infer the
extent of short-run impatience directly from individuals’ observed, real-life consumption behavior.
As a major contribution, we propose a methodology to infer whether a person is aware of their short-
run impatience. This is something previous papers have not been able to measure. Specifically, the
previous literature has identified sophisticated individuals as those who use costly commitment de-
vices. However, this does not allow estimating the effect of sophistication since commitment devices
directly affect outcomes. Moreover, the unique information on planned behavior also allows us to val-
idate our measure by showing that it is associated with following through with originally-made plans
– the key difference in the behavior of sophisticated and naive agents. Since high-frequency data on
spending patterns is becoming more commonly available, the inference of a user’s level of impatience
and sophistication from consumption patterns can also be applied in other empirical settings.4
      The paper continues as follows: Section 1 describes the data and presents summary statistics.
Section 2 shows planned and actual paydown of users in our sample. Section 3 formally proposes
empirical tests for both short-run impatience and sophistication and validates those in simulated
data. Section 4 implements the empirical tests and Section 5 presents and validates our measures
of impatience and sophistication with actual debt paydown patterns. Section 6 discusses alternative
explanations and provides robustness checks and Section 7 concludes.

1     Data
1.1     Empirical Setting
The data are obtained from the online financial management service ReadyForZero (www.readyforzero.com),
which offers users free help in managing their debt.5 When customers sign up, they are prompted to
make a plan of how much they want to reduce their debt each month, and are encouraged to link their
    2 Skiba and Tobacman (2008) find that the behavior of payday loan borrowers is better captured by the hyperbolic model
than the standard model. Paserman (2008), Fang and Silverman (2009) and Fang and Wang (2015) use similar approaches to
show the effect of present bias on job searches, welfare program participation and mammogram usage.
    3 Several other papers have documented the influence of present bias based on consumer’s choices between different con-

tracting options. For instance, Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi et al. (2004) and Carroll et al. (2009) document the importance
of default options in 401(k) savings plans, which can be attributed to the tendency of present-biased consumers to procras-
tinate. Present-biased preferences have also been shown to explain consumers’ decisions regarding workouts (DellaVigna
and Malmendier, 2006) or homework assignments (Ariely and Wertenbroch, 2002). DellaVigna (2009) provides an overview
of the empirical evidence.
    4 Gelman et al. (2014), Baugh, Ben-David and Park (2014), Baker (forthcoming), and Olafsson and Pagel (2016) use similar

datasets from different data providers.
    5 At the time of our sample, ReadyForZero was entirely free and private equity funded.




                                                             4
bank accounts and credit cards, which grants the company read access. For each account, the data
include daily snapshots of the balance, credit limit and transactions. The transaction data show the
amount, date charged and description the customer sees on his bank account statement, as well as a
code from the data provider which classifies transactions into different categories. The main service
offered by the website is to allow users to see all their financial accounts in one interface, making it
easier to keep track of different accounts and to help with calculating how to split a monthly pay-
ment between these different accounts (hence, the prompt to make a plan of how much to pay each
month). These services can presumably appeal to a variety of households, irrespective of impatience
or sophistication. It is therefore likely that these websites attract users who vary in terms of these
characteristics. Moreover, some of the services offered could potentially serve as commitment devices
by increasing the psychological cost of deviating from planned consumption. However, the website
does not actually restrict user behavior in any binding way.

1.2   Sample Selection
We focus on those individuals who (i) have linked their checking account, (ii) receive regular bi-
weekly paychecks, and (iii) appear to have linked all their active credit card accounts. This excludes
a substantial fraction of users, most of whom have only linked their credit card accounts. We further
restrict the sample to those users whom we observe for at least 180 days after sign-up. Since the
users in our sample signed up for ReadyForZero, they cannot be considered representative of the
overall population. However, they are uniquely suited to study why some individuals, despite their
intentions, fail to repay substantial amounts of debt. The final sample includes a total of 516 users
who fulfilled these criteria between September 2009 and September 2012. Appendix C.1 describes the
sample selection in detail. To identify those with regular paychecks, we first isolate transactions which
are likely paychecks, as outlined in Appendix C.2. A user receives regular bi-weekly paychecks if he
receives paychecks of similar amounts about every two weeks (13 to 16 days apart) and at most one
paycheck is missed.6 To be included in the sample, regular paychecks are also required to account for
at least 70% of a user’s income. This corresponds to an average of 68% of household income being
made up by wages in the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finance (Ackerman, Fries and Windle, 2012). We
further restrict the sample to users for whom spending over time appears to be primarily financed
by the observed income and changes in assets. This approach excludes users who most likely have
additional sources of income that we do not observe, such as users with accounts that are not linked.
We also exclude users who have only recently linked all their accounts such that at early times in the
sample, observed spending or debt balances are known to be incomplete. Finally, we require users to
have at least eight qualifying pay cycles with at least 45 days of spending on consumption goods (as
defined below) to allow us to estimate individual level impatience and sophistication.

1.3   Income, Assets and Debt Paydown
The first panel of Table 1 shows that the median user is observed in the sample for over one year
(430 days). During this time, the average user receives 28 paychecks, of which 21 are regular pay
cycles during which the paycheck arrives on time and no additional payment is received in the same
   6 A user can be an individual or a household. Households are included when the overall household income follows a bi-

weekly paycheck pattern. Both households and individuals are excluded when they receive multiple substantial paychecks
that do not follow a bi-weekly pattern.


                                                           5
pay cycle. During regular pay cycles, the average user receives $3,778 per month; the median user
receives $3,460. These monthly incomes are comparable to those in the 2010 Survey of Consumer
Finance.7 The average credit card debt at sign-up is $13,808, or almost four times the user’s average
monthly income.8 Data on interest rates is only available for a subset of accounts. Consumers face
an average APR of 16.7% on their credit card accounts. On their bank account, users have an average
cash balance of $4,822 and a median cash balance of $2,099, equivalent to 64% of average monthly
income.9 Users also have substantial borrowing capacity left on their cards, $10,722 on average. There
is significant heterogeneity across users in debt levels, both in absolute and in relative terms. The 25th
percentile’s debt level is 140% of monthly income, while the 75th percentile has almost five times as
much debt as monthly income.

1.4    Spending
We measure spending by examining all purchases made with credit or checking cards. Each transac-
tion is already classified into one of about 50 different spending categories, such as restaurant meals,
groceries or utilities. We also observe cash withdrawals. We distinguish between three different kinds
of expenditures: regular payments, discretionary spending and spending that qualifies as neither. Ap-
pendix C.2 describes the classification in detail. Regular payments primarily include rent, mortgage
and loan interest payments, but also smaller expenses such as magazine subscriptions.10 Non-regular
payments are classified as discretionary or non-discretionary based on the category assigned by the
data provider. Discretionary expenditures are those for which the consumer had a choice of whether
to incur the expense close to when it had to be paid or had discretion over how much to spend. Non-
discretionary expenses are those for which the amount due depends on the accumulated behavior
of the consumers in the past, but the consumer has no discretion on how much to pay once the bill
arrives. Non-discretionary expenses primarily include utility or cell phone bills and similar expenses.
Since consumption is not observed in the data, we proxy for consumption with expenditures likely
to be consumed immediately or shortly after purchase. Specifically, we focus on short-run consum-
ables, such as restaurant meals, groceries, gas and entertainment, as well as exclusively restaurant and
entertainment expenditures.11
      Table 2 shows summary statistics of users’ monthly expenditures. Total monthly discretionary
spending is about $1,800 for the average user, which corresponds to about 52% of the user’s regular
income. 30% of discretionary spending, $548, is spent on short-run consumables, of which $290 go to
restaurant meals and entertainment.12 Regular monthly payments average $1,205 per month, equiva-
lent to 33% of users’ regular income. Median monthly spending is slightly lower in all categories, but
    7 In the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF), Ackerman, Fries and Windle (2012) find a median annual household

income of $45,800 and average income of $78,500, of which roughly 70% are wages. Annual median wage income is about
$42,000 (12*3,460) so users in our sample earn more in wages than the median ($42,000 versus $45,800*.7=32,000), but less
than the average ($45,336 = 12*3,778 versus $78,500*.7 = $55,000) household in the SCF.
    8 Therefore, average debt is slightly higher than the $12,900 carried by households with revolving balances in the 2010

Survey of Consumer Finances (see Ackerman, Fries and Windle (2012)).
    9 In the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances, we find average bank account cash balances of $4,520 and a median on $1,326.
   10 A set of transactions is classified as regular if the payments are about equal to each other and the payments are mostly

7, 14 or 30 days apart and not more than one payment was missed.
   11 The Online Appendix lists the types of expenditures included in each of these categories.
   12 In the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances, we find average food spending of $492 and a median of $478, with an average

of $148 and a median of $95 on restaurants.



                                                              6
shows similar patterns.

2   Planned and Actual Paydown
The unique feature of our data is the information on planned paydown. When users sign up for
an account at ReadyForZero, they are prompted to state how much they want to reduce their debt
each month. Based on this information, users receive payment reminders and the website helps them
calculate how to split this monthly payment between the user’s different accounts.
    Table 3 shows that the average user plans to reduce their debt by $847 per month, which corre-
sponds to 12% of debt balances and to 24% of the user’s monthly income. The median of planned
paydown is lower at $598, corresponding to 6% of debt levels and 18% of monthly income. Given
these plans, the average user aims to reduce their current debt level by almost 30% over the next three
months and by almost half over the next 6 months.
    Next, we estimate which users characteristics affect planned paydown in a regression framework.
The first set of columns of Table 4 show the results. Planned paydown is strongly related to income
and original debt levels. For each dollar of additional income users plan to spend between 30 and
40 cents on debt reduction. Original debt levels also increase planned paydown but not by much:
an increase of $100 in debt is associated with $2.50 of higher planned paydown each month. Cash
balances, remaining available credit, total credit, discretionary spending, the interest rate paid, and
the number of credit cards owned have no significant effect on planned paydown. However, users
who use their credit cards more plan to pay more on debt reduction each month.
    Compared to planned paydown, actual changes in debt levels are much lower. After 3 months,
the average user has reduced debt levels by only $711 according to Table 3 - on average, a shortfall of
$1,732, or 77% relative to the originally planned amount. A substantial fraction of users even increase
their debt levels, as reflected in the increase in debt of $292 for the 75th percentile of changes in debt
levels. While consumers do not reduce their debt levels much relative to their original plans, most
make substantial payments on their credit cards. However, additional spending usually offsets the
payments made. The second set of columns of Table 4 shows regression estimates of the relationship
between planned and actual paydown controlling for user characteristics. For each dollar in planned
paydown, the average user pays down between 25 and 30 cents. While most users therefore fall
substantially short of their plans, originally planned paydown is still the single most predictive factor
for actual paydown. Controlling for planned paydown, the user’s income, debt levels, cash balances,
available credit, total credit, interests rates or spending behavior do not significantly affect actual debt
reduction. This indicates that planned paydown contains additional information about the user’s
ability to reduce debt not captured by income or spending, such as spending needs or the ease of
reducing spending.
    Overall, the results show that while plans are predictive of actual paydown, many users have
substantial problems following their plans to reduce credit card debt. Not following through with
originally made plans is a key prediction of present bias. The remainder of the paper analyzes to what
extent present bias can indeed explain the observed failure of sticking with debt paydown plans.




                                                     7
3     Inferring Present Bias from Consumption Patterns
This section theoretically shows how present bias and sophistication manifest in consumption patterns
and proposes new empirical tests for both. We use simulated model data to validate our proposed
empirical measures theoretically before using them to analyze their effect on debt paydown.

3.1    Preferences
The first empirical observation, that individuals do not follow through with their debt paydown plans,
can be explained by a broadly applied preference specification: present bias or quasi-hyperbolic pref-
erences, a modeling approach popularized by Laibson (1997). Each period t ∈ {0, ..., T }, a present-
biased agent with quasi-hyperbolic preferences discounts consumption utility in period t + τ, u(Ct+τ )
by βδτ , where β ∈ [0, 1] and δ ∈ [0, 1]. In turn, the agent maximizes his lifetime utility given by

                                                     T −t
                                        u(Ct ) + βEt [ ∑ δτ u(Ct+τ )]
                                                     τ =1

The agent’s discount factor between any two periods is not constant over time. Between any two
consecutive future periods, the agent discounts by δ. But between the current and all future periods,
the agent is more impatient and applies an additional discount factor of β. If β < 1, the agent is more
impatient in the short-run relative to his long-run preferences. β̂ denotes the agent’s expectation of
his future impatience factor β. We focus on three cases. (1) A sophisticated agent is perfectly aware
of his short-run impatience, i.e. β̂ = β. (2) A naive agent believes that his future preferences will be
identical to his current preferences, not realizing that his future self will become impatient, i.e., β̂ = 1.
(3) A standard agent discounts exponentially and thus behaves time consistently, i.e., β̂ = β = 1.
                                                                        C 1− θ
For simplicity, we assume a power-utility specification u(C ) =         1− θ     for the agent’s period utility
function. In the context of our model, the agent’s plan is her own expectation of future consumption.
Hence, for sophisticated and standard agents, planned and actual future consumption will be the
same. A naive agent’s planned consumption is her consumption under the mistaken assumption that
her future impatience factor will be equal to 1, i.e., under her belief β̂ = 1. The consumption plan then
determines the debt paydown plan we observe empirically.

3.2    Model Environment
All agents face a simple budget constraint. Cash-on-hand Xt is determined by their initial consump-
tion Ct−1 and savings At−1 as well as their income Yt and the opportunity to save, at interest rate Rs ,
or borrow, at interest rate Rb , summarized by the function R( At−1 ) := R, i.e.,

                                Xt = At−1 R + Yt = ( Xt−1 − Ct−1 ) R + Yt .

      Income in each period Yt is characterized by a permanent component Pt that grows deterministi-
cally each period by Gt . Moreover, income is characterized by transitory shocks NtT , i.e.,

                                         Yt = Pt NtT = Pt−1 Gt NtT .




                                                     8
The transitory shocks allow for a low probability p of unemployment or illness
                                  (      T
                                                                                               )
                                      e st   with probability 1 − p and stT ∼ N (µ T , σT2 )
                        NtT   =                                                                    .
                                       0                  with probability p

From period t = Ret on, the agent retires and earns his permanent income without uncertainty. We
omit permanent income shocks because in our empirical setting, we select individuals with stable em-
ployment and income over the sample period and are interested in inferring features of present bias
from individual reactions to transitory income fluctuations. Moreover, Carroll (2001) among others
argues that household income processes are well approximated by a deterministic trend and a transi-
tory shock. Furthermore, we assume the absence of credit constraints because we exclude users who
have low liquidity in the empirical analysis.

3.3   Model Equilibrium
We can obtain the equilibrium solution by backward induction. For the standard and sophisticated
agent, we derive the equilibrium consumption function under the premise that the agent enters pe-
riod t, optimizes over consumption, and expects to behave in the same manner in the future. This
equilibrium concept corresponds to the solution of Laibson (1997). The naive agent, however, enters
period t, optimizes over consumption, but expects to behave in a different manner in the future. In
fact, because β̂ = 1, the naive agent expects his future self to discount payoffs only by δτ instead of by
βδτ . Assuming a power-utility specification precludes an analytical solution, but simulations using
numerical backward induction suggest that a unique equilibrium exists.13

3.4   Calibration and Consumption Life-cycle Profiles
We calibrate the environmental and preference parameters in line with the literature. All parameters
are displayed in Table 5. For the income process we follow the fairly tight ranges suggested in the
life-cycle literature such as Gourinchas and Parker (2002). Specifically, µ T = 0, σT = 0.8, and p =
0.1%.14 Gt is assumed to follow a hump-shaped income profile that we estimate from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) using a standard pseudo-panel approach. Moreover, because Gourinchas
and Parker (2002) choose 25 years as the beginning of life, we choose the retirement period Ret = 11
years and the life span T − Ret = 54 years, in accordance with the average US retirement age according
to the OECD, and the average US life expectancy according to the UN. At age 25, we set the mean
ratio of liquid wealth to income equal to one,          = 1. The mean of Moody’s municipal bond
                                                            A0/P0

index is 3.1% such that Rs = 1.031 and, as in our data, the interest on borrowing is Rb = 1.167. We
assume the exponential discount factor to be δ = 0.94 and the coefficient of risk aversion to be θ = 2,
both standard choices in the literature. Empirical estimates for the present-biased parameter typically
range from around β = 0.6 to β = 0.9 (see Angeletos et al. (2001) among others) when the exponential
  13 The consumption functions are increasing and concave and the equilibrium appears easy to solve for and stable.Carroll
(2011) and Harris and Laibson (2002) demonstrate the existence and uniqueness of equilibria for the standard and sophisti-
cated hyperbolic-discounting agents in similar environments.
  14 We choose a relatively high volatility for the transitory income shocks for the following reason: when we simulate

the√model at a bi-monthly frequency to match our empirical setting, we need a minimum amount of variation that equals
0.8 1/24 for an annualized volatility of 0.8. To compensate, we set the permanent income shock to zero and also assume a
relatively low probability of unemployment or illness p.



                                                              9
discount factor is around one (δ = 0.94). We will show how varying values of β affect the estimates
and how we can use consumption patterns to infer β empirically. For the following illustration, we set
β = 0.7. We first simulate the model at an annual frequency, as is standard in the literature, then move
on to a bi-monthly frequency in line with our empirical setting. We initially explore the model at a
lower frequency to see how far we could differentiate sophistication versus naivete using standard
data sources, such as the CEX.
      Figure 1 contrasts the consumption paths of the three types of agents considered - standard, naive
present-biased, and sophisticated present-biased - with the empirical consumption and income pro-
files estimated from CEX data. Consistent with the data, sophisticated present-biased and naive
present-biased preferences generate a hump-shaped consumption profile. Moreover, power utility
implies prudence, such that all agents have a standard precautionary-savings motive causing an ini-
tially increasing consumption path. But, the present-biased agents are also sufficiently impatient, such
that consumption eventually decreases. Overall, we conclude that the calibrated lifetime consump-
tion profiles look reasonably similar to the average consumption profile from CEX data rendering
our calibration appropriate. However, the more important takeaway is the following: sophistication
versus naivete does not make a big difference with respect to the shape of the consumption profile.
Thus, we cannot use standard data sources to tell whether individuals are sophisticated or naive. As
we will show later, however, sophisticated versus naive individuals differ substantially in their high-
frequency responses to income payments when they have low versus high resources and in following
through with their credit card debt paydown plans. Our high-frequency data on spending, resources,
and plans thus allows us to determine whether individuals are sophisticated or naive and how far this
affects their actual versus planned debt paydown.

3.5      Euler Equations and Intuition for Empirical Measures
Tobacman (2007) shows that the Euler equations for the standard, sophisticated present-biased, and
naive present-biased agents can be expressed as follows:

                                                   ∂Ĉt+1  β    ∂Ĉ
                           u0 (Ct ) = δEt [ R( β          + (1 − t+1 ))u0 (Ĉt+1 )]
                                                   ∂Xt+1   β̂   ∂Xt+1

with Ĉt+1 being planned consumption in t + 1, which equals actual consumption for the standard and
sophisticated but not the naive agent. This specification nests the standard agent’s Euler equation, i.e.,
β = β̂ = 1,
                                          u0 (Ct ) = δEt [ Ru0 (Ct+1 )].

      Comparing the Euler equations illustrates the intuition for our proposed measures of an individ-
ual’s present bias, captured by his short-run impatience, β, and whether the individual is sophisti-
cated or naive about their future impatience. When deciding on how much to consume in the current
period relative to future periods, present-biased agents are overly impatient in the short run. Hence,
we would expect a higher marginal propensity to consume out of transitory income for present-biased
agents and for this response to be stronger the more impatient the agent is in the short run (the smaller
β is).
      Differences between sophisticated and naive agents arise when individuals’ current choices de-


                                                         10
pend on their beliefs about their future choices, such as when they consider passing on resources to
their future selves. The fully naive present-biased Euler equation, i.e., β̂ = 1 and β < 1, is

                                              u0 (Ct ) = δEt [ Rβu0 (Ĉt+1 )].

      A naive agent does not anticipate being overly impatient in the future. Instead, he believes his
future selves will share his current self’s (relatively patient) long-run preferences and choose con-
sumption accordingly, i.e., β̂ = 1 > β. The naive agent therefore chooses current consumption such
that the ratio of present to future marginal utility is equal to the discount factor between the two
periods. He expects his future self to follow through with this plan as the standard agent would.
      In contrast, the sophisticated present-biased Euler equation, i.e., β = β̂ < 1, is

                                                     ∂Ct+1       ∂C
                             u0 (Ct ) = δEt [ R( β         + (1 − t+1 ))u0 (Ct+1 )].
                                                     ∂Xt+1       ∂Xt+1

      Unlike naive agents, sophisticated agents know that their future selves do not share their more
patient long-run preferences, and will again be overly impatient. They know that a smaller fraction
of future resources will be saved by the future self than the current self would like. Because the fu-
ture selves will not smooth consumption to maximize utility, as for the standard agent (or as believed
by the naive agent), saving becomes somewhat more valuable. How much the future self consumes
rather than saves depends on the level of available resources. When resources are higher, the declin-
ing marginal utility of consumption leads future selves to consume a smaller share of any marginal
resources passed on to them. Hence, future selves act more in the interest of the first period’s self.
Aware of this reduced conflict in future resource allocation, the current self is more willing to pass
on additional resources to his future selves. In the Euler equation, this mechanism is captured by
                                    ∂Ct+1               ∂Ct+1
the effective discount factor, ( βδ ∂X t +1
                                            + δ (1 −    ∂Xt+1 )).   As the marginal propensity to consume out of
                                 ∂Ct+1
resources in the next period,    ∂Xt+1 ,   decreases, the current period self acts more patiently, since there is
more weight put on the long-run discount factor, δ, relative to the short-run discount factor βδ. With
diminishing marginal utility of consumption, the marginal propensity to consume decreases with the
level of resources. Hence, we would expect sophisticated agents to act more patiently when they ex-
pect next period’s resources to be high and marginal utility to be low. This mechanism does not exist
for naive agents, however, who are unaware of a potential conflict of interest with their future selves.
This difference allows us to distinguish between naive and sophisticated present-biased agents.

3.6    Measuring Short-Run Impatience
To make the following simulation exercises comparable to our empirical setting, we simulate the
model and run the regressions at a bi-monthly instead of annual frequency. Moreover, we ensure
our empirical setting has sufficient statistical power by assuming the same number of agents - 516 -
and the same number of bi-monthly paychecks - 26 (the median number of payweeks for users in our
sample).
      The annualized parameters, such as the exponential discount factor, are the same as in the pre-
vious model and displayed in Table 5, but a simulated period is now shorter to match our empirical




                                                            11
setting.15
      Based on the Euler equation above, we would expect that present-biased agents who are more
impatient in the short run (lower β) have a higher marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of
transitory income fluctuations. We estimate the following standard log consumption growth or MPC
regression following Campbell and Deaton (1989), among many others, using simulated data of the
agents in our model:
                                       ∆log(Ct+1 ) = a + b1 ∆log(Yt+1 ) + et+1 .                                          (1)

Table 6 shows the resulting estimates for b1 and standard errors for a range of short-run impatience
β. For agents who are more impatient in the short run (lower β), we indeed estimate higher MPC
coefficients b1 as they react more strongly to changes in income from period to period.16 Moreover, we
can see that the difference between the sophisticated and naive agents’ MPCs become larger for greater
levels of short-run impatience or present bias. The reason is that the sophisticated agent understands
that his future value is greatly reduced by his future present bias. That makes saving somewhat more
valuable and decreases the sophisticated agent’s MPC relative to the naive agent’s at greater levels of
short-run impatience.

3.7    Measuring Sophistication
The Euler equation above suggests that sophisticated agents act more patiently when they expect a
lower marginal propensity to consume in the next period. Thus, there appears a relationship between
consumption growth ∆Ct+1 , income growth ∆Yt+1 , and the inverse of the marginal propensity to
                         ∂Ct+1
consume 1 − MPCt+1 = 1 − ∂X t +1
                                 . In turn, we can estimate a modified consumption growth regression
with income growth and the inverse of the marginal propensity to consume interacted with income
growth:


                    ∆log(Ct+1 ) = a + b1 ∆log(Yt+1 ) + b3 (1 − MPCt+1 )∆log(Yt+1 ) + et+1 .                               (2)

      We expect b3 to be negative for the sophisticated agent, but not for the naive agent. Table 7 shows
the results. In line with our intuition, we find negative and significant estimates of b3 for the sophisti-
cated but not for the standard or naive agents.
      While we can infer the marginal propensity to consume theoretically in the model, in the data,
marginal propensities to consume are unobservable and need to be estimated from observables. We
propose the level of resources available to the individual from the last period (outgoing savings, At+1 ,
normalized by maximum savings over the sample period Amax to obtain a number comparable to the
MPC in variation) as a proxy for the marginal propensity to consume.17 With diminishing marginal
utility of consumption, higher resources lead to a lower marginal propensity to consume. Further-
  15 We solve for the infinite-horizon model as bi-monthly periods are very short.Here, because the income profile estimated
from CEX data is hump-shaped, we assume a constant growth rate of 3% to simulate agents early to mid-life in their life-
cycle where they would borrow more. 3% is the average growth rate of the income profile estimated from CEX data at
ages 25 to 55. The results are not different if instead we would simulate data at a quarterly or annual period assuming the
calibration in Table 5 or similar parameter values that are standard in the literature. Furthermore, results are not affected
when we assume a finite horizon and take a random sample of agents’ ages and initial savings levels to simulate the data.
  16 Even for the standard agent the baseline MPC is relatively high because we assume an income growth rate of 3% to

simulate agents early to mid-life in their life-cycles.
  17 In the empirical exercise, we use balances, thus income minus consumption, which equals outgoing savings, i.e., A
                                                                                                                        t +1 =
Xt+1 − Ct+1 .


                                                             12
more, to align our theoretical model with our empirical approach, we do not use logged consumption
growth, but logged absolute consumption as the outcome variable and logged absolute income as the
explanatory variable. Thus, we validate our empirical approach in the simulated data by estimating
the following regression:

                                                               A t +1     A
                      log(Ct+1 ) = α + b1 log(Yt+1 ) + b2             + b3 t+1 log(Yt+1 ) + ε t+1 .                       (3)
                                                               Amax       Amax
      Table 8 shows the results. Again we find a negative coefficient b3 for sophisticated agents but
not for naive ones. This is in line with our intuition and thus providing a valid empirical test for
sophistication.

4      Consumption Patterns
This section estimates each user’s sensitivity to paycheck receipt and how it is affected by varying
resources over time by implementing the empirical tests we just validated theoretically. After estimat-
ing each user’s level of short-run impatience and sophistication, we can relate those to debt paydown
behavior in the next section.

4.1     Sensitivity of Consumption to Paycheck Receipt
4.1.1    Regression Equation

The average sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck receipt for user i is estimated in the
following equation:
                                     log( Eit ) = αi + payweek it γ1i + Xit ψi + ε it                                     (4)

Eit are user i’s consumption expenditures on day t. payweek it is an indicator equal to 1 on the day
of paycheck receipt and the 6 subsequent days and 0 on all remaining days. Xit includes month
fixed effects and day-of-week fixed effects. Estimating equation (4) separately for each user yields
a user-specific estimate of sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck receipt, captured by the
coefficient on payweek, γ1i .
      We focus on expenditures Eit for goods likely to be consumed shortly after purchase, which we
call short-run consumables18 : restaurant and entertainment expenditures and food and gas purchases.
Since food and gas can be stored for a while rather than immediately consumed, we also present
results for just restaurant and entertainment spending and show that the consumption patterns look
very similar.

4.1.2    Filtering Out Credit Constraints

We are interested in capturing the extent of sensitivity to paycheck receipt that reflects a user’s level
of short-run impatience. But, if expense shocks come at times when consumers are credit constrained,
they also lead to increased spending in payweeks. To isolate the effect of short-run impatience, we
    18 Measuring consumption by expenditures can lead to misleading conclusions, as shown by Aguiar and Hurst (2005).
We focus on expenditure categories that are likely to be a good proxy for actual consumption, such as restaurant meals and
entertainment. We also estimate spending patterns over several pay cycles in which consumers do not experience income
shocks. It is therefore unlikely that the estimates are driven by shifts in behavior from one regime to another in response to
shocks.


                                                             13
thus restrict the sample to those paycycles in which short-run credit constraints are unlikely to play a
role. Specifically, we restrict the sample to those times in which the user had enough resources (cash
in his account and, especially, available credit on his cards) to afford the payweek’s worth of spending
in the previous week. In Section 6.4, we show that our results are also robust to more conservative
measures of credit constraints.

4.1.3    Estimated Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt

Table 9 shows estimates of the sensitivity γ1i in our sample. On average, users indeed consume sig-
nificantly more during payweeks than non-payweeks even if credit constraints are unlikely to play a
role. During payweeks, spending on short-run consumables is 6.1% higher, and spending on restau-
rants and entertainment is 4.7% higher. There is substantial variation between users. For instance, at
the 75th percentile users increase consumption in both categories by almost 20% in payweeks.19 Some
of this variation is due to noise in the estimation and some due to differences among individuals. We
therefore bootstrap standard errors for all estimates below in which sensitivity to paycheck is used
as an explanatory variable to account for the variation due to noise rather than actual differences be-
tween individual users. Bootstrapping the standard errors is the most conservative approach we can
take and tends to yield higher standard errors than other approaches.

4.2     Effect of Resources on Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt
4.2.1    Regression Equation

The effect of variation in resources on the sensitivity to paycheck receipt is estimated separately for
each user by the following equation:

           log( Eit ) = αi + payweek it γ1i + resourcesit γ2i + resourcesit ∗ payweek it γ3i + Xit ψi + ε it               (5)

where, as in equation (4), Eit are each user’s daily expenditures, payweek it is an indicator equal to 1 on
the day of paycheck receipt and the 6 subsequent days and 0 on all remaining days, and Xit includes
month fixed effects and day-of-week fixed effects. resourcesit are a user’s available resources, defined
as the cash balances on his bank accounts plus the available credit on his credit cards.

4.2.2    Wealth Fluctuations due to Regular Payments

To estimate the effect of varying resources, we exploit within-agent variation in resources over time.20
However, the level of resources available to the agent at every point in time is not exogenous to
the agent’s consumption decision. There are two sources of endogeneity. First, expenditures in the
beginning of the pay cycle reduce the resources available later in the pay cycle one-for-one. This can
be addressed by measuring resources at the beginning of each pay cycle. Second, resources in the
  19 Appendix Figure A1 plots the distribution of the estimated sensitivity for both categories of consumption. The two

distributions look very similar and confirm the key insights of Table 9: The mean of the distributions is shifted upwards
from zero, and a t-test confirms that it is significantly different from zero.
  20 In the literature, the effect of higher resources on the sensitivity of consumption is often estimated across individuals,

for instance by Stephens (2006). Using within-individual variation instead provides an alternative estimate of the effect of
resources.



                                                              14
given pay cycle depend on past consumption. This is problematic if high prior spending not only
reduces the agent’s resources, but also his taste for consumption in the current period, leading to
biased estimates. For instance, a user who went out regularly over the last weeks, going to the movies
and eating out, has lower resources in the current pay cycle. Additionally, he may have a lower taste
for new consumption, having seen the latest movies and been to his favorite restaurants.
    To address this endogeneity problem, we exploit variation in the agent’s resources due to regular
payments. Users in our sample are paid twice a month, but have regular monthly expenses, such as
rent or mortgage payments. These monthly obligations lead to substantially lower resources during
the two-week pay cycle when they are due relative to the other two weeks of the month. Another ex-
ample are months with three paychecks for users who are paid bi-weekly (rather than twice a month).
We exploit the systematic fluctuations in the level of resources caused by such regular payments to
construct an instrumental variable for the level of resources. Based on the agent’s regular payments,
we calculate what his resources would have been if all non-regular spending was split evenly across
the sample period. These hypothetical balances isolate the variation caused by regular payments from
the variation caused by prior discretionary spending. Figure A2 in Appendix A.2 illustrates the intu-
ition for these calculated balances.

4.2.3   Measuring Sophistication by Effect of Resources on Sensitivity

We estimate how fluctuations in resources affect the sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck
receipt using the hypothetical balances based on regular payments as an instrumental variable The
user-specific estimates captured by γ3i in equation (5) are shown in the bottom panel of Table 9.
    As outlined in Section 3, additional resources lead sophisticated agents - but not naive ones -
to act more patiently, and their consumption reacts less to payment receipt. We split the sample
into two groups. Those for whom additional resources reduce sensitivity to paycheck receipt, i.e.,
γ3i is negative, and those for whom this is not the case, i.e., γ3i is non-negative. For the median
user, the effect is close to zero in both short-run consumable spending and exclusively restaurant and
entertainment spending. But there is substantial heterogeneity allowing us to split the sample along
this characteristic.
    Because differences in the effect of resources theoretically correspond to differences in sophistica-
tion, we call the first group “sophisticated” and the latter “naive”. Note that we classify every user,
including those with no or low levels of short-run impatience, as either sophisticated or naive. We
address the fact that a classification into “sophisticated” and “naive” is not very meaningful for users
who are time-consistent or close to time-consistent (as captured by low sensitivity to paycheck re-
ceipt) below in section 6.3. Table 10 shows the classification of users into sophisticated and naive. A
substantial number of users are classified the same way, irrespective of whether the classification is
based on spending on short-run consumables or on restaurant and entertainment only. However, for
almost a third of users, the classification differs between the two categories. Therefore, we bootstrap
standard errors whenever the estimates are used as explanatory variables in a regression and show
that our results are similar using only consistently classified users in Appendix B.4.




                                                   15
4.2.4   Summary Statistics by Differences in Consumption Patterns

One concern is that agents classified as sophisticated or naive also differ substantially along dimen-
sions other than sophistication. Specifically, differences in sophistication may not only lead to differ-
ences in debt paydown behavior, but may also reflect differences in the level of impatience, assets,
earnings or total spending.
     Table 11 shows average and median estimated sensitivity levels for naive and sophisticated users
based on short-run consumables and on restaurant and entertainment spending only. When based
on short-run consumables spending, estimated levels of sensitivity to paycheck receipt are larger for
sophisticated agents. When based on restaurant and entertainment spending only, they are lower, but
the differences between the two groups is not statistically significant in either case.
     There are several factors that could lead sensitivity estimates to differ between the two groups,
though none seems to clearly dominate in our sample. First, average sensitivity estimates are biased
slightly downwards for sophisticated agents. When resource levels are high, sensitivity is lower for a
sophisticated agent than it is for a naive agent with the same level of impatience. Therefore average
sensitivity, estimated for times of both low and high resource levels, will be lower for a sophisticated
agent than for a naive one with the same level of impatience.21 A second factor is measurement error
in classifying users into sophisticated and naive. If sensitivity of consumption to paycheck receipt
is relatively low, sensitivity changes due to resource fluctuations are also small in absolute terms
and, when measured with error, less likely to be detected. Sophisticated users with low levels of
impatience therefore have a higher likelihood of being incorrectly classified as naive than users with
high levels of impatience. In the robustness checks, in Section 6.3, we therefore exclude users with
low sensitivity who are most likely to be misclassified. Third, the level of impatience may be directly
related to whether a user is aware of his short-run impatience. Users with high short-run impatience
may be more likely to eventually become aware of their own time inconsistency relative to users with
a relatively minor time inconsistency problem.
     In addition to estimated levels of sensitivity, Table 11 shows some key summary statistics on
income and debt levels across naive and sophisticated users. Income and initial credit card debt levels
are very similar between the two groups. Average income is almost identical. Average initial debt
is slightly lower, $13,693 relative to $14,144, for sophisticated users, but median debt is higher for
sophisticates. Table 11 also shows that sophisticated and naive agents have very similar spending
habits across all categories, both in absolute terms and relative to their income. Both types also use
their credit card in similar ways and charge 31% of total purchases on their credit cards. In general,
the differences between sophisticated and naive agents in assets and spending are small and none
is statistically significant. It is therefore unlikely that the classification into naive and sophisticated
masks substantial differences between the two groups along other dimensions which could directly
account for any differences in their debt repayment behavior. It is also consistent with the notion that
the services provided by ReadyForZero appealed to a variety of users with credit card debt and did
not target those with some form of present bias.
  21 Instead of using the average sensitivity to paycheck receipt estimated by equation (4), an alternative measure would

be the base level of sensitivity captured by the coefficient on payweek in equation (5). However, because of the additional
variables and the need to instrument for them, the estimates are much more noisy. Because of this higher precision, we use
the average sensitivity in the regression analysis, since the focus is on intra-, not inter-, group comparisons.


                                                            16
      The fact that we do not find large differences in income, assets, or spending between sophisticated
and naive users also lines up with our theoretical results that, in terms of the life-cycle profiles, as
shown in Figure 1, sophisticated agents do not differ much from naive agents.22 This theoretical
finding reinforces the need for an alternative measure of sophistication versus naivete like the one we
propose.
      Finally, we also do not find substantial differences in the levels of planned paydown. Appendix
table A2 shows that the main determinants of planned paydown are income and original debt levels
which are very similar across the two groups. There is no statistically significant effect of sensitivity
or sophistication on planned paydown. Hence, planned paydown seems to be determined primarily
by factors such as income, existing debt levels and possible other considerations such as spending
needs and ease of reductions in spending. Thus, the next question is whether sophisticates are better
in meeting their debt paydown plans.

5      The Effect of Present Bias on Debt Repayment
Section 4 showed that consumption patterns over the paycycle are consistent with users exhibiting
short-run impatience and varying levels of sophistication. As outlined in section 3, this section uses
these patterns as proxies for the extent of each user’s present bias and relates them to their success in
reducing debt levels.

5.1     Nonparametric: Debt Paydown by Type
Figure 2 shows the average change in debt levels over the first 90 days for both sophisticated and naive
users by quintiles of their estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt. In both groups, some users pay
down substantial amounts of debt. Among sophisticated users, those in the two lowest quintiles of
sensitivity to paycheck receipt reduce their debt levels the most. As sensitivity to paycheck increases,
paydown falls. For naive users, no such pattern exists. However, the graph does not control for any
characteristics of users, especially planned paydown, a key determinant of debt paydown. To do so,
the next section shows regression analysis of the effect of sensitivity and planned paydown.

5.2     Regression Equation
To formally analyze the effect of potential present bias as captured by consumption patterns on debt
paydown, we estimate the following regression:

                 Paydowni = µ0 + Sensitivityi µ1n + PlannedPaydowni µ2n
                                     + Sensitivityi ∗ Sophisti µ1s + PlannedPaydowni ∗ Sophisti µ2s
                                     + Xi0 λ + νi                                                                           (6)

where Sensitivityi is each user’s sensitivity of spending to paycheck receipt, estimated by equation
(4). PlannedPaydowni is the amount the user originally had planned to pay down and Sophisti is
an indicator for whether the user is classified as sophisticated. Xi is a set of control variables which
include the user’s monthly income and debt levels at sign up. We measure debt paydown over two
    22 Other papers such as Angeletos et al. (2001) also find only small differences in asset accumulation between sophisticated

and naive agents.



                                                               17
horizons: 90 and 180 days. To make estimates comparable, debt paydown and planned paydown are
therefore measured per day. Debt paydown is measured by the trend in debt balances over the given
time horizon. Relative to the simple difference in debt levels, this measure filters out fluctuations in
debt levels caused by the use of credit cards for transactions. To measure the trend in debt levels, we
fit a linear trend for the user’s debt balances over the given horizon, such that average daily paydown
equals the slope of the estimated trend line.23

5.3       Regression Results
Table 12 shows the regression estimates for equation (6) over time horizons of 90 and 180 days. Since
the regressors “Sensitivity” and “Sophisticated” are themselves estimated from consumption patterns,
standard errors in the second stage are bootstrapped to be most conservative.24 For naive agents, the
omitted category, an additional dollar in planned paydown increases actual paydown by 18 cents over
the first 90 days and by 13 cents over 180 days. In our baseline specification shown here, sensitivity has
a positive effect on paydown which is statistically significant over the 180 day horizon, but this result
is not robust across different specifications as shown throughout section 6. We therefore interpret our
results as ambiguous regarding the effect of short-run impatience for naive users’ paydown.
      For sophisticated users, planned paydown is substantially more predictive of actual paydown
than for naive users. Specifically, the estimated effect in the first 90 days is 55 cents (.18 + .37) and 52
cents (.13 + .39) in the first 180 days. As shown below, these results are very similar and robust across
different specifications. Unlike for naive users, the level of short-run impatience has a significant
negative effect for sophisticated users. More impatient agents reduce their debt less. The difference
relative to naive users, as well as the combined effect for sophisticates, is statistically significant (un-
reported test) and economically meaningful: moving from the 75th to the 25th percentile of estimated
impatience levels increases debt paydown in the first 90 days after sign up by $623. This is a sub-
stantial fraction of the average paydown of $711 over this time horizon.25 There is no statistically
significant difference in the effect of the control variables for sophisticated and naive users. In fact,
most of the control variables have no substantial effect on actual paydown once planned paydown
is included, consistent with the results presented in Table 4. The estimated relationship between the
characteristics of a user’s consumption patterns and his debt paydown reflects what one would ex-
pect if both were caused by present bias: Sophisticated users are better in following through with their
debt paydown plans, but higher short-run impatience leads them to pay down less over a given time
period. The results also reinforce the interpretation of sensitivity to paycheck receipt as a measure of
impatience and validates the classification of users as naive or sophisticated. After all, better ability to
follow plans is a key prediction of sophistication.
  23 Inunreported robustness checks, we use the simple difference in debt levels and the results are very similar.
  24 Foreach user, we draw a bootstrap sample from the observations of consumption spending and re-estimate the first
stage variables for each draw. Then we use these estimates in the second stage estimation and compute bootstrapped
standard errors based on the second stage results of all draws. Using robust standard errors to interpret the results would
not change the overall conclusions though it would increase statistical significance generally.
  25 The difference between the 25th and 75th percentile for the estimated sensitivity based on short-run consumables is

.28 = .199 + 0.081, as shown in Table 9. Multiplying the direct effect plus the difference for sophisticated agents by this
difference yields an estimated effect of $6.93 per day, or $623 over 90 days.




                                                            18
6      Robustness and Alternative Interpretations
Attributing the results in Section 5 to present bias and, hence, supporting our notion of using spending
patterns to measure present bias, requires that the two are related only through a user’s present bias
and that no other factor is plausibly driving the results. This section shows robustness of our main
results and shows that alternative explanations for some of the patterns in the data fail to explain the
joint behavior of debt paydown and consumption patterns.

6.1     Robustness of Estimating Effect on Paydown
Estimates based Only on Restaurant and Entertainment Spending and Regression Specification
Our main results in Table 12 use spending patterns based on short-run consumables as proxies for
short-run impatience and sophistication. The first two columns of Appendix Table A3 use spending
patterns based only on restaurant and entertainment spending instead. The results are very similar
to our baseline results: The level of short-run impatience has a significant negative effect for sophis-
ticated users, but not for naive users and planned paydown is substantially more predictive of actual
paydown for sophisticated rather than naive users.
      The remaining columns of Appendix Table A3 explore different regression specifications. Our
baseline specification allows the effect of the control variables to differ between sophisticated and
naive users. Appendix B.1 shows that the estimates are very similar when income and original debt
levels are not interacted with sophistication and the control variables are restricted to have the same
influence for both types of users. Another possible concern about the specification in equation (6) is
that planned paydown and the estimated level of sensitivity to paycheck receipt are highly correlated.
We, therefore, estimate separate specifications in which either the sensitivity to paycheck or planned
paydown is interacted with sophistication, and the respective other variable is only included as a
control (not interacted with sophistication). The results are very similar.

Direct Relationship between Paydown and Consumption Patterns One potential concern is that
spending patterns are directly linked to debt paydown, not just through behavioral biases, since, by
definition, debt paydown requires a reduction in consumption spending. First, there is no mechanical
relationship between the spending patterns and debt paydown. The sensitivity to paycheck receipt,
which is used to measure present bias, only captures how evenly consumption is split over the pay
cycle. It is thus unrelated to the level of consumption, which is what affects debt paydown. This leaves
enough variation to identify potential differences in the amount of debt paid down. In other words,
sensitivity of consumption captures the ratio of future to present consumption ( CCt+t 1 ), but saving for
debt paydown depends on the level of consumption spending (saving = income − Ct+1 − Ct ). There-
fore agents can exhibit the same level of sensitivity to paycheck receipt, while having different levels
of debt paydown. Similarly, agents with the same amount of debt reduction may choose to split the re-
maining resources differently between the two periods of the pay cycle, leading to different sensitivity
of consumption spending, but equal debt reduction.26
    26 Considerthe following example to illustrate this point: An agent with a paycheck of $100 saves $50 and consumes $30
in the first period and $20 in the second period, leading to 50% higher consumption in payweeks. Alternatively, the agent
can consume $60 in the first period and $40 in the second, leading to the same sensitivity of consumption spending but
different paydown. Similarly, saving $50 but consuming $25 each period leads to the same savings as in the first case, but



                                                           19
      Nevertheless, it could be the case that users who smooth consumption more when they have
higher resources, which we label sophisticates, may also be those who consume a lower share of these
additional resources, leading them to save more for debt paydown. A high reduction in sensitivity
as resources increase (i.e., a more negative coefficient on the interaction of payweek ∗ resources) would
lead to higher debt paydown. Appendix section B.2 explores this concern. We estimate the direct
relationship between the reduction in sensitivity to paycheck receipt and debt paydown. Appendix
Table A4 shows that this direct relationship is far from statistically significant in all specifications and
the point estimate is positive in several specification - the opposite of what would be expected under
the hypothesis that a reduction in sensitivity as resources increase leads to higher debt paydown.

6.2    Robustness of Estimating Sensitivity
Appendix B.3 shows that our results are robust to different ways of estimating the sensitivity to pay-
check receipt. In the baseline, we require 45 days of positive spending to include a user in our sample.
In Appendix Table A5 we replicate the analysis requiring 40 or 50 days instead. The relationship
between consumption patterns and debt paydown is unaffected.
      In the baseline specification, spending is also measured in logs and on a daily level. Instead,
the first two columns of Table A6 use sensitivity estimates based on the actual amount spent and
normalizes those estimates by average spending. The third and fourth columns use weekly spending
instead of daily spending. The last two columns use sensitivity estimates based only on debit card
spending, excluding any spending on credit cards. All results are very similar to the baseline estimates
in Table 12.

6.3    Robustness of Measuring Sophistication
Low Levels of Sensitivity From a theoretical perspective, the distinction between sophisticated and
naive agents becomes meaningless when users have very low or no short-run impatience. Relatedly,
users with low levels of sensitivity to paycheck receipt are difficult to classify as either sophisticated or
naive. With a low initial level of sensitivity, any potential reduction in the observed sensitivity which
could identify a user as sophisticated is relatively low. Therefore such a reduction is less likely to be
picked up in the estimation.
      In Table 13, we exclude users with low levels of sensitivity. Starting with the baseline sample, we
subsequently exclude users with the 10%, 15%, and 20% lowest estimated levels of sensitivity to pay-
check receipt. Despite the reduction in sample size, the estimated differences between sophisticated
and naive agents remain statistically significant and of similar magnitude.27 Consistent with theory,
the differences between sophisticated and naive agents are indeed driven by those agents with higher
levels of short-run impatience rather than those with relatively low or no short-run impatience.

Different Classifications of Users Appendix B.4 provides additional robustness checks on the clas-
sification of users as either sophisticated or naive. Ideally, users should be classified the same irre-
spective of whether estimates are based on short-run consumables or restaurant and entertainment
completely smooths consumption.
  27 Note that the average level of sensitivity and its standard deviation in the sample also changes as we drop observations.

So differences in the coefficients - or lack thereof - cannot be interpreted as implying a different sized effect (or lack thereof).
The estimated coefficients across the different sample are not statistically different from each other.


                                                                20
spending only. Appendix Table A7 shows that results are very similar to the baseline when only
consistently-classified users are included. If anything, the point estimates are more similar across
categories, supporting the notion that previously misclassified users lead to additional noise in the
estimation.
      Classification into sophisticated and naive is based on the effect of higher resources on sensitivity
to paycheck receipt. When estimating this effect, resources are instrumented for by hypothetical bal-
ances as outlined in Section 4.2. This addresses the concern that past consumption levels may affect
both the level of resources, as well as spending through unobservables such as a taste for consump-
tion. This could lead to a negative coefficient absent any sophistication by the user. To understand the
importance of this concern, we replicate the results classifying users as sophisticated or naive based
on OLS instead of IV estimates of the effect of resources. If the endogeneity concern is important, a
substantial number of users will be misclassified when using OLS estimates and the estimated differ-
ences between the two groups should be smaller. Indeed, Appendix Table A7 finds smaller differences
between sophisticated and naive individuals which are mostly statistically insignificant, reinforcing
the need to instrument for the level of resources.

6.4    Alternative Explanations for Sensitivity to Paycheck
Consumption spending may be sensitive to paycheck receipt for reasons other than short-run im-
patience. This section argues that such alternative explanations cannot explain the joint patterns of
consumption spending and debt paydown.

Credit Constraints One possible cause of consumption spending sensitivity to paycheck receipt is
credit constraints. If users are credit constrained and suffer an expense shock, they have to wait until
the next paycheck to incur the expense, making spending sensitive to paycheck receipt. Therefore,
throughout this paper, the estimation of the sensitivity to paycheck receipt is based only on times
when credit constraints are unlikely to have played a role. In this section, we replicate the main results
using different ways of excluding periods of potential credit constraint. The baseline specification
requires spending in the given category to be affordable in the pre-paycheck week. The first alternative
takes into account that users may want to hold a buffer stock of resources at all times. It requires
that spending in the given category would have been affordable in the pre-paycheck week without
reducing a consumer’s resources below a buffer stock, measured as the 5th percentile of observed
resources. The second alternative requires that the payweek’s total discretionary spending, rather than
just category-specific spending would have been affordable in the previous week. There is substantial
heterogeneity across users. The majority have considerable borrowing capacity left on their cards, an
average of about $11,000, as shown in Table 1. This group is never classified as likely constrained.
Some users, however, regularly could not have afforded payweek spending in the previous week.
Across all users, the baseline specification excludes about 20% of all days with positive spending as
possibly credit constrained. Requiring total discretionary spending to be affordable or taking a buffer
stock into account increases the number of excluded days to 22% and 28%, respectively. Appendix
Table A1 shows that the estimated sensitivity decreases slightly when filtering out pay cycles in which
the user may have been credit constrained. However, the estimated sensitivity would decrease even
if credit constraints did not play any role, since the excluded pay cycles are those with the highest


                                                     21
spending. On the individual level, the estimated sensitivities are highly correlated across the different
measures.28 Table 14 replicates the main results using sensitivity estimates based on the different
restrictions. Throughout, the results are very similar to the baseline specification.

Habits, Non-Separabilities in Consumption, or Social Coordination Habits coinciding with pay-
weeks are another possible explanation for higher spending during payweeks. For instance, some
people may have a habit of going out for “date night” every two weeks. For some of them, this might
by chance overlap with the receipt of their paycheck. Alternatively, some people may rationally co-
ordinate some purchases with when they get paid. Or they may coordinate consumption spending
with their potentially credit-constrained or present-biased friends or colleagues. However, if the es-
timated sensitivity of consumption were caused by habits, non-separabilities between consumption,
or social coordination, there is no reason to expect these users to have differential sensitivity depend-
ing on their resources or ability to adhere to their debt repayment plans in the way observed in the
data. Therefore, the estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt is at least partially driven by short-run
impatience. Otherwise, it would not relate to debt paydown in exactly the way predicted by present
bias.

Time-Consistent Preferences with a High Discount Factor For consumers who live paycheck to
paycheck, time-consistent preferences with a very high discount factor can lead consumption spend-
ing to be higher early in the pay cycle. Similarly, consumers with a higher discount rate would also
reduce their debt balances less. This is unlikely to be driving the results. First, the discount factor
that would be necessary to lead to sensitivity of consumption spending over a two week horizon is so
high that it is generally considered to be implausible, given consumers’ relative patience in the long-
run.29 Second, time-consistent consumers should have no issue sticking to their original plans. In our
setting, a time-consistent consumer with a high discount factor is likely to be classified as naive. For
both time-consistent as well as naive present-biased consumers, the discount factor between any two
periods does not vary with resource levels and their sensitivity to paycheck receipt should be unaf-
fected. However, we find that these consumers follow their plans substantially less than consumers
classified as sophisticated. Time-consistent preferences with a high discount factor cannot explain
why consumers whose consumption spending becomes less sensitive when resources are higher are
more able to stick to their debt paydown plans.

6.5     Alternative Explanations for Failing to Stick to Plan
Loss of Income A substantial loss of income, for instance from job loss, could render households
unable to follow their original plan to reduce debt levels. However, all users in our sample have
regular paychecks throughout the sample period. Therefore they do not experience a substantial
reduction in their income which could force them to abandon their original plan.
  28 Appendix Table A1 also shows that, within each consumption category, the correlation between sensitivity estimates

with different restrictions is more than 90%. Across the two spending categories - short-run consumables or restaurant and
entertainment spending only - the estimates are also similar with correlations between 55% and 65%.
  29 Shapiro (2005) outlines this argument for the monthly horizon considered in his paper.




                                                           22
Aspirational Plans and Alternative Interpretations of Plan Meaning When prompted by Ready-
ForZero to state how much they want to reduce their debt each month, users may differ in what they
understand a plan to be. For instance, some users may view their planned paydown as an aspira-
tional goal rather than as a realistic plan which they are likely to stick to. However, differences in
interpreting what a plan means should not affect how consumers allocate consumption over the pay
cycle and therefore cannot explain the systematic relationship between consumption patterns and the
extent to which consumers follow their plan. Additionally, the debt reduction plan at ReadyForZero
is not binding and there are no consequences for not following through with a plan. Rather, it was
used to help users calculate their monthly payment for each credit card. There are therefore no obvi-
ous incentives for users to lie about their planned paydown, other than for their own aspirations or
similar motives as mentioned above. This cheap talk nature of the plan on ReadyForZero also means
it is not a commitment device and we therefore do not expect individuals to be sophisticated simply
by signing up for the service.

Better Monitoring of Financial Situation Some users may be paying more attention to their finan-
cial situation than others. This could lead them to allocate more of their spending to times when their
resources are high, such as right after receiving a paycheck, and to generally have a higher marginal
propensity to consume when resources are high. At the same time, paying more attention would also
make them more successful in following through with planned paydown. However, this would pre-
dict that users pay down more when they are more responsive to paycheck receipt and when their
marginal propensity to consume increases with resources. This is the opposite of our results: We clas-
sify users as sophisticated when they have a lower - not higher - marginal propensity to consume
when overall resources are high and find that these users are better at following plans. At the same
time, higher propensity to consume after paycheck receipt is associated with lower debt reduction.
Better monitoring and alignment of spending with times of high resources would predict the opposite
of what we find and, therefore, cannot explain our results.

Lack of Planning Skills or Overoptimism A lack of planning skills or overoptimism could lead
some users to make overly ambitious debt paydown plans and, hence, explain their failure to stick to
their plans. Such bad planning either due to overoptimism or lack of planning skills in general could
also lead to sensitivity of consumption spending to paycheck receipt. Users may be overoptimistic
about the probability of receiving additional resources in the second week of a pay cycle or underes-
timate the cost of their first week’s planned consumption. As a result, they might spend more of the
paycheck when they receive it, and when additional resources fail to materialize, they reduce expen-
ditures. However, there is no reason why the extent of overoptimism or lack of planning skills should
vary systematically with the week to week changes in an individual’s level of resources. There is also
no reason why variations in resources affecting sensitivity of consumption spending should closely
relate to debt paydown. Furthermore, it is not the case that sophisticated and naive users differ in the
aggressiveness of their plans. Hence, overoptimism alone does not predict the systematic differences
between sophisticated and naive agents observed in the data.




                                                  23
Lack of Financial Literacy Several papers have shown that consumers’ lack of basic financial liter-
acy leads many to make suboptimal financial decisions.30 A lack of financial literacy alone, however,
cannot explain the results in this paper. Lack of financial literacy does not necessarily lead to sensitiv-
ity of consumption to paycheck receipt. However, consumers who better understand the implications
of their financial decisions may also be better at planning and allocating resources over their two-
week pay cycles, leading them to smooth consumption more. That being said, a lack of financial
literacy would not predict that differences in the effect of resources on the sensitivity to paycheck
receipt systematically predict which consumers are better able to follow their plan and reduce their
debt levels. Furthermore, one may argue that financially literate individuals should have a higher
marginal propensity to consume when resources are high (see the argument above about better mon-
itoring) rather than the other way around, which is what we observe for sophisticates. Nevertheless,
the results are consistent with some - or even most - consumers lacking a thorough understanding of
financial matters in addition to some having present-biased preferences.

7      Conclusion
This paper shows that differences in consumers’ short-run impatience and their sophistication about
their own time-inconsistent preferences can help explain why some consumers plan to pay off expen-
sive credit card balances but fail to do so. A set of theoretical papers has shown that common features
in credit card contracts, such as teaser rates, disproportionally hurt consumers with behavioral biases
(see Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2010).31 Whether credit markets should be regulated or not, however, cru-
cially depends on whether individuals are aware of their behavioral biases or not. Regulations such
as those in the CARD Act of 2009 might be justified by evidence that awareness of behavioral biases
play a role in explaining credit card debt paydown. This regulation, for instance, prohibits issuers of
sub-prime credit cards to backload fees, which would be very effective in preventing present-biased
consumers from borrowing without fully internalizing the cost.32 The results also have important
implications for how to help consumers get out of debt. For instance, mechanisms that make commit-
ment to long-term plans attractive to consumers could be a promising and cost effective way to do
so. One possibility would be to allow consumers to select a certain amount to be deducted from their
regular paycheck to be put towards debt repayment, and to make it costly or complicated to change
    30 Lusardi and Tufano (2009) show that households with lower financial literacy report excessive debt balances more often.

Bertrand and Morse (2011) find a lack of financial literacy among payday loan borrowers. Bernheim and Garrett (2003) and
Bernheim, Garrett and Maki (2001) show that financial education increases savings. Hastings and Mitchell (2011) show
that while short-run impatience is a strong predictor for retirement savings in Chile, financial literacy is also correlated
with savings levels. Stango and Zinman (2009) show that households who exhibit exponential growth bias borrow more.
Agarwal and Mazumder (2013) find that households with higher cognitive ability measured by math scores make fewer
financial mistakes, such as suboptimal use of credit cards. Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn (2013) provide an overview
of this literature.
   31 Ponce-Rodriguez (2008) shows that banks in Mexico structure credit card contracts to exploit customers’ potential be-

havioral biases. DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004) study how firms structure contracts with consumers who have self
control issues. Several papers have explored the implications of behavioral biases for regulation and policy. Camerer et al.
(2003) argue for the benefits of some paternalistic regulation in the face of behavioral biases, including potential present
bias. Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Congdon (2012) present a framework for the implications of potential behavioral
biases for regulation and public finance. Gruber and Kőszegi (2004) study the implications of time-inconsistent preferences
for the incidence of cigarette taxes.
   32 Agarwal et al. (2015) show that reductions in fees after the Credit CARD Act were not passed on to consumers. Agarwal

et al. (forthcoming) also show why reductions in the cost of funds may not be passed on to credit card borrowers.



                                                              24
this selection. In the literature, similar ideas have been explored in helping present-biased consumers
save, for instance by Thaler and Benartzi (2004) or Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006).
    The need for regulation crucially depends on whether individuals are aware (sophisticated) or
unaware (naive) of their own short-run impatient preferences. This paper proposes a new empirical
methodology to detecting short-run impatience and sophistication versus naivete in high-frequency
transaction-level data of all spending, income, balances, and credit limits. Moreover, we are able
to validate our empirical approach by comparing individuals’ actual debt paydown to their debt
paydown plans. This allows for the application of our methodology in future research using only
spending and income data. To the best of our knowledge, no previous work exists distinguishing
sophistication from naivete in observational data, even though the distinction of sophistication versus
naivete is of utmost important for policy recommendations and in theoretical models.




                                                  25
References
Ackerman, R.A., G. Fries, and R.A. Windle. 2012. “Changes in US Family Finances from 2007 to 2010:
 Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin.

Agarwal, Sumit, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2013. “Cognitive Abilities and Household Financial De-
 cision Making.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1): 193–207.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D.
 Evanoff. 2010. “Learning to Cope: Voluntary Financial Education and Loan Performance during a
 Housing Crisis.” American Economic Review, 100(2): 495–500.

Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2008. “Learning in the Credit
 Card Market.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13822.

Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015. “Reg-
 ulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 130(1): 111–164.

Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. forthcoming.
 “Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow?” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics.

Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2005. “Consumption versus Expenditure.” Journal of Political Economy,
 113(5): 919–948.

Akerlof, George A. 1991. “Procrastination and obedience.” The American Economic Review, 81(2): 1–19.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen Wein-
 berg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evalua-
 tion.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3): 47–68.

Ariely, D., and K. Wertenbroch. 2002. “Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: Self-control by
  precommitment.” Psychological Science, 13(3): 219–224.

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evidence from a commitment
 savings product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 635–672.

Ausubel, Lawrence M. 1991. “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market.” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 81(1): 50–81.

Baker, Scott R. forthcoming. “Debt and the consumption response to household income shocks.”
  Journal of Political Economy.

Baugh, Brian, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park. 2014. “Disentangling financial constraints, pre-
  cautionary savings, and myopia: household behavior surrounding federal tax returns.” National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Baugh, Brian, Jesse B Leary, Financial Conduct Authority, and Jialan Wang. 2017. “When Is It Hard
  to Make Ends Meet?”

Bernheim, B.D., and D.M. Garrett. 2003. “The effects of financial education in the workplace: Evi-
  dence from a survey of households.” Journal of Public Economics, 87(7): 1487–1519.

Bernheim, B.D., D.M. Garrett, and D.M. Maki. 2001. “Education and saving: The long-term effects
  of high school financial curriculum mandates.” Journal of Public Economics, 80(3): 435–465.


                                                26
Bertrand, M., and A. Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday Borrow-
  ing.” Journal of Finance, 66(6): 1865–1893.

Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettlinger, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John Sabelhaus,
  Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle. 2014. “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to
  2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin.

Browning, Martin, and M. Dolores Collado. 2001. “The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated
  Income Changes: Panel Data Estimates.” American Economic Review, 91(3): 681–692.

Camerer, Colin, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin.
  2003. “Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for "Asymmetric Pater-
  nalism".” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 151(3): 1211–1254.

Campbell, J., and A. Deaton. 1989. “Why is Consumption So Smooth?” Review of Economic Studies,
  56(3): 357–373.

Carroll, C. 2001. “Theoretical Foundations of Buffer Stock Saving.” Working Paper Johns Hopkins Uni-
  versity.

Carroll, C. 2011. “Theoretical Foundations of Buffer Stock Saving.” Working Paper Johns Hopkins Uni-
  versity.

Carroll, G.D., J.J. Choi, D. Laibson, B.C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and
  Active Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639–1674.

Choi, J.J., D. Laibson, B.C. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2004. “Default Effects and 401 (k) Savings
 Behavior.” Perspectives on the economics of aging.

DellaVigna, S. 2009. “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.” Journal of Economic Liter-
 ature, 47(2): 315–372.

DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and Evidence.”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 353–402.

DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier. 2006. “Paying not to go to the gym.” American Economic Review,
 96(3): 694–719.

Fang, H., and D. Silverman. 2009. “Time-inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation: Evidence
  from the NLSY.” International Economic Review, 50(4): 1043–1077.

Fang, Hanming, and Yang Wang. 2015. “Estimating dynamic discrete choice models with hyper-
  bolic discounting, with an application to mammography decisions.” International Economic Review,
  56(2): 565–596.

Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis. 2014.
 “Harnessing naturally occurring data to measure the response of spending to income.” Science,
 345(6193): 212–215.

Gourinchas, P.-O., and J. A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption over the Life Cycle.” Econometrica, 70(1): 47–
 89.

Gruber, J., and B. Kőszegi. 2004. “Tax incidence when individuals are time-inconsistent: the case of
 cigarette excise taxes.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(9): 1959–1987.

Harris, C., and D. Laibson. 2002. “Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption.” Advances in Economics
 and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, 1: 258–298.

                                                 27
Hastings, J., and E. Washington. 2010. “The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior and Store
 Responses.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2): 142–162.

Hastings, Justine S., and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011. “How Financial Literacy and Impatience Shape
 Retirement Wealth and Investment Behaviors.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 16740.

Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn. 2013. “Financial Literacy,
 Financial Education, and Economic Outcomes.” Annual Review of Economics, 5(1): 347–373.

Heidhues, P., and B. Kőszegi. 2010. “Exploiting Naïvete about Self-control in the Credit Market.”
 American Economic Review, 100(5): 2279–2303.

Hsieh, C.T. 2003. “Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from the Alaska
 Permanent Fund.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 397–405.

Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri. 2010. “The Consumption Response to Income Changes.” Annual Review
  of Economics, 2: 479–506.

Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. “Self-Control and the Develop-
 ment of Work Arrangements.” American Economic Review, 100(2): 624–28.

Keys, Benjamin J, and Jialan Wang. 2016. “Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer
 Credit Cards.” Working Paper.

Laibson, D. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  112(2): 443–478.

Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman. 2007. “Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption
  Choices over the Lifecycle.” Working Paper.

Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2003. “A Debt Puzzle.” Knowledge, Informa-
  tion, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund Strother Phelps, 228.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. 2009. “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and Overindebt-
  edness.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14808.

Madrian, BC, and DF Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k) Participation and
 Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149–1187.

Meier, S., and C. Sprenger. 2010. “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing.” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1): 193–210.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J. Congdon. 2012. “A Reduced-Form
 Approach to Behavioral Public Finance.” Annual Review of Economics, 4(1): 511–540.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic Review,
  89(1): 103–124.

Olafsson, A., and M. Pagel. 2016. “The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from Personal Finance Man-
 agement Software.” Working Paper.

Parker, Jonathan A. 1999. “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social
  Security Taxes.” American Economic Review, 89(4): 959–973.

Paserman, M.D. 2008. “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and Policy
  Evaluation.” The Economic Journal, 118(531): 1418–1452.

                                               28
Ponce-Rodriguez, Alejandro. 2008. “Rate Offers in the Credit Card Market: Evidence from Mexico.”
  Dissertation Stanford University.

Scholnick, B. 2013. “Consumption Smoothing after the Final Mortgage Payment: Testing the Magni-
  tude Hypothesis.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4): 1444–1449.

Shapiro, J.M. 2005. “Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition cycle.”
  Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3): 303–325.

Shui, H., and L.M. Ausubel. 2005. “Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market.” Working Paper.

Skiba, Paige Marta, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2008. “Payday Loans, Uncertainty and Discounting: Ex-
  plaining Patterns of Borrowing, Repayment, and Default.” Working Paper.

Souleles, N.S. 1999. “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds.” American
  Economic Review, 89(4): 947–958.

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance.” The
  Journal of Finance, 64(6): 2807–2849.

Stephens, Jr, M. 2006. “Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption.” The Economic Journal,
  116(513): 680–701.

Strotz, Robert Henry. 1955. “Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization.” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 23(3): 165–180.

Thaler, R.H., and S. Benartzi. 2004. “Save More Tomorrowï£¡: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase
  Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 164–187.

Tobacman, J. 2007. “The Partial Naivete Euler Equation.” Mimeo.

Zhang, C Yiwei. 2017. “Consumption Responses to Pay Frequency: Evidence from ’Extra’ Paychecks.”
  In Working Paper.




                                                29
        Figure 1: Simulated Life-cycle Profiles and CEX Consumption and Income Data




This figure contrasts the average consumption profiles using the simulated data of 516 agents that have either sophisticated,
naive, or standard preferences with the average CEX consumption and income data. The calibration is displayed in Table 5
and we set β = 0.7. The unit of consumption and income is the log of 1984 dollars controlling for cohort, family size, and
time effects.




                                                             30
                   Figure 2: Mean Paydown after 90 Days by Sensitivity Quintiles

                                                                   1600


                                                                   1400
                            Debt Reduction 90 Days After Sign-up




                                                                   1200


                                                                   1000


                                                                    800


                                                                    600


                                                                    400


                                                                    200


                                                                     0
                                                                          1                   2                   3                   4                   5
                                                                                         Quintiles Based on Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt


                                                                          Sophisticated - Short-Run Consumables           Naive - Short-Run Consumables




The figure shows the mean paydown over the first 90 days after sign-up for consumers classified as sophisticated and naive.
For each type, consumers are sorted into five groups based on their estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt.




                                                                                                           31
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics - Income and Assets

                                                                           Income and Assets
                                                                                       25th     50th       75th
                                                      Obs.        Mean     Std. Dev.
                                                                                       pctile   pctile     pctile

      Users
       Days in sample                                  516         415        150       262      430        584
        Days in sample after sign-up                               392        231       274      401        588
        Nr of paychecks                                            28         12        19       26         38
        Nr of paychecks - regular paycycles                        21         14        12       20         31

      Income
        Avg. monthly income- regular paycycles         516        3,778      1,830     2,469    3,460      4,671
        Median monthly income- regular paycycles                  3,744      1,810     2,450    3,440      4,564
        Avg. monthly non-paycheck income                           295        417        0       135        406
        Median monthly non-paycheck income                          69        252        0        0          0
        Fraction of regular income                                 0.89       0.11      0.83     0.92       0.99
      Assets
       Credit Card Debt - $                            516        13,808    13,319     4,582    9,777     18,331
       Credit Card Debt - rel. to income                           3.81      3.35       1.40     2.90      4.92
       Cash Balances - $                                          4,822     7,550       911     2,099     5,178
       Cash Balances - rel. to income                              1.28      1.86       0.31     0.64      1.54
       Total Credit - $                                           24,684    22,418     8,573    18,000    33,475
       Total Credit - rel. to income                               6.80      5.66       2.70     5.16      8.97
       Available Credit - $                                       10,722    14,177     1,550    4,973     14,725
       Available Credit - rel. to income                           3.04      4.13       0.48     1.47      3.89
        APR paid on debt - mean                        401        16.71      5.65      13.24    16.33      20.35
        APR paid on debt - median                                 16.77      6.57      13.24    16.24      20.45


The table shows mean, median, and the 25th and 75th percentile for how long users are observed in the sample, their income,
and assets. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level.




                                                             32
                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics - Spending

                                                                 Monthly Spending
                                                                               25th       50th       75th
                                              Obs.      Mean     Std. Dev.
                                                                               pctile     pctile     pctile

      Discretionary Spending
      Total
       Avg. $                                 516       1,795       939       1,127      1,593       2,271
       Avg. relative to avg. income                     0.52        0.24       0.35       0.47       0.63
       Median $                                         1,817      1,044      1,117      1,638       2,311
       Median relative to avg. income                   0.52        0.26       0.35       0.49       0.65

      Non-Durable
       Avg. $                                 516       1,026       540        635        920        1,291
       Avg. relative to avg. income                     0.30        0.15       0.20       0.28       0.36
       Median $                                         1,030       595        624        942        1,314
       Median relative to avg. income                   0.30        0.15       0.21       0.28       0.37

      Short-run Consumables
       Avg. $                                 516        548        285        336        500         681
        Avg. relative to avg. income                     0.16       0.08       0.10       0.14       0.20
        Median $                                         564        330        340        514        718
        Median relative to avg. income                   0.16       0.10       0.10       0.15       0.21

      Restaurant&Entertainment
        Avg. $                                516        290        165        172        256        370
        Avg. relative to avg. income                     0.09       0.05       0.05       0.08       0.11
        Median $                                         277        181        152        246        364
        Median relative to avg. income                   0.08       0.05       0.04       0.07       0.10

      Regular Payments
       Avg. $                                 516       1,205       784        619       1,050       1,673
       Avg. relative to avg. income                     0.33        0.19       0.20       0.31       0.44
        Median $                                        1,264       965        475       1,096       1,902
        Median relative to avg. income                  0.35        0.24       0.15       0.33       0.50

The table shows mean, median, and the 25th and 75th percentile for spending of the users in the sample used throughout
the paper. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level.




                                                         33
                             Table 3: Summary Statistics - Plans and Paydown

                                                                Plans and Debt Paydown
                                                                                 25th       50th      75th
                                                  Obs.      Mean     Std. Dev.
                                                                                 pctile     pctile    pctile

  Plans
   Planned Paydown - monthly - $                  516       891       1,112      353        598       1,017
   Planned Paydown - monthly - % of debt                    0.12       0.18      0.04       0.06       0.11
   Planned Paydown - monthly - % of income                  0.25       0.37      0.11       0.18       0.30

   Planned Paydown - 90 days - $                  516       2,482     2,710      926       1,792      2,992
   Planned Paydown - 90 days - % of debt                     0.28      0.26      0.11       0.18       0.33

   Planned Paydown - 180 days - $                 516       4,650     4,972      1,785     3,288      5,951
   Planned Paydown - 180 days - % of debt                    0.47      0.30       0.22      0.36       0.66


  Debt Paydown
   Change in Debt - 90 days - $                   516       -734      3,041      -1,291     -222       292
   Change in Debt - 90 days - %                             0.02       0.92       -0.14     -0.02      0.04

   Change in Debt - 180 days - $                  516       -977      3,858      -2,087     -418       479
   Change in Debt - 180 days - %                            0.26       4.04       -0.20     -0.04      0.06

   Shortfall relative to plan - 90 days - $       516       1,748     3,466      429       1,417      2,986
   Shortfall relative to plan - 90 days - %                  0.85      2.45      0.39       0.84       1.19

   Shortfall relative to plan - 180 days - $      516       3,673     5,224      970       2,813      5,410
   Shortfall relative to plan - 180 days - %                 1.16      4.28      0.50       0.88       1.15

   Payments made - 90 days                        516       3,160     4,398       660      1,660      3,957
   Payments made - 180 days                                 5,823     7,324      1,339     3,490      7,747



The table shows mean, median, and 25th and 75th percentile for planned and actual debt paydown of the users in the sample
used throughout the paper. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level.




                                                           34
                                     Table 4: Determinants of Planned Paydown and Actual Paydown after 90 Days

                                                        Planned Paydown                                                      Actual Paydown 90 Days

       Planned Paydown                                                                                   0.288***    0.287***    0.288***    0.295***    0.283**     0.253**
                                                                                                         (0.109)     (0.109)     (0.109)     (0.109)     (0.111)     (0.117)
       Median paycheck          0.349***    0.352***    0.352***    0.273***    0.384***    0.401***      0.137        0.146      0.130        0.200      0.154       0.230
                                (0.082)     (0.091)     (0.091)     (0.080)     (0.091)     (0.110)      (0.170)     (0.177)     (0.176)     (0.240)     (0.184)     (0.229)
       Original debt            0.025***    0.025***    0.025***    0.024***    0.025***    0.026***      0.004        0.005      0.003        0.005      0.006       0.009
                                (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.025)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.015)
       Cash balances                         -0.001      -0.001       0.000      -0.004      -0.006                    0.002      0.001        0.001      0.001       0.006
                                            (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)                  (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.024)
       Available credit                       0.000                  -0.001      -0.006      -0.006                   -0.004                  -0.004     -0.005      -0.006
                                            (0.003)                 (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)                  (0.022)                 (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.028)
       Total credit                                       0.000                                                                   0.001




35
                                                         (0.003)                                                                 (0.022)
       Total discretionary                                            0.145                                                                  -0.110
        spending                                                     (0.123)                                                                 (0.291)
       Nr of credit cards                                                     -7.080    -2.889                                                           -9.097 -27.699
                                                                              (23.85) (27.92)                                                            (56.17) (66.89)
       Credit card usage                                                      786.53    776.62                                                          164.017 813.014
       (% of expenditures)                                                   (268.81) (334.18)                                                          (563.25) (671.99)
       APR                                                                              -1.518                                                                    1.173
                                                                                        (6.895)                                                                  (26.867)
       Constant                 -430.3**    -426.9**    -427.3**    -515.6** -556.1*** -205.462           -1,171      -1,157     -1,178      -1,082      -1,165    330
                                 197.98      191.96      192.35      243.75   195.59    226.77            714.11      710.82     722.26      757.39      750.05 1227.20
       N                           516        516         516         516       516       401              516         516        516         516          516     401

     The table shows estimates of the effect of various variables on planned paydown and actual paydown after 90 days with robust standard errors in parentheses. All variables
     are winsorized at the 1% level. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).
                                                    Table 5: Calibration




                                           Preference and Environmental Parameters

                  µT    σT      p         Gt           Rs     Rb      A0/P0   Ret   T-Ret      δ     θ     β

                   0   0.8     0.1%    𝑒 𝑌𝑡+1 −𝑌𝑡    1.031   1.167    1       11     54      0.94     2   0.7




The table shows all calibrated parameters for the life-cycle model. The simulation results in Tables 6 to 8 show a range of
hyperbolic discount factors, β. Furthermore, we assume for the sophisticated agent β̂ = β < 1, for the naive agent β̂ = 1
and β < 1, and for the standard agent β̂ = β = 1. For the illustration in Figure 1, we set β = 0.7.




                                                             36
                                Table 6: Simulated MPC Regression Results




                                                           MPC Regression Coefficient b1

                                                    Obs.      standard   sophisticated    naïve

                      Short-run Impatience β
                                                              0.324***     0.803***      0.876***
                        0.6                        516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.023)
                                                              0.324***     0.743***      0.811***
                        0.65                       516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.028)      (0.028)
                                                              0.324***     0.703***      0.737***
                        0.7                        516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.033)      (0.035)
                                                              0.324***     0.642***      0.666***
                        0.75                       516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.040)
                                                              0.324***     0.582***      0.597***
                        0.8                        516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.041)      (0.043)
                                                              0.324***     0.519***      0.530***
                        0.85                       516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.042)      (0.044)
                                                              0.324***     0.459***      0.465***
                        0.9                        516x26
                                                               (0.037)      (0.042)      (0.043)



The table shows the average regression coefficient results of equation (1) using the simulated data of 516 agents with 26 bi-
monthly data points each after a burn-in period of 60 months with standard errors displayed in parentheses. The regression
results are similar for different assumptions about the number of data points, initial savings levels, and time horizons.




                                                             37
                     Table 7: Simulated Sophistication Regression Results - MPC




                                                    Sophistication Regression Coefficient b3

                                                     Obs.     standard sophisticated     naïve
                      Short-run Impatience β
                                                               -0.344       -0.178*      -0.015
                        0.6                        516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.143)      (0.345)
                                                               -0.344      -0.470***     0.106
                        0.65                       516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.171)      (0.433)
                                                               -0.344      -0.223***     0.183
                        0.7                        516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.476)      (0.538)
                                                               -0.344      -0.890***     0.205
                        0.75                       516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.388)      (0.621)
                                                               -0.344      -0.980***     0.123
                        0.8                        516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.477)      (0.654)
                                                               -0.344      -1.272***     -0.034
                        0.85                       516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.464)      (0.648)
                                                               -0.344      -1.142***     -0.210
                        0.9                        516x26
                                                               (0.474)      (0.428)      (0.610)




The table shows the average regression coefficient results of equation (2) using the simulated data of 516 agents with 26 bi-
monthly data points each after a burn-in period of 60 months with standard errors displayed in parentheses. The regression
results are similar for different assumptions about the number of data points, initial savings levels, and time horizons.




                                                             38
    Table 8: Simulated Sophistication Regression Results - Equivalent to Empirical Setting




                                                    Sophistication Regression Coefficient b3

                                                    Obs.     standard   sophisticated    naïve


                      Short-run Impatience β
                                                               -0.103      -0.135***     -0.050
                        0.6                        516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.059)       (0.102)
                                                               -0.103      -0.198***     0.004
                        0.65                       516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.076)       (0.122)
                                                               -0.103      -0.281***     0.045
                        0.7                        516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.097)       (0.134)
                                                               -0.103      -0.376***     0.039
                        0.75                       516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.132)       (0.147)
                                                               -0.103      -0.409***     0.005
                        0.8                        516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.172)       (0.160)
                                                               -0.103      -0.384**      -0.036
                        0.85                       516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.202)       (0.172)
                                                               -0.103      -0.309*       -0.075
                        0.9                        516x26
                                                              (0.208)      (0.219)       (0.183)




The table shows the average regression coefficient results of equation (3) using the simulated data of 516 agents with 26 bi-
monthly data points each after a burn-in period of 60 months with standard errors displayed in parentheses. The regression
results are similar for different assumptions about the number of data points, initial savings levels, and time horizons.




                                                             39
                                           Table 9: Sensitivity Estimates

                                                        Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt
                                                                                  25th          50th         75th
                                          Obs.         Mean         Std. Dev.
                                                                                  pctile        pctile       pctile

       Sensitivity - Pooled estimates
         Short-Run Consumables             516         0.061         0.009      t-stat = 6.94
         Restaurants&Entertainment         526         0.047         0.008      t-stat = 5.74

       Sensitivity - Individual estimates
         Short-Run Consumables             516         0.061         0.211        -0.081        0.049       0.199
         Restaurants&Entertainment         516         0.046         0.201        -0.086        0.052       0.172

       Effect of Resources on Sensitivity (γ3)
         Short-Run Consumables             516         -0.473        8.932        -0.116        0.014       0.134                  0.251
         Restaurants&Entertainment         516          0.122        4.082        -0.135        0.012       0.170                  0.305


The table shows summary statistics of the baseline estimates of each user’s sensitivity to paycheck receipt and the effect of
higher resources on this sensitivity. Sensitivity to paycheck receipt is captured by the coefficient on payweek in equation (4).
The effect of higher resources on sensitivity is captured by the coefficient on payweek ∗ resources in equation (5). Both equa-
tions are estimated separately for each user and include day of week and month fixed effects. Resources are instrumented
for with calculated balances based on regular payments.
                                                        Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt

                                                                                  25th          50th
                                          Obs.         Mean         Std. Dev.
                                                                                  pctile        pctile



       Short-Run Consumables
        significantly positive 516                     0.093         0.291          0             0
        significantly negative 516                     0.014         0.116          0             0
       Restaurants&Entertainment
        significantly positive 516                     0.050         0.219          0             0
        significantly negative 516                     0.010         0.098          0             0

                                                               40
                         Table 10: Classification Into Sophisticated and Naive

                                                                Restaurant&Entertainment
                                                          Naïve       Sophisticated        Total
                    Short-run Consumables
                      Naïve                                210              75              285
                      Sophisticated                         66             165              231

                      Total                                276             240              516

This table shows the number of users classified as sophisticated or naive based on estimates using either short-run con-
sumables or restaurant and entertainment spending. Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources decrease
sensitivity to paycheck receipt, i.e. if the coefficient on payweek ∗ resources in equation (5) is negative.




                                                           41
                                 Table 11: Summary Statistics by Sophistication


                                                                                                 t-test for equality
                                                                  Naïve         Sophisticated
                                                                                                      (p-value)


      Sensitivity to Paycheck (Short-run Consumables)
       Average sensitivity                                        0.051            0.072              0.263
       Median sensitivity                                         0.043            0.059

      Sensitivity to Paycheck (Restaurant & Entertainment)
       Average sensitivity                                        0.046            0.045              0.969
       Median sensitivity                                         0.058            0.034

      Income and Debt
        Income - Mean                                             3,808            3,802              0.975
        Credit Card Debt - Mean                                   14,144           13,693             0.713
        Credit Card Debt - Median                                 9,430            10,133
          Credit Card Debt / Income - Mean                        3.786            4.773              0.306


      Total Discretionary Spending
       avg. $                                                     1,844.0          1,755.8            0.307
       avg. % of income                                             52.9            51.6              0.598
       avg. % spend on credit cards                                 34.3             33.9             0.854

      Short-run Consumables
       avg. $ - mean                                              560.9            537.0              0.503
       avg. % spend on credit cards                                31.1             31.1              0.981

      Restaurant & Entertainment
       avg. $ - mean                                              298.6            282.6              0.289
       avg. % spend on credit cards                                32.4             32.4              0.978
      Planned Paydown - 90 Days
        Mean                                                      2,540.1          2,409.7            0.574
        Median                                                    1,795.1          1,723.3
      N                                                            285              231

The table shows summary statistics on estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt, monthly income, debt and spending for
users classified as naive or sophisticated based on estimates using short-run consumables.




                                                             42
Table 12: Effect of Impatience and Planned Paydown on Actual Debt Paydown by Naive and
Sophisticated Agents

                                                                                     Paydown
                                                                      90 Days                        180 Days

       Sensitivity                                                     8.511                           6.461*
                                                                      (7.253)                          (3.921)
       Planned paydown                                                0.179*                            0.129
                                                                      (0.094)                          (0.086)
       Sensitivity * Sophisticated                                  -33.293***                        -10.179*
                                                                     (11.638)                          (5.861)
       Planned paydown * Sophisticated                                0.371*                           0.391*
                                                                      (0.224)                          (0.212)
       Median paycheck (in 1,000s)                                      1.938                          1.990*
                                                                      (1.503)                          (1.150)
       Original debt (in 1,000s)                                        0.173                           -0.028
                                                                      (0.123)                          (0.104)
       Median paycheck * Sophisticated                                 -2.116                           -2.412
                                                                      (3.148)                          (2.280)
       Original debt * Sophisticated                                   -0.346                           -0.148
                                                                      (0.273)                          (0.236)
       Sophisticated                                                    4.157                           -1.099
                                                                      (5.747)                          (4.271)
       Constant                                                     -12.035***                        -8.585***
                                                                      (2.688)                          (2.035)
       Number of individuals                                            516                              516

This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are win-
sorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4).
Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck receipt and as naive otherwise.
Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                               43
                                                                       Table 13: Low Impatience Excluded

                                                                   Paydown 90 Days                                                       Paydown 180 Days
                                                                    Exclude if sensitivity in the lowest                                  Exclude if sensitivity in the lowest
                                              Baseline            10%             15%                 20%            Baseline           10%             15%                 20%

       Sensitivity                              8.511            9.471           10.684           10.626              6.461*           5.963            6.379            6.087
                                               (7.253)          (7.589)          (7.614)          (7.732)             (3.921)         (4.050)          (4.075)          (4.110)
       Planned paydown                         0.179*            0.152            0.129            0.153*             0.129            0.118            0.102            0.117
                                               (0.094)          (0.100)          (0.099)          (0.089)             (0.086)         (0.086)          (0.089)          (0.088)
       Sophisticated * Sensitivity            -33.293***       -33.412**        -32.203**        -30.319**           -10.179*         -10.352*          -9.786           -8.326
                                               (11.638)        (12.088)         (12.332)         (13.049)             (5.861)         (6.172)          (6.247)          (6.465)
       Sophisticated * Planned paydown          0.371*           0.398*           0.414*           0.402*             0.391*           0.368*            0.388*           0.384*




44
                                                (0.224)         (0.238)          (0.238)          (0.231)             (0.212)         (0.210)          (0.215)          (0.219)
       Sophisticated                             4.157           7.080            6.068            6.494               -1.099          0.712             0.726            0.538
                                                (5.747)         (6.364)          (6.570)          (6.838)             (4.271)         (4.628)          (4.869)          (5.148)
       Median paycheck                            Y                Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                Y
       Original debt                              Y                Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                Y
       Constant                                   Y                Y                Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                Y
       Number of individuals                     516              465              439              413                516              465              439              413


     This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average
     daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4). Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck
     receipt and as naive otherwise. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).
Table 14: Debt Paydown and Consumption Patterns - Different Restrictions on Sensitivity
Estimates

                                                                                  total discretionary
                                            baseline            buffer stock                              no restriction
                                                                                      affordable

       Dependent Variable: Paydown 90 Days
       Sensitivity                            8.511                  6.135               8.934                 8.362
                                             (7.253)                (6.823)             (6.330)               (6.833)
       Planned paydown                       0.179*                 0.180*              0.180*                0.179*
                                             (0.094)                (0.095)             (0.095)               (0.102)
       Sensitivity                         -33.293***            -28.158***           -31.647***            -32.144***
       * Sophisticated                      (11.638)              (11.372)             (10.381)              (11.634)
       Planned paydown                       0.371*                0.380*               0.372*                 0.368
       * Sophisticated                       (0.224)               (0.228)              (0.226)               (0.224)
       Sophisticated                          4.157                 3.061                3.610                 4.394
                                             (5.747)               (5.632)              (5.740)               (5.232)
       Dependent Variable: Paydown 180 Days
       Sensitivity                           6.461*                  4.428               3.920                 5.593
                                             (3.921)                (4.065)             (3.988)               (3.655)
       Planned paydown                        0.129                  0.139               0.139                0.139*
                                             (0.086)                 0.094               0.093                (0.093)
       Sensitivity                          -10.179*                 -8.115              -6.921                -8.567
       * Sophisticated                       (5.861)                (6.876)             (6.289)               (5.653)
       Planned paydown                       0.391*                 0.420*              0.418*                0.416*
       * Sophisticated                       (0.212)                (0.232)             (0.232)               (0.225)
       Sophisticated                          -1.099                 -1.455              -1.550                -1.260
                                             (4.271)                (4.322)             (4.373)               (4.299)
       Controls
       Median Paycheck                          Y                     Y                    Y                     Y
       Original Debt                            Y                     Y                    Y                     Y
       Nr of individuals                      516                    516                  516                  516


This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are win-
sorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4).
Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck receipt and as naive otherwise.
Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                               45
A     Estimating Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt
A.1   Distribution of Estimated Sensitivities
Figure A1 plots the distribution of the estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt of expenditures on
short-run consumables in the left panel, and of expenditures on restaurant and entertainment only in
the right panel. The plot complements the summary statistics on the estimated sensitivity to paycheck
receipt in Table 9. As indicated by the summary statistics, the mean of the distributions is shifted
upwards from zero. A t-test confirms that it is significantly different from zero - that is the average
user’s expenditures react substantially to paycheck arrival. The two distributions also look very sim-
ilar irrespective of whether expenditures on short-run consumables or restaurant and entertainment
only were considered.

A.2   Hypothetical Balances Based on Regular Payments
Section 4.2.2 estimates the effect of changing resources on the sensitivity to paycheck receipt. To do so,
we isolate the variation in resources uncorrelated with an individual’s prior spending by calculating
hypothetical balances for each consumer. Figure A2 illustrates the construction of these hypotheti-
cal balances. It shows actual (upper panel) and calculated balances (lower panel) for a hypothetical
consumer who receives regular bi-weekly paychecks (illustrated by upward pointing arrows) and
has to pay rent monthly every other pay date (downward pointing red arrows). The upper panel
shows the agent’s actual balances given his income, rent payments, and spending patterns. The lower
panel shows the agent’s calculated balances. Instead of using the agent’s actual spending, non-regular
spending is assumed to be split equally across all days. Each day’s balance is then calculated based
on the agent’s regular paycheck, regular rent payment, and average daily spending. The figure shows
that the monthly regular rent payments lead to substantially lower resources during the pay cycle in
which they have to be made compared to the pay cycle where no regular payment is due. The calcu-
lated balances isolate this exogenous variation in the agent’s level of resources from the endogenous
variation caused by prior discretionary spending.

A.3   Sensitivity to Paycheck Under Different Restrictions
Table A1 shows summary statistics of estimated sensitivity to paycheck under different restrictions
in the top panel and the intra user correlation between these estimates in the bottom panel. The
estimated sensitivity decreases as more pay cycles are filtered out in which the user may have been
credit constrained. However, the estimated sensitivity would decrease even if credit constraints did
not play any role, since the excluded pay cycles are those with the highest spending. On the individual
level, the estimated sensitivities are highly correlated. Within a given consumption category (short-
run consumables or restaurant and entertainment), the correlation between sensitivity estimates with
different restrictions is more than 90%. Across the two spending categories, the estimates are also
similar with correlations between 55% and 65%.

A.4   Planned Paydown by Differences in Consumption Patterns
Table A2 shows that planned paydown is similarly influenced by characteristics for naive and sophis-
ticated individuals. There is no statistically significant effect of sensitivity or sophistication on planned
paydown. Overall, planned paydown seems to be determined primarily by factors such as income,

                                                     46
existing debt levels and possible other considerations such as spending needs and ease of reductions
in spending.

B     Robustness of Paydown Results
B.1    Estimates based on Restaurant and Entertainment Spending and Regression Specifi-
       cation
The first two columns of Table A3 show estimates of equation (6) when the sensitivity and sophistica-
tion are based only on spending on restaurant and entertainment rather than the broader category of
short-run consumables. The last six columns of Table A3 show different regression specifications of
the baseline results in Table 12. Unlike in the baseline, the control variables are assumed to have the
same effect for both types of agents and are therefore not interacted with sophistication. In addition,
the effect of sensitivity and planned paydown is estimated separately. To do so, either sensitivity to
paycheck or planned paydown is interacted with sophistication and the respective other variable is
only included as a control (not interacted with sophistication). The results for each variable are very
similar to the baseline results in Table 12.

B.2    Direct Relationship between Paydown and Consumption Patterns
To estimate any direct relation between the reduction in sensitivity to paycheck receipt and debt pay-
down, we estimate the following regression equation:

                  Paydowni = µ0 + (coe f f icient_on_payweek ∗ resources)µ1 + Xi0 λ + νi             (A1)

The regressor of interest is (coe f f icient_on_payweek ∗ resources) estimated in equation (5), which cap-
tures how additional resources affect an agent’s sensitivity to paycheck receipt. Equation (A1) is esti-
mated with and without including the explanatory variables from the baseline specification (equation
(6)) as additional controls. Table A4 shows that the direct relationship between paydown and the re-
duction in sensitivity with additional resources is weak in all specifications. None of the coefficients
is statistically significant and several are positive. That is the opposite of what would be expected
under the hypothesis that a reduction in sensitivity as resources increase directly leads to higher debt
paydown.

B.3    Sensitivity Estimates Based on Level of Spending and Weekly Spending
To be included in the baseline sample, users are required to have at least 45 days of positive spending.
Table A5 replicates the baseline results requiring either 40 or 50 days of positive spending instead.
Throughout, the results are very similar to the baseline estimates in Table 12.
      In the baseline specification, spending is measured in logs and on a daily level. Instead, the first
two columns of Table A6 use sensitivity estimates based on the actual amount spent and normalizes
those estimates by average spending (levels instead of logs). The third and fourth columns use weekly
spending instead of daily spending. The last two columns use sensitivity estimates based only on debit
card spending, excluding any spending on credit cards. Some users do not have enough spending on
debit cards, so the sample is smaller - 494 instead of 516 users. All results are very similar to the
baseline estimates in Table 12.


                                                    47
B.4   Robustness to Sophistication Classification
The first four columns of Table A7 exclude users who get classified differently into naive and sophis-
ticated based on short-run consumables or restaurant and entertainment spending. This reduces the
sample size, increasing standard errors so that some of the estimates are just outside standard sig-
nificance bounds. Overall, the results are similar to the baseline results in Table 12. If anything, the
point estimates are more similar across categories, supporting the notion that previously misclassified
users lead to additional noise in the estimation. The last four columns of Table A7 classify users as so-
phisticated or naive based on OLS estimates of the effect of resources instead of using estimates when
resources are instrumented for by hypothetical balances as outlined in Section 4.2. If the endogeneity
concern motivating the use of IV estimates is important, we would expect a substantial number of
users to be misclassified when using OLS estimates and, hence, to find fewer differences between the
two groups. Indeed, Table A7 finds smaller difference between sophisticated and naive, which are
mostly not statistically significant, reinforcing the need to instrument for the level of resources.

C     Data Preparation and Classifications
C.1   Sample Selection
The following table illustrates how many users are lost at each step of the data selection process,
starting with a random sample of users. We allow users to fulfill all sample criteria in 4 possible ways.
First, they are included when all criteria are fulfilled considering all available data. Next, we restrict
each user’s data to one year, 270 days, and 180 days after sign-up and include them if they fulfill all
criteria during this shorter sample horizon. This includes users who acquire additional accounts later
in the sample or switch jobs, such that they miss more than one paycheck or no longer have a regular
paycheck later in the sample. The vast majority of users, 470 out of 516 fulfill the sample criteria when
all their data are considered.




                                                    48
      Users with a linked checking account in original sample            3653

       and observed for at least 180 days after sign-up                  2558

       and all accounts linked at sign-up                                2051

       and a credit card and plan to reduce debt                         1845

       and at least one paycheck deposited into a checking account       1590

       and regular bi-weekly paychecks                                   1118

       and regular paychecks account for more than 70% of all income      923

       and appear to have all relevant accounts linked                    897

       and at least 8 regular, non-constrained paycycles                  698

       and at least 45 days of positive spending                          579

       and fulfill all above criteria over the same horizon               516

            fulfill criteria over full time observed                      470

            fulfill criteria during first year observed                    21

            fulfill criteria during first 270 days observed                12

            fulfill criteria during first 180 days observed                13


C.2   Classifying Transactions
The transaction data used in the paper includes the amount, date charged and description the cus-
tomer sees on his bank account statement, as well as a code from the data provider which classifies
transactions into different categories. Based on this information, we first identify transactions which
are likely to be paychecks. The remaining transactions are classified as either regular or non-regular.
Finally, we define two additional types of spending, short-run consumables and total discretionary
spending. This online appendix explains how transactions are classified into each category.

Paychecks Transactions are identified as paychecks when they are classified as such by the data
provider or when their description contains one or more of the following words or word groups:

   • “Payroll”, “payroll”, “PAYROLL”, “PAYRLL”, “PAYROL”, “PAYPPD”

   • “SALARY”, “salary”, “Salary”, “FED SAL”

   • “PPD”, plus one of the following: “DIR DEP”, “DIRDEP”, “DIRECTDEPOSIT”, “DIRECT DE-
      POSIT”, “DIRECT DEP”, “DIR.DEPST”, “CO ID”, “PAYMENTPPD”

   • “CO ID”and “INDN”, plus one of following: “DIR DEP”, “DIRDEP”, “DIRECTDEPOSIT”, “DI-
      RECT DEPOSIT”, “DIRECT DEP”

Even if they meet the above criteria, transactions are not classified as a paycheck if they contain any
of the following words:

                                                       49
   • “tax”, “Tax”, “TAX”

   • “PAYPAL”, “paypal”, “HALF.COM”, “Square Inc”, “SQUARE INC”

Finally, we classify regular deposits (identified the same way as regular payments described below)
of more than $500 as paychecks.

Spending We first distinguish between regular and non-regular payments. Non-regular payments
are further distinguished into discretionary spending and non-regular, non-discretionary spending.
Discretionary spending is defined as an expense where at the time of the payment the consumer had
discretion about i) whether to incur the payment at all, or ii) how much to spend. Payments are
classified as discretionary based on the type of expenditure category. An example of discretionary
spending is a restaurant meal. For non-discretionary spending, such as are cell phone bills or utility
bills, the amount due depends on past consumption, but there is no discretion once the bill arrives.
we further consider short-run consumables, a subcategory of discretionary spending described below.

Regular Payments To classify transactions as regular payments they are first grouped into sets
which have the same

   • exact amount

   • amount when cents are truncated

   • amount rounded to the next integer

   • amount rounded to multiples of $10 when the transaction amount is more than $100

A set of transactions is classified as occurring regularly every two weeks if

   • there are at least 7 transactions

   • the median difference between payments is between 13 and 16 days

   • at most one payment in the sequence was missed, i.e. the maximum amount of time between
     payments is 31 days

A set of transactions is classified as occurring regularly monthly if

   • there are at least 5 transactions

   • the median difference between payments is between 28 and 31 days

   • at most one payment in the sequence was missed, i.e. the maximum amount of time between
     payments is 64 days

Non-regular payments are further classified into short-run consumables, non-durables or total discre-
tionary spending. These three broad categories consist of the following sub-categories as assigned by
the data provider:

   • Short-run Consumables

                                                   50
     – gasoline/fuel
     – groceries
     – restaurant/dining
     – entertainment (movie tickets, Netflix, iTunes, video/DVD rental, computer games, party
       stores, etc.)

• Total discretionary expenditure

     – short-run consumables
     – travel
     – gifts
     – drugstore purchases/personal care
     – pet expenditures
     – general merchandise (Target, Walmart, Cosco, etc.)
     – automotive expenditures (excluding car purchases), primarily oil checks and the like
     – toys and other children’s products
     – clothing and shoes
     – healthcare/medical products
     – home maintenance
     – non-regular cable and online services
     – hobby expenditures
     – electronics
     – credit reports or services
     – advertising or custom management services
     – non-regular bills
     – PayPal purchases
     – unclassified credit card purchases
     – non-regular uncategorized transactions




                                               51
                  Figure A1: Distribution of Individual-Level Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt
    2.5




                                                                                           2.5
    2




                                                                                           2
      1.5




                                                                                             1.5
Density




                                                                                       Density
    1




                                                                                           1
    .5




                                                                                           .5
    0




                                                                                           0
                     -.4       -.2       0      .2      .4        .6                                 -.5                      0                     .5
              Sensitivity of Short-Run Consumables Expenditures to Paycheck Receipt                Sensitivity of Restaurant&Entertainment Expenditures to Paycheck Receipt

            The distribution of the estimates of each user’s sensitivity to paycheck receipt, captured by γ1i in equation (4).




                                                                                      52
                   Figure A2: Hypothetical Balances Based on Regular Payments

                                                                        Actual resources

                           Y               Y                    Y                    Y




                                          - rent                                   - rent


                                                                        Simulated balance

                         paycheck        paycheck            paycheck             paycheck




                                                             Slope:
                                          - rent    Average daily non-regular      - rent
                                                          expenditure
                                                       over sample period

The figure illustrates the construction of hypothetical balances based on regular payments. The upper panel shows actual
balances for a hypothetical agent who receives regular bi-weekly paychecks (illustrated by upward pointing red arrows)
and has to pay rent monthly every other pay date (downward pointing red arrows). The lower panel shows the agent’s
hypothetical balances based on regular payments and the assumption that spending is split equally across all days. Each
day’s balance is calculated based on the agent’s regular paycheck, regular rent payment and average daily spending.




                                                              53
                           Table A1: Sensitivity Estimates under Different Restrictions



                                                  Panel A: Sensitivity Estimates

                                                                       Sensitivity to Paycheck Receipt
                                                      Obs.        Mean         Std. Dev.   25th pctile    50th pctile   75th pctile

  Short-run Consumables
    no restriction                                    516        0.074         0.211        -0.064        0.066         0.201
    category spending possible (baseline)                        0.061         0.211        -0.081        0.049         0.199
    buffer stock (5th percentile)                                0.052         0.227        -0.093        0.040         0.190
    total discretionary possible                                 0.057         0.216        -0.089        0.039         0.198
  Restaurants&Entertainment
    no restriction                                    516        0.056         0.201        -0.070        0.056         0.192
    category spending possible (baseline)                        0.046         0.201        -0.086        0.052         0.172
    buffer stock (5th percentile)                                0.041         0.223        -0.108        0.050         0.179
    total discretionary possible                                 0.040         0.206        -0.089        0.042         0.163




                                                          Panel B: Correlation


                                            Short-run Consumables                          Restaurant&Entertainment
                                        no        category spending      total           no       category spending     total
                                    restriction   baseline with buffer possible      restriction baseline with buffer possible
    Short-run Consumables
    no restriction                      1
    category spending (baseline)      0.976         1
    category spending with buffer     0.903       0.927         1
    total discretionary possible      0.948       0.964       0.933        1
    Restaurant&Entertainment
    no restriction                    0.648       0.628       0.584      0.614           1
    category spending (baseline)      0.629       0.632       0.587      0.617         0.983        1
    category spending with buffer     0.553       0.564       0.624      0.574         0.885      0.900          1
    total discretionary possible      0.580       0.586       0.575      0.623         0.933      0.951        0.910         1


The top panel shows summary statistics of each user’s estimated sensitivity to paycheck receipt under restrictions other
than the baseline estimates. The bottom panel shows the correlation between these estimates of each user’s sensitivity to
paycheck receipt. Throughout the table, the first row shows sensitivity estimates based on all paycycles the user is observed.
The second row shows the baseline estimates. The third row requires payweek spending in each category to have been
affordable without reducing the user’s resources below the 5th percentile of the user’s observed resources. The fourth row
requires total discretionary spending (rather than just spending in the respective category) to have been affordable. As in
the baseline specification, sensitivity to paycheck receipt is captured by the coefficient on payweek in equation (4).




                              Printed by BoltPDF (c) NCH Software.54
                                                                   Free for non-commercial use only.
                      Table A2: Sensitivity, Sophistication, and Planned Paydown

                                                                              Planned Paydown
                                                                                               Restaurant&
                                                            Short-run Consumables
                                                                                              Entertainment

                     Sensitivity                                      145.538                     186.976
                                                                     (131.181)                   (170.901)
                     Sophisticated                                      32.648                    140.571
                                                                     (113.646)                   (104.431)
                     Sensitivity * Sophisticated                       -70.542                    -126.329
                                                                     (246.732)                   (249.622)
                     Median paycheck ($)                              194.5***                    257.5***
                                                                      (51.312)                    (55.614)
                     Original debt ($)                                 17.8***                     15.8***
                                                                       (3.309)                     (3.317)
                     Cash balances                                      3.247                       2.283
                                                                       (4.462)                     (4.485)
                     Available credit                                   2.435                       3.641
                                                                       (2.116)                     (2.779)
                     Median paycheck * Sophisticated                    -2.058                    -112.168
                                                                      (76.658)                    (74.710)
                     Original debt * Sophisticated                      1.296                       4.279
                                                                       (4.541)                     (4.553)
                     Cash balances * Sophisticated                      -4.209                      -1.390
                                                                       (6.642)                     (6.632)
                     Available credit * Sophisticated                   0.327                       -1.986
                                                                       (3.786)                     (3.552)
                     Constant                                         -123.076                    -198.269
                                                                     (113.267)                   (128.905)
                     Number of individuals                              516                         516

The table shows estimates of the effect of short-run impatience and sophistication on planned paydown with bootstrapped
standard errors in parentheses. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Short-run impatience is measured as the coef-
ficient β 1 in equation (4) using expenditures on short-run consumables or restaurant and entertainment as the dependent
variable. Median paycheck and level of original debt are measured in dollars. Users are classified as sophisticated if addi-
tional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck receipt and as naive otherwise. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05),
*** (p<0.01).




                                                               55
                                                             Table A3: Alternative Regression Specifications


                                      Restaurant & Entertainment Only                                             Alternative Regression Specification
                                  Paydown 90 Days Paydown 180 Days                                     Paydown 90 Days                              Paydown 180 Days

       Sensitivity                        -2.876                   8.937**                     5.046           8.910                         4.497           6.254
                                         (6.552)                   (4.279)                    (6.800)         (7.358)                       (3.935)         (4.255)
       Planned paydown                   0.268***                  0.194***                   0.223***                       0.216***       0.176***                      0.168***
                                         (0.066)                   (0.055)                    (0.061)                        (0.066)        (0.057)                       (0.060)
       Sensitivity                       -17.219*                 -24.525***                  -26.341**      -29.980***                      -7.893        -10.137
       * Sophisticated                   (10.379)                   (6.604)                    (10.532)       (11.492)                      (6.015)        (6.433)
       Planned paydown                     0.105                    0.259*                       0.268                        0.262         0.338**                       0.337***
       * Sophisticated                    (0.166)                   (0.140)                     (0.175)                      (0.172)        (0.168)                       (0.161)




56
       Median paycheck                   1.317***                   0.639***                  1.199***        3.880***       1.547***        0.853***      2.663***        1.054***
                                          (0.220)                   (0.177)                    (0.243)         (0.141)        (0.221)        (0.217)        (0.079)        (0.216)
       Original debt                       0.029                   -0.115***                    0.030         0.327***        0.035*        -0.110***      0.188***       -0.115***
                                          (0.026)                   (0.020)                    (0.022)         (0.011)        (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.007)        (0.021)
       Sophisticated                      -1.621                   -4.134***                   -3.695           5.029         -3.821          -5.806         2.474          -6.388
                                          (4.263)                   (3.472)                    (4.729)         (3.296)        (4.755)        (3.983)        (2.071)        (3.945)
       Constant                         -12.609***                 -8.998***                  -9.357***      -16.577***     -11.239***      -6.590***     -12.611***      -6.880***
                                          (3.380)                   (1.904)                    (2.469)         (1.630)        (2.482)        (2.047)        (1.115)        (2.048)
       Nr of individuals                    516                       516                        516            516            516            516             516            516


     This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average
     daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4). Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck
     receipt and as naive otherwise. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).
                  Table A4: Direct Effect of Sophistication Measure on Debt Paydown

                                         Paydown 90 Days                               Paydown 180 Days

                                  I          II        III          IV           V        VI        VII      VIII

      Short-run Consumables
      Coefficient on     -0.439            0.114     -0.224     0.683        -0.497     -0.539     -0.376    -0.075
      Resources*Payweek (0.432)           (0.935)    (0.675)   (0.602)       (0.145)    (0.551)   (0.238)   (0.927)
      Winsorized           1%               5%         1%        5%            1%         5%        1%         5%
      Controls                                          Y         Y                                  Y          Y

      N                                                                   516
      75th - 25th percentile                                             0.251

      Restaurant & Entertainment
      Coefficient on            -0.070     0.185     -0.075     0.492         0.320      0.843     0.267     0.925
      Resources*Payweek        (0.864)    (0.867)    (0.847)   (0.643)       (0.218)    (0.182)   (0.271)   (0.118)
      Winsorized                  1%        5%         1%        5%            1%         5%        1%        5%
      Controls                                          Y         Y                                  Y         Y

      N                                                                   516
      75th - 25th percentile                                             0.305



The table shows regression estimates of equation (A1) with p-values based on bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.
The coefficient on the interaction of payweek and resources is estimated in equation (5). Full controls include all regressors
included in equation (6), i.e., debt levels at sign up and user’s monthly income. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05),
*** (p<0.01).




                               Printed by BoltPDF (c) NCH Software. Free for non-commercial use only.




                                                               57
    Table A5: Paydown - Different Requirements for Days Observed for Sample Inclusion

                                              Paydown 90 Days                                 Paydown 180 Days
                                  Baseline                                        Baseline
                                                  40 obs          50 obs                           40 obs         50 obs
                                  (45 obs)                                        (45 obs)

      Sensitivity                   8.511          8.260           2.825           6.461*           5.813          4.290
                                   (7.253)        (6.831)         (7.876)          (3.921)         (3.961)        (4.296)
      Planned paydown              0.179*         0.180*          0.178*            0.129           0.103          0.127
                                   (0.094)        (0.093)         (0.094)          (0.086)         (0.084)        (0.086)
      Sensitivity                -33.293***      -31.175***     -32.280***        -10.179*          -7.222       -10.515*
      * Sophisticated             (11.638)        (10.972)       (12.504)          (5.861)         (5.531)        (6.358)
      Planned paydown              0.371*           0.360         0.380*           0.391*          0.408**        0.401*
      * Sophisticated              (0.224)         (0.222)        (0.227)          (0.212)         (0.208)        (0.213)
      Median paycheck                1.938           1.817          1.752          1.990*            1.015        1.804*
                                   (1.503)         (1.413)        (1.572)          (1.150)         (1.149)        (1.202)
      Original debt                  0.173           0.177          0.187           -0.028           0.102         -0.029
                                   (0.123)         (0.116)        (0.126)          (0.104)         (0.111)        (0.106)
      Median paycheck               -2.116          -1.083         -2.564           -2.412          -0.944         -2.571
      * Sophisticated              (3.148)         (2.923)        (3.365)          (2.280)         (2.296)        (2.399)
      Original debt                 -0.346          -0.337         -0.358           -0.148          -0.244         -0.150
      * Sophisticated              (0.273)         (0.255)        (0.278)          (0.236)         (0.250)        (0.238)
      Sophisticated                  4.157           2.728          4.664           -1.099          -3.063         -1.211
                                   (5.747)         (5.444)        (6.071)          (4.271)         (4.181)        (4.545)
      Constant                   -12.035***      -12.105***      12.622***        -8.585***       -8.012***         0.607
                                   (2.688)         (2.626)        (2.801)          (2.035)         (2.005)        (1.888)

      Number of individuals
                                     516            537             493              516            537             493


This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are win-
sorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4).
Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck receipt and as naive otherwise.
Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                               58
                  Table A6: Paydown - Sensitivity Estimates Based on Levels, Weekly Spending and Debit Card Spending Only

                                                                  Levels                                     Weekly                               Debit Card Only
                                                      90 Days              180 Days              90 Days              180 Days               90 Days             180 Days

       Sensitivity                                      4.844                1.426               11.585**             8.032***              16.731**              6.907*
                                                       (5.186)              (2.594)               (4.672)             (3.035)                (6.509)              (3.844)
       Planned paydown                                 0.179*                0.140                0.177*               0.106                  0.149                0.125
                                                       (0.093)              (0.093)               (0.092)             (0.083)                (0.119)              (0.115)
       Sensitivity*Sophisticated                      -13.557*               -4.919              -14.306**            -9.213**              -31.065***             -6.599
                                                       (7.966)              (4.079)               (7.108)              (4.602)               (10.151)             (5.872)
       Planned paydown*Sophisticated                    0.354               0.415*                 0.358               0.390**                0.458**             0.426*
                                                       (0.225)              (0.232)               (0.223)              (0.196)                (0.231)             (0.229)
       Median paycheck                                   1.835              2.092*                  1.739              2.073*                  1.556                 1.961
                                                       (1.516)              (1.186)               (1.549)              (1.203)               (1.722)               (1.329)




59
       Original debt                                     0.175               -0.071                 0.198               -0.001                0.219*                -0.044
                                                       (0.124)              (0.113)               (0.123)              (0.098)               (0.127)               (0.119)
       Median paycheck*Sophisticated                    -1.441               -2.445                -1.252               -3.021                -3.121                -2.612
                                                       (3.098)              (2.345)               (3.144)              (2.365)               (3.400)               (2.589)
       Original debt*Sophisticated                      -0.305               -0.129                -0.322               -0.112                -0.374                -0.144
                                                       (0.273)              (0.258)               (0.273)              (0.215)               (0.280)               (0.254)
       Sophisticated                                     2.467               -1.296                 1.919               -0.312                 5.933                -0.907
                                                       (5.802)              (4.535)               (5.544)              (4.490)               (6.004)               (4.775)
       Constant                                      -12.301***            -8.496***             -13.387**            -9.366***              -12.366              -8.845**
                                                       (2.817)              (2.155)               (5.225)              (2.704)               (9.242)               (3.753)
       Number of individuals                             516                  516                   516                  516                   494                  494

     This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average
     daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4). Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck
     receipt and as naive otherwise. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).
         Table A7: Sophistication Classification - Exclude Inconsistently Classified Users and Classification Based on OLS Estimates

                                                                       Consistently Classified Users Only                                Classification based on OLS

                                                             Paydown 90 Days                       Paydown 180 Days                Paydown 90 Days Paydown 180 Days
                                                      Short-run          Restaurant&         Short-run          Restaurant&
                                                                                                                                           Short-run Consumables
                                                     Consumables        Entertainment       Consumables        Entertainment

               Sensitivity                                5.633              -4.140              1.973              6.480                  6.741               2.351
                                                         (8.959)            (8.184)             (4.754)            (5.390)                (6.463)             (3.525)
               Planned paydown                           0.243**            0.240**              0.133             0.144*                 0.261***            0.194*
                                                         (0.123)            (0.108)             (0.106)            (0.085)                (0.090)             (0.106)
               Sensitivity*Sophisticated               -38.795***            -19.103             -9.739           -20.045**               -23.764**            -0.887
                                                        (14.462)            (12.924)            (7.328)            (8.335)                 (10.330)           (5.206)
               Planned paydown*Sophisticated              0.331               0.316             0.456*             0.480**                   0.141              0.261
                                                         (0.291)             (0.262)            (0.256)            (0.241)                  (0.235)           (0.241)
               Median paycheck                            -0.016              0.308               0.354               0.423                  1.307               0.380




60
                                                         (2.089)            (1.819)             (1.212)             (1.153)                (1.694)             (1.228)
               Original debt                               0.151              0.138               0.027              -0.008                0.198*                0.037
                                                         (0.142)            (0.151)             (0.116)             (0.109)                (0.120)             (0.103)
               Median paycheck*Sophisticated               2.653            3.070*                0.365               0.568                  0.329               0.892
                                                         (3.826)            (3.472)             (2.238)             (2.142)                (3.302)             (2.404)
               Original debt*Sophisticated                -0.404             -0.326              -0.265              -0.249                 -0.427              -0.362
                                                         (0.323)            (0.306)             (0.262)             (0.246)                (0.261)             (0.239)
               Sophisticated                              -3.634             -6.876              -6.417             -6.818*                  6.269              -2.309
                                                         (6.688)            (6.323)             (4.481)             (4.072)                (6.224)             (4.148)
               Constant                                 17.229***           10.582                0.240            -0.456**              -17.621***          -10.305***
                                                         (7.486)            (8.388)             (2.882)             (2.994)                (3.142)             (2.014)
               Number of individuals                       375                375                 375                375                     516                516


     This table shows regression estimates of equation (6) with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Paydown is the average
     daily reduction in debt levels. Sensitivity is the coefficient γ1 in equation (4). Users are classified as sophisticated if additional resources reduce the sensitivity to paycheck
     receipt and as naive otherwise. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).
