                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PROBING FOR INFORMAL WORK ACTIVITY

                                    Katharine G. Abraham
                                       Ashley Amaya

                                     Working Paper 24880
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24880


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2018, Revised June 2019




The authors are grateful to Frederick G. Conrad, Monica Dashen, Susan Houseman, Frauke
Kreuter, and James R. Spletzer for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of the
paper. Support for collection of the data analyzed in the paper was provided by the U.S. Census
Bureau under Contract YA132312CN0037 with the University of Maryland, which provided
support for the Joint Program in Survey Methodology (JPSM) generally and the 2016 JPSM
Survey Practicum specifically. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Katharine G. Abraham and Ashley Amaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Probing for Informal Work Activity
Katharine G. Abraham and Ashley Amaya
NBER Working Paper No. 24880
August 2018, Revised June 2019
JEL No. J21,J46

                                         ABSTRACT

The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the source of official U.S. labor force statistics. The
wording of the CPS employment questions may not always cue respondents to include informal
work in their responses, especially when providing proxy reports about other household
members. In a survey experiment conducted using a sample of Mechanical Turk respondents,
additional probing identified a substantial amount of informal work activity not captured by the
CPS employment questions, both among those with no employment and among those categorized
as employed based on answers to the CPS questions. Among respondents providing a proxy
report for another household member, the share identifying additional work was systematically
greater among those receiving a detailed probe that offered examples of types of informal work
than among those receiving a simpler global probe. Similar differences between the effects of the
detailed and the global probe were observed when respondents answered for themselves only
among those who had already reported multiple jobs. The findings suggest that additional probing
could improve estimates of employment and multiple job holding in the CPS and other household
surveys, but that how the probe is worded is likely to be important.


Katharine G. Abraham
Department of Economics and
Joint Program in Survey Methodology
University of Maryland
1218 LeFrak Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kabraham@umd.edu

Ashley Amaya
RTI International
701 13th Street NW
Suite 750
Washington, DC 20005
aamaya@rti.org
Introduction
        Information on employment and hours of work is critical to policy makers and other

decision makers for assessing the state of the labor market and the economy more broadly. In the

United States, much of this information comes from the Current Population Survey (CPS), a

monthly survey of approximately 60,000 households carried out by the U.S. Census Bureau on

behalf of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). In the CPS, an individual is considered to be

employed if he or she “did any work at all for pay or profit during the survey reference week.

This includes all part-time and temporary work, as well as regular full-time, year-round

employment” (Bureau of Labor Statistics, undated).

        One potential concern about the CPS data is that the wording of the survey’s employment

questions may not adequately cue respondents to report work activity outside of a conventional

job or business. The CPS employment questions are asked for each household member age 16

and older. The initial employment question asks whether the household member did any work

during the survey reference week for ‘pay’ (or, if applicable, for ‘pay or profit’). Later questions

in the sequence ask about having more than one ‘job’(or, if applicable, more than one ‘job or

business’). 1 It is not clear, however, that respondents necessarily will think of money earned

through informal work activity as either ‘pay’ or ‘profit’ or consider such activity to be a ‘job’

or ‘business.’ The consequence may be that the reporting of informal work activity is

incomplete.

        The use of proxy respondents is a second potential challenge to accurate reporting.

Although CPS interviewers attempt to collect employment information from each household




1
  The “pay or profit” and “job or business” formulations are used in cases in which the CPS respondent has indicated
that someone in the household has a business.

                                                                                                       1|Page
member age 16 years or older, time and availability constraints often lead to the use of a proxy

reporter, a household member who answers the survey questions on behalf of other household

members. Responses for roughly half of CPS sample persons are collected from proxy reporters

(U.S. Census Bureau 2006). Even if the respondent understands that all work to earn money

should be reported, irregular or casual work performed by other household members may be less

salient to the proxy respondent than similar work performed by the respondent herself and thus

less likely to be reported. In some cases, the respondent simply may not know about informal

work performed during the survey reference period by other household members.

       This paper seeks to understand the nature of potential biases in the reporting of work

activity in the CPS and similar surveys. Our first research question can be stated:



       1) Is there informal work for pay or profit done during the survey reference week that is

           not captured by the standard Current Population Survey (CPS) employment

           questions?



To answer this research question, we examine whether asking questions focused specifically on

informal work as a follow-up to the standard CPS employment questions identifies additional

work activity. We also are interested in whether different ways of asking such added questions

are more or less effective and in whether this varies according to whether a respondent is

reporting for themselves versus another household member or, in the latter case, according to the

relationship of the respondent to the other household member:




                                                                                        2|Page
       2) Does the way in which questions that probe for informal work are asked affect the

              number of additional jobs identified?

       3) Does the relative effectiveness of different ways of probing for informal work vary by

              whether the survey respondent is answering for herself (self-report) or for another

              household member (proxy report)? If answering for another household member, does

              the relative effectiveness of different ways of probing vary by the closeness of the

              survey respondent to the other household member?



Finally, we are interested in the potential effects of under-reporting of informal work during the

survey reference week on key labor force measures:



       4) How does any under-reporting of informal work in answering the standard CPS

              questions affect estimates of the employment rate (the share of the sample that is

              categorized as employed) and the multiple job holding rate (the share of employed

              persons in the sample who hold more than one job)?


Background

       To understand how question wording might affect reports of work activity, we must first

identify how respondents formulate responses. The most common model of the response process

suggests four steps: (1) understanding the question, (2) recall, (3) inference and estimation, and

(4) mapping the answer onto the response format and editing the response (Sudman, Bradburn

and Schwarz, 1996; Tourangeau, Rips, and Rasinski, 2000). We limit our discussion to the first

two of these steps because they are the most relevant to our research questions and experimental

conditions.

                                                                                           3|Page
       Before a respondent can provide a response to a survey question, she must first

understand what information is being requested. Even questions that appear to be clear can be

interpreted in different ways. For example, in one study, respondents were asked: “Have you

smoked at least 100 cigarettes in your entire life?” Respondents disagreed on whether to include

puffs where they did not inhale, whether to count cigarettes they had only partially smoked, and

what constituted a cigarette (Schober, Suessbrick, and Conrad 2018). This sort of disconnect is

due, in part, to the difference between literal interpretation and pragmatic interpretation.

Individuals want to be responsive to what they think the researcher wants to know (pragmatic

interpretation), regardless of exactly what was asked (literal interpretation) (Schwarz 1999). A

respondent answering the CPS employment questions might decide that informal or irregular

work activity that occurred during the survey reference week is not part of what the interviewer

is asking about. . For example, someone who performed as a magician at weekend children’s

parties or maintained a blog that generated ad revenue might think of this activity as a ‘hobby’

and not as ‘work’, and fail to report it when asked the standard CPS questions. While any

misconstruing of a question on the part of a respondent is problematic for achieving accurate

estimates, there is no reason to think that the severity of this problem should differ between self

and proxy reports. In either case, a probe asking specifically about informal work may change

the respondent’s understanding of what they should be reporting and thus uncover previously

unreported work activity.

       In the second step of the response process, the respondent must recall information

relevant to formulating a response. She will use cues such as ‘work’, ‘pay or profit’, ‘job or

business,’ and the reference week from the question wording and survey context to search her

memory. Poor cues will increase the chance of retrieval failure (Tourangeau 2000). Because



                                                                                           4|Page
richer information is stored about the self than about others (Kuiper and Rogers 1979), strong

cues may be especially important for proxy reporting. To the extent that individuals store more

information about events that involve them directly, even a weak cue may spur retrieval of a

given event, whereas stronger cues may be required to activate the retrieval of information about

other individuals’ activities. In the context of collecting information about informal work

activity, we would expect a question that provides specific examples of the types of work that

may have been performed (e.g., doing yard work or driving for a ridesharing service) to activate

a respondent’s memory more successfully than a question that asks in more general terms about

informal work activity. We would expect this to be more the case for proxy reports than for self-

reports and, among proxy reports, perhaps more so for individuals with whom the respondent has

weaker ties (e.g., a roommate or other unrelated household member) as opposed to those with

whom the respondent has stronger ties (e.g., a spouse).

       The use of dispositional knowledge also may lead to failure in the recall process.

Individuals may have two distinct types of knowledge about others: situational and dispositional

(Schwarz and Wellens 1997). Situational knowledge includes details about specific events

whereas dispositional knowledge is information that can be inferred about an individual based on

her typical behavior. In a study of consumer expenditures, for example, respondents used a

combination of situational and dispositional knowledge to report their own spending behavior

but relied primarily on dispositional knowledge when reporting on behalf of their spouse

(Dashen 2000). When individuals use dispositional knowledge to answer questions about

employment, they may be less likely to report sporadic or casual work activity because it is not a

‘usual’ behavior (Sudman, Bradburn, and Schwarz 1996; Schwarz and Wellens 1997). This

reasoning suggests that, to the extent that probing encourages the respondent to tap into



                                                                                        5|Page
situational knowledge, it may be differentially effective for uncovering added informal work

among proxy reports compared to self-reports.

       Individuals also may fail to retrieve the necessary information if it was not encoded in the

first place. While this should be relatively rare for self-reports of employment, it could be more

of an issue for proxy reporting. If another household member did work during the reference week

but did not tell the respondent, the respondent would not know to report it. More generally, it

may be difficult for a proxy respondent to estimate the extent of another household member’s

participation in an irregular behavior over a particular interval of time (Phillips, Bickart and

Menon 2006). The closeness of proxy reporters to the subject of their reporting has been found to

be correlated with the accuracy of the proxy report, perhaps because individuals who are closer

to one another are more likely to share information about their activities (Bower and Gilligan

1979; Phillips, Bickart and Menon 2006). As an example, Kojetin and Miller (1993) found

stronger agreement between spouses’ reports about their partners’ spending and the partners’

own reports than between parents’ reports about their children’s spending and the children’s own

reports. In general, making spending decisions jointly with another household member,

discussing spending with the other household member, or observing items that the other

household member may have purchased all contributed to stronger agreement between reports

made by the proxy respondent and those made by the person doing the spending. If lack of

encoding is problematic in the context of reporting about work activity, we might expect the

effects of probing to differ depending on the relationship between the respondent and the person

about whom she is reporting. In this case, probing could be more effective when used to elicit

information about individuals such as a spouse who are closer to the respondent, since the




                                                                                           6|Page
information is more likely to have been encoded in the first place, and less effective when used

to elicit information about other household members.

       Three primary methods have been tested to improve accuracy of reports about behavior.

First, definitions have been used to clarify questions, thus improving comprehension. In an

experiment described by Fowler (1992), definitions intended to ensure that respondents’

interpretations of a set of questions related to health behaviors were consistent with the

researcher’s intent were provided to half of the participants but not to the others. While no

information was collected on respondent interpretation, the distribution of responses differed

significantly between the two conditions. Inclusion of definitions or instructions can be more

important in complex situations. For example, in one experiment, subjects asked a series of

questions about employment status, housing, and household purchases based on complex

fictional scenarios answered accurately about 87% of the time when interviewers had the

flexibility to clarify definitions, but just 28% of the time when no definitions were provided.

Answers to the same questions based on simpler scenarios were accurate 97% or more of the

time regardless of whether the interviewer had the opportunity to provide clarification (Schober

and Conrad 1997).

       Second, adding examples to questions offers additional cues that the respondent may be

able to use to recall more complete information. The choice of examples provided may affect the

responses that are given. In a study of food consumption, Tourangeau et al. (2014) varied the

examples for different food categories by the frequency of consumption (e.g., bread vs. barley

for grains) and by whether the item would be considered a typical example (e.g., milk vs. sour

cream for dairy). Overall, individuals reported more consumption when any examples were

provided. Further, when asked to list what they ate, they were more likely to mention



                                                                                             7|Page
consumption of the example items. This suggests that individuals retrieve enough information to

make a judgement but do not try to recall everything.

       Finally, and perhaps most relevant for this study, researchers have tested the use of

decomposed questions to offer additional cues and enhance recall. Menon (1997) conducted a

diary experiment in which individuals were asked either open-ended questions about the number

of times they had done each of six behaviors or a set of questions that explicitly cued the

respondent to think about the different circumstances under which each of the same things might

have been done. The second, decomposed condition improved the accuracy of recall for the three

irregular behaviors studied (making unplanned stops to talk to friends, snacking, and drinking

from a water fountain), but not for the regular behaviors (washing hair, having dinner, and

attending class).

       Other research has identified circumstances under which decomposed questions may

perform less well. In a survey experiment reported by Belli et al. (2000), respondents either were

asked a simple question about the total number of local or long-distance phone calls they had

made during a specified period or were asked decomposed questions about the same behavior

that cued the respondent to think separately about calls at different times or to different

destinations. Subjects who received the decomposed question had a greater tendency to over-

report the number of phone calls they had made than subjects who received the simple question.

Members of the study population in the Belli et al. (2000) study made a sufficiently large number

of phone calls that they most likely used an estimation strategy to formulate their answers rather

than enumerating each call individually (Blair and Burton 1987). We would expect respondents

reporting on informal work activities during the prior week to enumerate rather than estimate,




                                                                                              8|Page
meaning that the findings reported by Menon (1997) are likely to be more applicable to our

context than the findings reported by Belli et al. (2000).

       Additional research has suggested that probing or decomposed questions also may result

in overreporting due to forward telescoping, that is, the inclusion of activities that in fact had

occurred prior to the specified reference period (telescoping) (Sudman and Bradburn 1973).

Forward telescoping is more likely to occur when events are highly salient. Events that are less

salient are more likely to suffer from backward telescoping, i.e., the exclusion of events that

occurred within the reference period because individuals think they occurred longer ago. To the

extent that work identified through the additional questions is work that is less salient, the results

will be more likely to suffer from backwards than forward telescoping, trending the additional

work identified toward zero (Brown, Rips, and Shevell 1985). Moreover, telescoping (of any

kind) is more likely to occur the further back the period for which the respondent is asked to

recall (Martin 2006). Given that our survey asks about events that occurred over the most recent

calendar week, we would not expect telescoping to be a large problem in our context. On

balance, the existing literature leads us to expect that adding questions to the CPS questionnaire

to identify previously unreported work should improve the accuracy of the information collected.

       The material importance of any potential underreporting of informal work activity for our

understanding of the labor market will depend in part on the prevalence of such activity among

the CPS target population. This is something that several recent surveys have attempted to

measure. Robles and McGee (2016) analyze data from the Enterprising and Informal Work

Activities (EIWA) survey fielded by the Federal Reserve Board in October and November of

2015. Based on their sample, during the six months prior to the survey, 36% of the adult

population had participated in informal work that involved either selling or renting property or



                                                                                            9|Page
providing services. The estimate from the 2016 Survey of Household Economics and

Decisionmaking (SHED), which included similar questions, is that 28% of adults earned money

from informal work during the month prior to the survey (Board of Governors of the Federal

Reserve Board 2017). The two waves of the Survey of Informal Work Participation (SIWP)

carried out during 2015 asked whether respondents were “currently engaged” in informal paid

activity or side jobs, exclusive of selling property, renting property or responding to surveys

(Bracha and Burke 2019). This was found to be the case for 21% of adults age 21 and older

categorized as employed, 25% percent of those categorized as unemployed and 12% of those

categorized as out of the labor force based on the CPS employment questions. An important

caveat is that all three of these estimates are based on online panel surveys. One might be

concerned that engagement in other sorts of informal work is higher among those willing to

participate in an online panel than among the general population. While this may be the case, at

least in the SHED, even after excluding all informal work done by anyone who reported any

online work, the estimated prevalence of informal work activity falls but remains substantial

(Abraham and Houseman 2018).

       Existing research provides some insights regarding the set of questions about the

measurement of informal work that motivate our research. In an early study based on data

collected during the early 1990s, Martin and Polivka (1995) explored the effect of probing for

informal work activity on measured employment rates. In one portion of their study, household

survey respondents were asked questions very similar to the current CPS employment sequence.

Then, in cases in which there was at least one adult member of the respondent’s household with

no reported employment, a question about informal work activity was asked regarding the first

such person listed on the household roster. Additional work activity identified through this



                                                                                        10 | P a g e
probing raised the estimated employment rate by 2.3 percentage points, with proportionally

larger effects for household members under age 20 and age 65 and older. Martin and Polivka did

not attempt to learn about underreporting of informal work as a secondary work activity (i.e.,

about multiple job holding) or about differences in the effects of probing for self versus proxy

reporters, nor did they experiment with alternative wordings for their probe.

       More recently, analyzing data from the two waves of the SIWP fielded in 2015, Bracha

and Burke (2019) estimated that accounting for informal work activity identified through probing

would raise the overall employment rate by 4.5 percentage points above that estimated based on

responses to the CPS employment questions and raise the multiple job holding rate by more than

11 percentage points. In contrast to Martin and Polivka (1995), Bracha and Burke asked first

about informal work and then administered the CPS employment questions. This question

ordering could have affected the responses to the CPS questions and thus their conclusions. The

wording of their question about informal work—which asks whether a respondent is “currently

engaged” in such work rather than about whether the respondent did any such work during the

survey reference period—is also potentially problematic. Bracha and Burke (2019) do not

provide evidence on possible differences in the reporting behavior of self-reporters versus proxy

reporters, nor was their study designed to learn about the effectiveness of different ways of

asking about respondents’ participation in informal work.

       Another relevant study is Katz and Krueger (2019a), which reports on a 2015 survey of

respondents recruited via the Mechanical Turk website, Amazon’s crowdsourcing platform, that

was designed primarily to learn whether people answering the CPS employment questions under-

report multiple job holding. They first asked the CPS employment questions and then asked “Did

you work on any gigs, HITS or other small paid jobs last week that you did not include in your



                                                                                        11 | P a g e
answer to the previous question?” Taking the additional small jobs mentioned by respondents

into account raised the share of workers in the Katz and Krueger sample who are multiple job

holders from 39 percent to 77 percent. Similar to the other studies we have discussed, the Katz

and Krueger study was not designed to shed light on possible differences between the reporting

behavior of self-reporters versus proxy reporters nor to assess the relative effectiveness of

different ways of probing to learn about informal work activity.

       Finally, in a novel analysis, Allard and Polivka (2018) use data from the American Time

Use Survey (ATUS) to gauge the effects of accounting for informal work on the employment

and multiple job holding rates. The ATUS, which uses the CPS as a sampling frame, includes

CPS-style questions about individuals’ labor force status and also collects information on each

respondent’s allocation of time during one 24-hour period. Allard and Polivka focus on time

devoted to labor-intensive income-generating activities such as hobbies, crafts, food,

performances or services that are not part of a job or business. They estimate that, in the ATUS

over the 2012-2016 period, accounting for such activities would have raised the employment rate

by between 0.4 and 3.0 percent and raised the multiple job-holding rate by between 3.0 and 20.7

percent. In both cases, the range reflects uncertainty about the extent to which average daily

participation in such activities reflects the same people engaging in the activity on multiple days

as opposed to different people engaging in the activity on different days. These estimates suggest

that the standard CPS questions miss relatively little informal work activity, but depend both on

the definition of income-generating activities adopted and, perhaps more importantly, on the

ATUS doing a good job of capturing time devoted to those activities.




                                                                                         12 | P a g e
Methods

       To answer our research questions, we use data from the 2016 Joint Program in Survey

Methodology (JPSM) practicum project. For this project, a task visible only to U.S. residents was

posted to the Mechanical Turk website, asking for individuals to complete a survey about

employment referred to in the posting as the Current Employment Survey. Individuals who

clicked on the task were told that they would receive $2.50 for completion of a survey about the

employment status of themselves and other household members. A total of 4,991 people

completed the survey on August 16 and 17, 2016, taking an average of 13.55 minutes to answer

the questions asked. Given the non-probabilistic nature of the survey, response rates were not

calculated. We excluded 52 cases due to item non-response, and analysis was conducted on the

remaining 4,939 completed interviews.

       The first section of the survey collected information on the characteristics of all members

of a respondent’s household. It included questions concerning age, sex, education, race and

ethnicity, marital status and relationship to the household respondent (opposite sex spouse,

opposite sex unmarried partner, same-sex spouse, same-sex unmarried partner, child, grandchild,

parent, brother/sister, other relative, foster child, housemate/roommate, roomer/boarder or other

non-relative). The second section of the survey asked questions to identify each household

member’s employment status; for those who were employed, whether they held more than one

job; and, as applicable, the hours worked on the main and other jobs. With the exception of some

experimental questions concerning sexual orientation and gender identity, all of the questions

about household members’ characteristics and work activity were taken directly from the Current

Population Survey (CPS) questionnaire. The use of the CPS employment questions on the JPSM

practicum survey means that the responses can be used to construct CPS-like measures of both


                                                                                       13 | P a g e
employment and multiple job holding during the survey reference week (“last week,” defined as

the most recent completed week beginning on a Sunday and ending on a Saturday).

       For the respondent (in single person households) or for one randomly-selected member of

the household (in multiple person households), the CPS employment questions were followed by

additional questions probing for activity to earn money outside of a regular job. This is the

sample of people on which the analysis reported here is based. As can be seen in Table 1, the

analysis subjects are younger and considerably more educated than the population as a whole.

       The specific questions asked about informal work activity were varied experimentally. In

one treatment condition, randomly assigned to half the cases, respondents were asked a global

yes/no question about whether any such activity had occurred during the survey reference week

(the global question). If no work activity had been reported for the subject household member in

response to the standard CPS questions, the global question was:



       Sometimes people who don’t have a job do other things to earn money. Did

       [you/[NAME]] do other things to earn money last week?



For those with work activity reported in answer to the CPS questions, the global question was:



       Sometimes, in addition to working at a job [or business] where there is a definite

       arrangement for regular work on a continuing basis, people do other things to earn

       money. Outside of a job [or business], did [you/[NAME]] do other things to earn money

       last week?




                                                                                        14 | P a g e
In these questions, as applicable, the text filled based on the person selected (e.g., if the

respondent is answering about another household member, NAME refers to that person’s name)

and whether or not the respondent had reported work by the individual in a family business.

       In the second treatment condition, survey respondents were asked essentially the same

question, but with potential informal work activity decomposed into seven different categories

(the detailed question). The seven categories of work activity outside of a regular job that a

respondent might report were (1) provided services to other people, (2) provided services to a

self-employed individual or business, (3) performed as an actor, musician or entertainer, (4)

drove for a ridesharing service, (5) assisted with medical, marketing or other research, (6) posted

videos, blog posts or other content online, or (7) did other informal work or side job. Examples

were provided for all but the ‘other’ category.

       For anyone categorized as CPS employed for whom informal work was reported, the

respondent was asked to indicate whether the informal work mentioned in response to additional

probing had been included in the CPS job count. Both among those who received the global

probe and among those who received the detailed probe, only about half of the informal work

mentioned when we probed had been included when answering the CPS employment questions.

Respondents also were asked to report the number of hours devoted to the informal work

reported in response to the probing question. The full survey questionnaire is reproduced in

online Appendix A. Online Appendix B provides information on the age, sex, education,

ethnicity and race of self-reports and proxy reports by assignment to the global versus the

detailed question treatment. The question treatment groups are well balanced with respect to

these characteristics. The only statistically significant differences between the characteristics of

the global and detailed question treatment groups are among other household members, with



                                                                                           15 | P a g e
those assigned the global question somewhat less likely than those assigned the detailed question

to have some college or an Associate degree (30.6% versus 36.7%) and somewhat more likely to

have a Bachelors degree or higher (40.5% versus 36.1%).

       To answer our first research question—whether there is informal work for pay or profit

done during the survey reference week that the CPS employment questions do not capture—we

look at the proportion of individuals for whom additional probing identified work that was not

included in the answers to the CPS questions. We use a one-tailed one sample t-test to determine

whether this proportion is significantly greater than zero.

       To address our second research question on whether the method used to probe for

informal work affects the answers obtained, we compare the share of people for whom additional

work is identified by the global versus the detailed question. We use a two-tailed two-sample t-

test to determine whether the two probes—the global question and the detailed question—elicit

different amounts of additional work activity. To address our third research question, we carry

out these same comparisons separately for respondents reporting for themselves (self-reporters)

versus respondents reporting for other household members (proxy reporters) and then, within the

latter group, separately for respondents reporting about a spouse or unmarried partner (which we

will refer to simply as a spouse) versus respondents reporting about another household member.

       We are most interested in the effects that probing for informal work activity has on the

estimated employment rate (the percent of people in the sample who were employed) and the

multiple job holding rate (the percent of employed persons with two or more jobs). Additional

work activity identified among those initially classified as not employed could raise the

employment rate; additional work activity identified among those with a single CPS job could




                                                                                       16 | P a g e
raise the multiple job holding rate. 2 We look first at how asking one or the other of the probing

questions (either the global question or the detailed question) affects the statistics of interest (the

employment rate and the multiple job holding rate). We use one-tailed paired t-tests to determine

whether these effects pass the threshold of statistical significance. The differences in the effects

of interest then are compared across the two treatments—the detailed question treatment versus

the global question treatment—using a two-tailed two-sample t-test. These analyses related to

our final research question are carried out first for the full sample and then separately by

household member status (self-report or proxy report), with the latter also broken out according

to whether the report is for a spouse or other household member.

         All analyses are unweighted. The implications of the sample design and lack of weights

are considered in the concluding discussion.


Results

         Our first research question asks whether individuals engage in informal work during the

reference week that is not captured by the standard CPS employment questions. We begin by

looking at the patterns of employment for the sample as a whole. As shown in Table 2, based on

their employment status as determined using the responses to the standard CPS questions, 16.6%

of sample members are categorized as not employed, 63.6% as employed with one job, and

19.8% as employed with more than one job. 3 When respondents are prompted with follow-up



2
  The identification of multiple jobs for someone initially classified as not employed also in principle could raise the
multiple job holding rate. For the purpose of comparing the effects of the detailed and global questions on the
multiple job holding rate, however, we do not want to allow for an outcome that is possible for those receiving the
detailed question but not for those receiving the global question. In contrast to the detailed question, the global
question allows us to determine only that an individual had done some work that was not initially reported, not
whether they had more than one unreported job.
3
  In CPS data for August 2016, 38.7% of individuals 18 and older were not employed, 58.3% were employed with
one job, and 3.0% were employed with two or more jobs. This distribution was similar for those reporting for

                                                                                                          17 | P a g e
questions about work activity outside of a regular job, additional work not reflected in the

answers to the standard CPS employment questions is reported for 21.9% of the sample.

Additional work is identified for members of all three employment-status groups—among those

the CPS questions identified as not employed, as employed with a single job and as employed

with two or more jobs.

        Because our sample was recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, we know that all

of our respondents have been involved in gig work at least to some extent. This means that the

incidence of additional work we uncovered by probing likely is higher than in the general

population. We do not have good information on the types of informal work done by those who

received the global probe, but we do have that information for those who received the detailed

probe. About a third of those receiving the detailed probe who did any added informal work

reported work in the research category, which is where Mechanical Turk activities should be

listed. 4 As a sensitivity check, using the portion of our sample that received the detailed probe,

we reran the tabulations reported in Table 2 excluding all additional informal research work.

Without this exclusion, 25.8% of those receiving the detailed probe reported additional work

activity; excluding research work, this share was smaller but remained substantial at 19.7%. As

shown in online Appendix Table C1, even with research work excluded, probing identified

substantial added work activity in all three employment status groups as determined based on the

answers to the CPS employment questions.




themselves compared to those for whom a proxy report was obtained, as well as for reference persons, spouses, and
other household members.
4
 Looking across the remaining categories, among those receiving the detailed probe for whom we identified added
work, 17% performed services for others, 12% performed services for a business or self-employed person, 7%
earned money by posting content online, 3% drove for a ride-sharing service, 3% performed as an entertainer, and
31% did other types of informal work not captured in the more specific categories. These numbers add up to
slightly more than 100 percent because there were some people who reported more than one type of added work.

                                                                                                    18 | P a g e
       Another natural question to ask about the added work activity identified through probing

is whether it involved more than a minimal amount of individuals’ time. We collected

information on hours for informal work identified through probing both for those receiving the

global probe and for those receiving the detailed probe. Among those responding to the global

probe, after asking the hours question, we then asked whether any reported informal work

activity had been included when answering the CPS employment questions. Some subjects

receiving the global probe could have done more than one type of informal work during the

survey reference week and it is not entirely clear how they would have answered this question.

For those responding to the detailed probe, we asked separately about hours and their inclusion

in answering the CPS employment questions for each type of reported informal activity. As a

check on whether our conclusions would have been different had we excluded informal work

activity identified through probing that involved only a minimal amount of time, we recomputed

the numbers reported in Table 2 but counting added informal work only for those with at least

four hours of such work identified through probing. As can be seen in online Appendix Table

C3, the share of respondents with added work is about 40 percent lower—13.0% rather than

21.9% —but the general trends in the estimates are otherwise unaffected.

       Among the full set of people reporting additional work during the survey reference week

after probing, including those with very low hours, some 17.6% said that they spent an estimated

15 or more hours on that additional activity (15.2% for those receiving the global probe and

19.3% for those receiving the detailed probe). Added work activity during the reference week

identified through probing occupied an average of 8.2 hours during the survey reference week

(7.0 hours for those receiving the global probe and 9.1 hours for those receiving the detailed

probe), roughly equivalent to a full normal work day. Those with no CPS employment for whom



                                                                                       19 | P a g e
unreported work activity was identified by probing are somewhat more likely than those with

one or more CPS jobs to have spent 15 or more hours on that activity during the reference week

(24.7% versus 16.0% overall, 17.1% versus 14.9% for those the receiving the global probe, and

29.2% versus 16.9% for those receiving the detailed probe). Among those for whom added work

activity was identified, the group with no CPS employment also spent more hours than those

with one or more CPS jobs (9.9 versus 7.9 hours overall, attributable entirely to the difference of

11.8 versus 8.5 hours for those receiving the detailed probe). Our second research question asks

whether the form of the follow-up question about informal work affects the number of people for

whom additional work activity is identified. The first two rows of Table 3 report estimates of the

distribution of the sample by CPS employment status and the distribution of additional

employment identified by probing across the three employment status groups. Here these

estimates are shown separately for the cases receiving the global prompt and those receiving the

detailed prompt. As anticipated given that the assignment to the global versus the detailed probe

was random, the shares of the sample cases in each of the three CPS employment status groups

do not differ significantly between the two treatments. The share of cases for which added

employment was identified through probing, however, is significantly greater under the detailed

question treatment than under the global question treatment (25.8% versus 18.0%, a statistically

significant difference of 7.8 percentage points). This overall difference is spread across

individuals with no CPS employment, one CPS job and more than one CPS job; in each of the

three groups, the detailed question identifies significantly more added employment than does the

global question.

       The third research question we posed was whether the effects of prompts to uncover work

activity outside of a regular job differ depending on whether they apply to the individual herself



                                                                                        20 | P a g e
(self-report) or to another household member (proxy report) and, in the latter case, whether the

effects differ according to the relationship between the respondent and the other household

member. The next two panels of Table 3 report estimates separately for the self-report and proxy

report cases in our sample. The prevalence of work activity reported in response to the CPS

questions is much higher for the people for whom we obtained self-reports than for the people

for whom we obtained proxy reports. Those in the self-report group are much less likely to have

no CPS employment, equally likely to have a single CPS job and much more likely to have two

or more CPS jobs. Consistent with the random assignment of respondents to treatments, within

each of these two groups (self-reports and proxy reports), there are no significant differences in

the prevalence of work activity elicited by the standard CPS questions between those receiving

the global prompt and those receiving the detailed prompt.

       The self-report cases in our sample differ from those for whom we have proxy reports not

only in their level of work activity as captured by the CPS questions but potentially also with

respect to the prevalence and nature of any work activity not captured by those questions.

Differences in the amount of additional work activity identified by prompting for the self-report

cases versus the proxy report cases could be due to differences in how people report about

themselves as compared to how they report about others They also could be due, however, to real

differences in the labor force activity of the self-reports versus the proxy reports. Given that

respondents were assigned randomly to be asked the detailed question versus the global question,

however, we can attribute differences across question treatments within either the self-report or

the proxy report group to the type of probe each treatment group received.

       Asking the detailed question rather than the global question raises the share of proxy

report cases for which additional work activity is identified by 10.2 percentage points, from 6.0%



                                                                                         21 | P a g e
of cases with added work activity using the global prompt to 16.3% of cases using the detailed

prompt. In contrast, the difference for the self-report cases is just 5.7 percentage points, with

27.9% reporting added work activity under the global prompt versus 33.7% under the detailed

prompt. Putting these results somewhat differently, the number of proxy report cases with

additional work identified by probing increases by 172% when the detailed question is asked

instead of the global question, compared to an increase of just 21% for the self-report cases.

Asking the detailed rather than the global question also has a larger effect on the number of

hours devoted to additional work for proxy report cases for whom additional work is identified

(11.1 hours versus 6.5 hours, a 4.6 hour difference) than for self-report cases with additional

work (8.3 hours versus 7.1 hours, a 1.2 hour difference). Among the proxy reports, there are

significant differences in the amount of additional work activity identified by the detailed prompt

versus the global prompt for all three employment status groups—those without CPS

employment, those with one CPS job and those with more than one CPS job. Among the self-

report cases, however, the only statistically significant difference arises for the subgroup who

already had reported more than one job in response to the standard CPS questions.

       The bottom two panels of Table 3 further break out how asking the global versus the

detailed question affects the additional work activity reported when a proxy is answering for a

spouse or unmarried partner (referred to for convenience as a spouse) versus some other

household member. The rationale for making this comparison is that we expect a respondent

generally to be closer to her spouse than to other household members and to communicate more

with her spouse about daily activities. If this is correct, we might expect the amount of additional

work activity identified by the global compared to the detailed questions be more similar when

the proxy subject is a spouse than when the proxy subject is some other household member.



                                                                                          22 | P a g e
       Among reports for spouses, the global and the detailed questions perform very similarly

with respect to identifying previously unreported work activity for those with no CPS job,

though a second or third job is more likely to be reported when the detailed question is asked.

Among reports for other household members, the detailed question elicits significantly more

reports of additional employment than the global question for all three CPS employment status

groups (no CPS employment, one CPS job, or two or more CPS jobs). This is consistent with

stronger cues being more important for activating respondents’ memories or encouraging

respondents to make use of situational knowledge when they are reporting for household

members other than their spouse. Both for spouses and for other household members, among

those with additional work identified, the detailed probe has a larger effect than thon the number

of hours reported (11.0 versus 6.1 hours for spouses and 11.2 versus 6.9 hours for other

household members).

       Because we have good information about the type of informal work performed only for

respondents asked the detailed question, we cannot repeat this analysis with research work

excluded. We have replicated the Table 3 tabulations excluding added work that involved less

than four hours during the reference week. These results are shown in online Appendix Table

C4. As in our baseline results, the detailed probe elicits more unreported work activity than the

global probe. This is especially true for proxy reports and, among the proxy reports, for other

household members rather than a spouse.

       Table 4 examines how taking into account the additional work activity identified by

probing affects the estimated employment rate, defined as the share of the sample employed

during the survey reference week, and the estimated multiple job holding rate, defined as the

share of CPS employed persons holding more than one job during the reference week. The table



                                                                                       23 | P a g e
reports estimated rates based on the responses to the CPS questions; augmented rates that add the

additional work activity identified by probing to the numerator used to calculate the rate in

question; and differences between each pair of estimated rates. In the full sample, as shown by

the numbers in the first two rows of the table, probing to identify additional work activity

consistently raises both the employment rate and the estimated multiple job holding rate. The

increase in the employment rate is larger for those who received the detailed probe than for those

who received the global probe. The difference in the effects of the detailed versus the global

probe on the estimated employment rate in the full sample is a statistically significant 2.0

percentage points. Both the global and the detailed probe produce substantially larger effects on

the multiple job holding rate. Again, in the full sample, the effect is larger with the detailed

probe, which raised the multiple job holding rate by a statistically significant 3.6 percentage

points more than the global probe. 5

        Disaggregating by whether the respondent is reporting for herself or for another

household member makes clear that the differences in the effects on the employment rate we

observe in the full sample for the detailed question versus the global question arise primarily

among the proxy report cases. For proxy reports, the effect on the employment rate of

incorporating additional work activity identified by probing is a statistically significant 3.0

percentage points larger based on asking the detailed question as opposed to the global question.

For the self-report cases, the corresponding difference in employment rate effects is smaller (1.2

percentage points) and not statistically significant.

        The same general pattern holds for the multiple job holding rate. For proxy reports,

incorporating additional work identified by probing raises the multiple job holding rate by a


5
 In CPS data for August 2016, among those age 18 and older, the employment rate was 61.3% and the multiple job
holding rate was 5.0%.

                                                                                                  24 | P a g e
statistically significant 8.4 percentage points more when the detailed question is asked than when

the global question is asked. For self-reports, in contrast, although both the detailed and the

global question questions identify a sizable number of second jobs not reported in response to the

CPS questions, the difference between the two effects is small and statistically indistinguishable

from zero.

       As with the results reported in Table 3, there is heterogeneity within the proxy report

cases. Results are shown separately for spouses and other household members in the bottom two

panels of Table 4. Recall that, among those reporting about themselves, the global and the

detailed questions have statistically indistinguishable effects on both the employment rate and

the multiple job holding rate. In the reports for spouses, the effect on the employment rate of

asking the detailed question is statistically indistinguishable from the effect of asking the global

question, but asking the detailed question has a notably larger effect on the multiple job holding

rate. Adding work activity identified by probing raises the multiple job holding rate for a spouse

by a statistically significant 6.7 percentage points more when the detailed question is asked than

when the global question is asked. Finally, among reports for other household members, asking

the detailed question rather than the global question has a larger effect on both the employment

rate and the multiple job holding rate.

       To assess the sensitivity of these findings, we have replicated the Table 4 tabulations for

respondents who received the detailed prompt but with added research work excluded (results

reported in online Appendix Table C2). We also have replicated the full Table 4 analysis but

with added work involving less than four hours during the reference week excluded (results

reported in online Appendix Table C5). Even with these exclusions, incorporating the added

work identified by probing produces a statistically significant increase in the estimated



                                                                                         25 | P a g e
employment rate and has an even larger effect on the estimated multiple job holding rate. In the

tabulations that exclude added work involving less than four hours, we can examine the effects

of asking the detailed versus the global question about informal work. All of the qualitative

findings from our Table 4 analysis are robust to the exclusion of very-low-hours added work.



Discussion and Conclusion

       The results that we have reported suggest that there may be a substantial number of

people involved in informal work that is not captured by the standard CPS questions. In our

sample, additional probing using either a global question or a decomposed question identified a

sizeable number of reports of additional work activity. This was true whether a respondent was

reporting for themselves or for another household member, and also whether the other household

member was a spouse or someone else. Accounting for this additional work activity raised both

the employment rate and the multiple job holding rate, defined in each case in the same way as in

the monthly labor force statistics published by the BLS.

       Further, our results suggest that different ways of probing for additional work activity

may produce different results depending on the person about whom a respondent is reporting.

For those in our sample reporting about themselves, the effects of a global probe are not very

different from the effects of a more detailed probe that decomposes various possible types of

work activity a person might have carried out and provides examples. Among these self-reports,

the detailed probe elicits a significantly greater number of reports of additional work activity

only for those who already had mentioned two or more jobs in response to the standard CPS

questions. In contrast, for proxy reports, the detailed probe more consistently elicits a greater




                                                                                         26 | P a g e
number of such reports. This is especially true when a respondent is reporting for a household

member other than her spouse.

       For a self-report, asking the detailed question rather than the global question has

essentially the same effect as asking the global question on both the employment rate and the

multiple job holding rate. For reports about a spouse, asking the detailed question produces a

larger effect on the multiple job holding rate but not the employment rate. Finally, for reports

about other household members, asking the detailed question has a larger effect on both the

employment rate and the multiple job holding rate.

       The added work activity identified through probing in our survey most likely is

attributable either to respondents not having understood that this activity should have been

reported in answering the CPS employment questions or to the cue offered by the probe

activating their memories of the activity. The fact that, for self-reports, the detailed probe

generally does not produce larger effects than the global probe may suggest that memories about

own recent work activity tend to be relatively accessible. In contrast, for proxy reports—and

especially proxy reports pertaining to household members other than the spouse—the detailed

probe more consistently produces more reports of added work activity, suggesting that strong

cues are likely to be useful when seeking information from household survey respondents about

work done by others in their households.

       An important limitation of our study is that the sample for which we collected data is not

representative of the population as a whole. All of our respondents are individuals who are active

on Mechanical Turk and thus likely (though not certain) to have been involved at least in that

form of informal work activity during the survey reference week. We would not expect the same

necessarily to be true of other members of respondents’ households, but even that group is



                                                                                          27 | P a g e
younger and more educated than the population as a whole and may be atypical in other respects.

For these reasons, even if we were to reweight the data we have collected to match the

observable demographic characteristics of the broader population, the estimates derived from our

survey responses could not be generalized to that universe. Another caution about drawing

conclusions from our study about biases in the responses to the CPS employment questions is

that our survey was conducted online, whereas the CPS responses are collected via telephone or

face-to-face interviews. The survey findings nonetheless provide important evidence about the

sensitivity of survey estimates to asking more probing questions and structuring the probes in

different ways.

       To the extent that irregular or informal work has become more common, under-reporting

of work activity in response to the standard CPS questions could have become more prevalent

over time. The fact that the share of people reporting self-employment income on their tax

returns has been rising while the share reporting self-employment income in household survey

data has been flat or declining is consistent with this possibility (Katz and Krueger 2019b;

Abraham et al. 2018). On the other hand, surveys designed specifically to capture informal work

activity do not show continued overall growth in the rate of participation in such activity in

recent years, though participation in online platform work appears to have become more

prevalent and cyclical effects could have masked a continuation of an underlying positive trend

(Bracha and Burke 2018). It is important in any case to understand clearly what the CPS

employment questions are and are not capturing, and to think about whether and how they could

be improved or supplemented.

       As the agency responsible for producing official U.S. labor force statistics, the Bureau of

Labor Statistics has a strong interest in producing the best possible information about



                                                                                          28 | P a g e
individuals’ work arrangements and how they are evolving. The Contingent Work Supplement

(CWS) to the CPS, administered on five occasions between 1995 and 2005 and again in 2017,

provides valuable information on this topic (see, e.g., Polivka 1996, Cohany 1996, and Bureau of

Labor Statistics 2018). Because the CWS takes as its starting point the employment reported in

response to the standard CPS questions, asking additional questions only about the main job

reported for each person, it provides no information about any work not reported in answer to the

standard CPS questions or work that is secondary to a main job. There is a need, we would

argue, for efforts to design questions that can be used to obtain information about informal work

more broadly. That said, if the types of informal work that people are doing change over time,

the questions that are most appropriate to ask may change as well, something that could make it

more difficult to produce estimates of informal work activity that are consistent over time.

       In future research, it would be of value to examine whether our findings can be replicated

in samples that have different characteristics and, ideally, are more representative of the general

population. There also would be value in replicating our analysis using the survey modes that are

employed in the CPS (telephone and face-to-face interviews) rather than collecting responses to

an online instrument. In this study, we have compared the effects of asking a global question to

the effects of asking a particular decomposed question for learning about informal work not

reported in response to the standard CPS questions. The categories and examples included in our

decomposed question focused on activities in which compensation is received mainly for a

person’s labor, as opposed to being provided in connection with selling a product (e.g., selling

crafts on e-Bay) or providing temporary use of a capital asset (e.g., renting out a room in a house

through Airbnb). It is not yet clear, however, which categories and examples of activities should

be mentioned to obtain the most complete accounting of work done for pay or profit. Further



                                                                                        29 | P a g e
research on how best to ask about such activity would be desirable. Additional testing also might

incorporate follow-up questions about when any added activities were performed (to determine

whether and to what extent activities that occurred prior to the survey reference period may have

been reported), how much was earned from any missed activities (as a means of gauging their

importance), and why the activities were not reported initially.




                                                                                      30 | P a g e
References


Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky and James R. Spletzer. 2018.
      “Measuring the Gig Economy: Current Knowledge and Open Issues,” National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper No. 24950. August. DOI 10.3386/w24950.

Abraham, Katharine G. and Susan N. Houseman. 2018. “Making Ends Meet: The Role of
      Informal Work in Supplementing Americans’ Income,” Upjohn Institute, unpublished
      working paper. December.

Allard, Mary Dorinda and Anne E. Polivka. 2018. “Measuring Labor Market Activity Today:
        Are the Words Work and Job Too Limiting for Surveys?” Monthly Labor Review.
        November. Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2018/article/pdf/measuring-labor-
        market-activity-today.htm April 16, 2019.

Belli, Robert F., Norbert Schwarz, Eleanor Singer and Jennifer Talarico. 2000. “Decomposition
        Can Harm the Accuracy of Behavioural Frequency Reports,” Applied Cognitive
        Psychology, 14: 295-308. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1099-
        0720(200007/08)14:4<295::AID-ACP646>3.0.CO;2-1

Blair, Edward and Scot Burton. 1987. “Cognitive Processes Used by Survey Respondents to
        Answer Behavioral Frequency Questions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 14(2): 280-
        288. DOI https://doi.org/10.1086/209112.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017. Report on the Economic Well-Being
       of U.S. Households in 2016. Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal
       Reserve System. Accessed at https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2016-
       report-economic-well-being-us-households-201705.pdf May 10, 2019.

Bower, Gordon H. and Stephen G. Gilligan. 1979. “Remembering Information Related to One’s
      Self,” Journal of Research in Personality, 13: 420-432. DOI
      https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(79)90005-9

Bracha, Anat, and Mary A. Burke. 2018. “The Ups and Downs of the Gig Economy, 2015-
       2017,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 18-12. October. Accessed at
       https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/research-department-working-paper/2018/the-
       ups-and-downs-of-the-gig-economy-2015-2017.aspx May 10, 2019.

____________. 2019. “How Big is the Gig?” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, unpublished
      working paper. January.

Brown, N.R., L.J. Rips, and S.K. Shevell. 1985. “The Subjective Dates of Natural Events in
      Very-Long-Term Memory,” Cognitive Psychology, 17(2): 139-177. DOI
      https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(85)90006-4



                                                                                    31 | P a g e
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Undated. “Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey:
      Frequently Asked Questions.” Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/cps/faq.htm June 8, 2018.

____________. 2018. “Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements, May 2017.”
      Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/conemp.pdf June 18, 2018.

Cohany, Sharon R. 1996. “Workers in Alternative Employment Arrangements.” Monthly Labor
      Review October: 31–45. Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/mlr/1996/10/art4full.pdf May
      10, 2019.

Dashen, Monica. 2000. “The Effects of Retention Intervals on Self- and Proxy Reports of
      Purchases,” Memory, 8 (3): 129–143. DOI https://doi.org/10.1080/096582100387560

Fowler, Floyd Jackson, Jr. 1992. “How Unclear Terms Affect Survey Data,” Public Opinion
       Quarterly, 56(2): 218-231. DOI https://doi.org/10.1086/269312

Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 2019a. “Understanding Trends in Alternative Work
       Arrangements in the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 25425. Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research. DOI 10.3386/w25425

____________. 2019b “The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United
      States, 1995-2015.” ILR Review, 72(2): 382–416. DOI
      https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0019793918820008

Kojetin, Brian A. and Leslie A. Miller. 1993. “The Intrahousehold Communications Study:
       Estimating the Accuracy of Proxy Responses at the Dyadic Level,” paper presented at the
       48th Annual Conference of the American Association for Public Opinion Research, St.
       Charles, Illinois. May. Accessed at
       http://www.asasrms.org/Proceedings/papers/1993_188.pdf May 10, 2019.

Kuiper, N.A. and T.B. Rogers. 1979. “Encoding of Personal Information: Self-Other
       Differences,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(4): 499-514. DOI
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.37.4.499

Martin, Elizabeth. 2006. “Survey Questionnaire Construction,” U.S. Census Bureau Research
       Report Series, Survey Methodology #2006-13. Accessed at
       https://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/rsm2006-13.pdf May 10, 2019.

Martin, Elizabeth and Anne Polivka. 1995. “Diagnostics for Redesigning Survey Questionnaires:
       Measuring Work in the Current Population Survey,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 59(4):
       547-567. DOI https://doi.org/10.1086/269493

Menon, Geeta. 1997. “Are the Parts Better than the Whole? The Effects of Decompositional
      Questions on Judgments of Frequent Behaviors,” Journal of Marketing Research, 34(3):
      335-346. DOI https://doi.org/10.1177%2F002224379703400303



                                                                                    32 | P a g e
Phillips, Joan M. and Barbara A. Bickart and Geeta Menon. 2006. “Reporting About Others'
        Behavior: The Role of Judgment Strategy, Knowledge, and Regularity.” September.
        Accessed at https://ssrn.com/abstract=946247 April 16, 2019.

Polivka, Anne E. 1996b. “A Profile of Contingent Workers.” Monthly Labor Review. October:
       10–21. Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/1996/article/profile-of-contingent-
       workers.htm May 10, 2019.

Robles, Barbara and Marysol McGee. 2016. Exploring Online and Offline Informal Work:
       Findings from the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (EIWA) Survey,
       Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. DOI
       https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.089

Schober, Michael F., and Frederick G. Conrad. 1997. “Does Conversational Interviewing Reduce
      Survey Measurement Error?,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 61(4): 576-602. DOI
      https://doi.org/10.1086/297818

Schober, Michael F., Anna L. Suessbrick, and Frederick G. Conrad. 2018.“When Do
      Misunderstandings Matter? Evidence from Survey Interviews about Smoking,” Topics in
      Cognitive Science, 10(2): 452-484. DOI 10.1111/tops.12330

Schwarz, Norbert. 1999. “Self-Reports: How the Questions Shape the Answers,” American
      Psychologist, 54(2): 93-105. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.2.93

Schwarz, Norbert and Tracy Wellens. 1997. “Cognitive Dynamics of Proxy Responding: The
      Diverging Perspectives of Actors and Observers,” Journal of Official Statistics, 13(2):
      159-179.

Sudman, Seymour and Norman M. Bradburn. 1973. “Effects of Time and Memory Factors on
     Response in Surveys,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 68: 805-815.
     DOI: 10.2307/2284504.

Sudman, Seymour, Norman M. Bradburn and Norbert Schwarz. 1996. Thinking About Answers:
     The Application of Cognitive Processes to Survey Methodology, San Francisco: Jossey-
     Bass.

Tourangeau, Roger. 2000. “Remembering What Happened: Memory Errors and Survey
      Reports,” in Arthur A. Stone, Christine A. Bachrach, Jared B. Jobe, Howard S. Kurtzman
      and Virginia S. Cain, eds., The Science of Self-Report: Implications for Research and
      Practice, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc., 29-47.

Tourangeau, Roger, Frederick G. Conrad, Mick P. Couper and Cong Ye. 2014. “The Effects of
      Providing Examples in Survey Questions,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 78(1): 100-125.
      U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. DOI https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nft083




                                                                                     33 | P a g e
Tourangeau, Roger, Lance J. Rips and Kenneth Rasinski. 2000. The Psychology of Survey
      Response, Cambridge University Press: New York.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Design and Methodology: Current Population Survey, Technical
       Paper No. 66. Washington DC.




                                                                                 34 | P a g e
Table 1: Characteristics of Analysis Sample versus American Community Survey
Estimates (percent distributions)

                                                                                           Other
                                                                                         Household             ACS
                                                                     Respondent          Members             (2016)***

Age
                 18-24/16-24*                                             11.7               18.7                12.8
                 25-34                                                    45.8               31.7                17.7
                 35-44                                                    23.9               17.5                16.6
                 45-54                                                    11.1               14.1                17.7
                 55-64                                                     5.7               11.4                16.4
                 65 and over                                              1.7                6.6                 18.9

Female**                                                                  50.6               47.3                51.4

Education
                 Less than high school                                     0.3                6.7                12.6
                 High school                                               8.7               21.3                27.7
                 Some college or Associate degree                         36.2               33.6                31.0
                 Bachelors degree or higher                               54.7               38.3                28.7

Race/Ethnicity
                 Hispanic                                                  7.3               10.7                16.0
                 Non-Hispanic White                                       73.8               70.9                65.5
                 Non-Hispanic African American                             7.0                6.9                12.3
                 Non-Hispanic other race                                   8.0                8.9                 4.8
                 Non-Hispanic multiracial                                  3.9                2.6                 1.5

                 Sample size                                             2,704              2,235                 --



*All survey respondents were age 18 or older, but respondents were asked to report for other household members
age 16 and older. The survey sample includes N=93 other household members age 16 or 17. The ACS numbers show
the age distribution of the population age 18 and older.
**The survey sample includes N=22 respondents and N=19 other household members reported as transgender or

not identifying as either male or female, or for whom no report on gender identity was provided. They are included
in the denominator when calculating the percent female in our sample.
***All   sample distributions are significantly different from the corresponding ACS distributions at p<0.001.
 Table 2: Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing, Full Sample

                                                                   Employment              Additional Work
                                                                 Status Based on           Activity Identified        Additional Work
                                                                 CPS Questions,               by Probing,             Activity Identified
                                                 Sample           Percent of Full           Percent of Full          by Probing, Percent
                                                  Size               Sample                     Sample*               of Row Category

 Total                                               4,939              100.0                      21.9                        21.9

 CPS not employed                                      820              16.6                        3.9                        23.5

 CPS employed, 1 job                                 3,142              63.6                       14.8                        23.3

 CPS employed, 2 plus jobs                             977              19.8                        3.1                        15.9

*All reported values for percent in full sample with additional work activity identified by probing significantly different from zero at p< 0.001.
Table 3: Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing, Global versus Detailed Probe
                                              Employment Status Based on CPS Questions        Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing
                                                       (percent of sample)                                 (percent of sample)
                                                         Not                                              CPS, Not        CPS,         CPS,
                                 Sample
                                   Size      Total      Employed      1 Job      2+ Jobs      Total      Employed        1 Job       2+ Jobs
Full Sample
    Global prompt                  2,492       100.0          16.6       63.5         19.9        18.0          2.9         13.3          1.8
    Detailed prompt                2,447       100.0          16.6       63.8         19.7        25.8          4.9         16.4          4.5
    Detailed minus global              --          --          0.0        0.3          -0.2        7.8          2.0          3.0          2.8
    (p-value)                                              (0.980)    (0.845)      (0.828)    (<0.001)     (<0.001)     (<0.001)     (<0.001)
Self Reports
    Global prompt                  1,364       100.0            5.4      64.4         30.3        27.9          2.3         22.7          3.0
    Detailed prompt                1,340       100.0            5.3      64.6         30.2        33.7          3.4         23.4          6.9
    Detailed minus global              --          --          -0.1       0.2          -0.1        5.7          1.2          0.7          3.9
    (p-value)                                              (0.862)    (0.921)      (0.965)     (0.001)      (0.070)      (0.664)     (<0.001)
Proxy Reports
    Global prompt                  1,128       100.0          30.2       62.4           7.4        6.0          3.7          2.0           0.3
    Detailed prompt                1,107       100.0          30.3       62.8           7.0       16.3          6.7          7.9           1.7
    Detailed minus global              --          --          0.0        0.4          -0.4       10.2          3.0          5.8           1.5
    (p-value)                                              (0.987)    (0.856)      (0.386)    (<0.001)      (0.002)     (<0.001)       (0.001)
    Spouse
       Global prompt                 583       100.0          17.3       73.2          9.4         6.2          2.7          2.9          0.5
       Detailed prompt               542       100.0          18.5       71.2         10.3        13.8          3.1          8.3          2.4
       Detailed minus global           --          --          1.1        -2.0         0.9         7.7          0.4          5.4          1.9
       (p-value)                                           (0.623)    (0.449)      (0.614)    (<0.001)      (0.697)     (<0.001)     (<0.001)
    Other Household Member
       Global prompt                 545       100.0          44.0       50.8           5.1        5.9          4.8          1.1           0.0
       Detailed prompt               565       100.0          41.6       54.7           3.7       18.6         10.1          7.4           1.1
       Detailed minus global           --          --          -2.4       3.9          -1.4       12.7          5.3          6.3           1.1
       (p-value)                                           (0.411)    (0.198)      (0.250)    (<0.001)      (0.001)     (<0.001)       (0.014)
Table 4: Effect of Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing on Employment and Multiple Job Holding Rates, Global versus
Detailed Probe
                                                  Employment Rates                                      Multiple Job Holding Rates
                               Sample      CPS      Augmented Difference       (p-      Sample      CPS       Augmented Difference      (p-
                                Size     Questions by Probing                 value)     Size     Questions by Probing                 value)
Full Sample
   Global prompt                2,492         83.4        86.3         2.9   (<0.001)    2,078         23.9       39.9        16.0    (<0.001)
   Detailed prompt              2,447         83.4        88.3         4.9   (<0.001)    2,041         23.6        43.2        19.6   (<0.001)
   Detailed minus global            --         0.0         2.0         2.0      --           --         0.3         3.3         3.6      --
   (p-value)                        --     (0.984)     (0.035)    (<0.001)      --           --     (0.820)     (0.031)     (0.002)      --
Self Reports
   Global prompt                1,364         94.7        96.9         2.3   (<0.001)    1,291         32.0        55.9        23.9   (<0.001)
   Detailed prompt              1,340         94.7        98.1         3.4   (<0.001)    1,269         31.8        56.5        24.7   (<0.001)
   Detailed minus global            --         0.1         1.2         1.2      --           --         -0.2        0.6         0.7      --
   (p-value)                        --     (0.951)     (0.042)     (0.070)      --           --     (0.933)     (0.769)     (0.667)      --
Proxy Reports
   Global prompt                1,128         69.8        73.5         3.7   (<0.001)     787          10.6        13.5         2.9   (<0.001)
   Detailed prompt              1,107         69.7        76.4         6.7   (<0.001)     772          10.0        21.2        11.3   (<0.001)
   Detailed minus global            --         0.0         2.9         3.0      --          --          -0.6        7.8         8.4      --
   (p-value)                        --     (0.987)     (0.110)     (0.002)      --          --      (0.710)    (<0.001)    (<0.001)      --
   Spouse
       Global prompt             583          82.7        85.4         2.7   (<0.001)     482          11.4        14.9         3.5   (<0.001)
       Detailed prompt           542          81.6        84.7         3.1   (<0.001)     442          12.7        22.9        10.2   (<0.001)
       Detailed minus global       --          -1.1        -0.7        0.4      --          --          1.3         7.9         6.7      --
       (p-value)                   --      (0.623)     (0.730)     (0.697)      --          --      (0.557)     (0.002)    (<0.001)      --
   Other Household Member
       Global prompt             545          56.0        60.7         4.8   (<0.001)     305            9.2       11.1         2.0    (0.007)
       Detailed prompt           565          58.4        68.5        10.1   (<0.001)     330            6.4       19.1        12.7   (<0.001)
       Detailed minus global       --          2.4         7.8         5.3      --          --          -2.8        7.9        10.8      --
       (p-value)                   --      (0.411)     (0.007)     (0.001)      --          --      (0.184)     (0.005)    (<0.001)      --
Appendix A: JPSM 2016 Survey Practicum Questionnaire

                                    Current Employment Survey
                                            8/1/2016 V12

INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the Current Employment Survey. We are seeking to gather information about the
employment status and personal characteristics of survey respondents and the people they live
with.

This study is being conducted by Katharine G. Abraham at the University of Maryland College
Park and should take approximately 10 minutes to complete. We suggest that you find
someplace quiet and away from distractions to take the survey.

Your responses are voluntary and will remain completely confidential. Only researchers and
staff who work on this project will have access to your responses. There are no known risks of
participation.

If you are not comfortable answering a question, you may skip it and move on to the next
question. This will not affect your Mechanical Turk payment.

Please check the box below, to indicate that you have read this statement in its entirety; that
you are at least 18 years of age; that your questions about the research study have been
answered to your satisfaction; and that you voluntarily agree to participate in the study. You may
print a copy of this consent form if you wish.

      □   I have read this statement in its entirety and affirm the stated conditions

ROSTERING

Q1.       We want to know a little bit about the people in your household who are old enough to
          work before we ask you some questions about their employment status.

          Including yourself, how many people ages 16 or older live in your household?

          DROP DOWN MENU 1-10, 11 or more

          IF Q1 IN (.,1), GO TO Q4_1. ELSE GO TO Q2.




                                                                                                  1
Q2.   Please list the first names, nicknames or initials of the people ages 16 and older in
      your household starting with yourself.

      We don’t need actual names, just something that in later questions will tell you who we
      are asking about.

      [We will only collect information for 10 of the people in your household. Please list
      yourself first, then include the 9 oldest people age 16 and older among the remaining
      members of your household.]

      DISPLAY THE CORRECT NUMBER OF TEXT BOXES

Q3_X. How is [NAME] related to you?

      1. Opposite-sex Spouse (Husband/Wife)
      2. Opposite-sex Unmarried Partner
      3. Same-sex Spouse (Husband/Wife)
      4. Same-sex Unmarried Partner
      5. Child
      6. Grandchild
      7. Parent (Mother/Father)
      8. Brother/Sister
      9. Other relative (Aunt, Cousin, Nephew, Mother-in-law, etc.)
      10. Foster child
      11. Housemate/Roommate
      12. Roomer/Boarder
      13. Other nonrelative

REPEAT Q3_X FOR EACH HH MEMBER BEFORE GOING TO Q4_1.

DEMOGRAPHICS

ASK Q4_1-Q13_1 BEFORE LOOPING BACK FOR OTHER HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS.

Q4_X. In what year [were you/was [NAME]] born?

      If you don’t know the answer, leave this box blank.

      ENTER YEAR 1896-2000

      IF Q4_X=BLANK, CONTINUE TO Q5_X. ELSE GO TO Q6_X.




                                                                                                2
Q5_X. Even though you may not know [your/[NAME]’s] exact birth year, what is your best
      guess as to how old [you were/NAME was] on [your/his or her] last birthday?

       ENTER AGE 16-120

Q6_X-Q7_X EXPERIMENT: HALF THE SAMPLE GETS Q6_X-Q8_X. THE OTHER HALF OF
THE SAMPLE GETS Q6A_X-Q7A_X.]

Q6_X. [Was your/To the best of your knowledge, was [NAME]’s] sex assigned as male or
      female at birth?

       1.   Male
       2.   Female
       8.   I don't know the answer
       9.   I prefer not to answer

Q7_X. [Do you/To the best of your knowledge, does [NAME]] currently describe
      [yourself/themselves] as male, female, or transgender?

       1.   Male
       2.   Female
       3.   Transgender
       4.   [Do not/Does not] identify as male, female or transgender
       8.   I don't know the answer
       9.   I prefer not to answer

       IF INCONSISTENT ([Q6=1 & Q7=2] OR [Q6=2 & Q7=1]), GO TO Q8_X. (ONLY GO TO
       Q8_X ONCE PER PERSON.) ELSE GO TO Q9_X.

Q8_X. Just to confirm, [you were/[NAME] was] assigned [IF Q6_X=1: male/IF Q6_X=2: female]
      at birth and now [describe yourself/describes themselves] as [IF Q7_X=1: male/IF
      Q7_X=2: female]. Is that correct?

       1. Yes, that is correct
       2. No, that is not correct

       IF Q8_X=2, RETURN TO Q6_X. ELSE GO TO Q9_X.




                                                                                         3
Q6A_X. [Do you/To the best of your knowledge, does [NAME]] currently consider
     [yourself/themselves] male or female?

       1.   Male
       2.   Female
       3.   [Do not/Does not] identify as male or female
       8.   I don't know the answer
       9.   I prefer not to answer


Q7A_X. Sex is what a person is born. Gender is how a person feels. When a person’s sex and
     gender do not match, they might think of themselves as transgender.

       [Are you/To the best of your knowledge, is [NAME]] transgender?

       1.   Yes
       2.   No
       8.   I don't know the answer
       9.   I prefer not to answer

       IF Q6A_X IN (3,8,9) GO TO Q8A_X. ELSE GO TO Q9_X.

Q8A_X. [Was your/To the best of your knowledge, was [NAME]’s] sex assigned as male or
     female at birth?

       1.   Male
       2.   Female
       8.   I don't know the answer
       9.   I prefer not to answer

Q9_X. [Which/To the best of your knowledge, which] of the following best represents how [you
      think of yourself/[NAME] thinks of themselves]?

       1. [IF (Q6_X=1 AND Q7_X=1) OR (Q6A_X=1 AND Q7A_X=2): Gay, ELSE: Gay or
          lesbian]
       2. Straight, that is, not [IF (Q6_X=1 AND Q7_X=1) OR (Q6A_X=1 AND Q7A_X=2): gay,
          ELSE: gay or lesbian]
       3. Bisexual
       4. Something else
       8. I don't know the answer
       9. I prefer not to answer




                                                                                               4
Q10_X. [Are you/Is [NAME]] now…

       1.   Married
       2.   Living with partner
       3.   Widowed
       4.   Divorced
       5.   Separated
       6.   Never married

Q11_X. What is the highest level of school [you have/[NAME] has] completed or the highest
      degree [you have/[NAME] has] received?

       1.   Less than a high school degree, no diploma
       2.   High school graduate or the equivalent (for example: GED)
       3.   Some college but no degree
       4.   Associate degree (for example: AA, AAS, ABA)
       5.   Bachelor's degree (for example: BA, AB, BS)
       6.   Master's degree (for example: MA, MS, MEng, MEd, MSW, MBA)
       7.   Professional school degree (for example: MD, DDS, DVM, LLB, JD)
       8.   Doctorate degree (for example: PhD, EdD)

Q13_X. [Are you/Is [NAME]]...

       Please select all that apply.

       1.   White
       2.   Black or African American
       3.   Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin
       4.   American Indian or Alaska Native
       5.   Asian
       6.   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
       7.   Other (please specify)

IF Q1>X, LOOP BACK TO Q4_X-Q13_X. ELSE GO TO Q14




                                                                                            5
EMPLOYMENT

Q14.   Now we are going to ask you some questions about work-related activities.

       [IF Q1=1: Do you/IF Q1>1: Does anyone in this household] have a business or a farm?

       1. Yes
       2. No


       ASK Q15_1-Q29_Y FOR RESPONDENT BEFORE LOOPING BACK FOR EACH
       HOUSEHOLD MEMBER.


Q15_X. [The rest of our questions relate to work you [or others in your household] may have
      done last week. By last week, we mean the week beginning on Sunday and ending on
      Saturday.]
       Last week, did [you/[NAME]] do any work for [either] pay [or profit]?
       1. Yes
       2. No
       IF Q15_X=1, GO TO Q18_X. ELSE IF Q14=1 AND Q15_X IN (BLANK,2), GO TO
       Q16_X, ELSE GO TO Q17_X.
Q16_X. Last week, did [you/[NAME]] do any unpaid work in the family business or farm?
       1. Yes
       2. No
       IF Q16_X=(BLANK,2), GO TO Q17_X. ELSE GO TO Q18_X.
Q17_X. Last week, [in addition to the business] did [you/[NAME]] have a job, either full- or part-
      time?

       Include any job from which [you were/[NAME] was] temporarily absent.

       1. Yes
       2. No
       IF Q17_X=1, GO TO Q18_X. ELSE GO TO Q24_X.




                                                                                                     6
Q18_X. Last week, did [you/[NAME]] have more than one [job/job or business], including part-
      time, evening or weekend work?
       Include any jobs from which [you were/[NAME] was] temporarily absent.
       1. Yes
       2. No
       IF Q18_X=1, GO TO Q19_X. ELSE GO TO Q20_X.

Q19_X. Altogether, how many [jobs/jobs or businesses] did [you/[NAME]] have last week?
       1. 1 job
       2. 2-3 jobs
       3. 4 or more jobs

DISPLAY Q20_X AND Q20A_X ON THE SAME SCREEN.

Q20_X. [How/To the best of your knowledge, how] many hours did [you/[NAME]] work at
      [your/his/her/his or her/their] [main] [job/job or business] last week?
       ENTER NUMBER 0-100
Q20A_X. Is this more, less, or about the same amount of time [you/[NAME]] would work at
     [your/his/her/his or her/their] [main] [job/job or business] in a typical week?
       1. More
       2. About the same
       3. Less

       IF Q19_X IN (2,3,.), GO TO Q21_X. ELSE GO TO Q22_X.
DISPLAY Q21_X AND Q21A_X ON THE SAME SCREEN.


Q21_X. [How/To the best of your knowledge, how] many hours did [you/ [NAME]] work at
      [your/his/her/his or her/their] other jobs last week?
       ENTER NUMBER 0-100
Q21A_X. Is this more, less, or about the same amount of time [you/[NAME]] would work at
     [your/his/her/his or her/their] other jobs in a typical week?
       1. More
       2. About the same
       3. Less




                                                                                               7
Q22_X. How much [do you/does [NAME]] usually earn per week at [your/his/her/his or
      her/their] [main] job before any taxes or deductions?
       Include any overtime pay, commissions, or tips usually received.
       Report in whole numbers. Do not include “$” or “,”.
       ENTER NUMBER 0-20,000

IF GIGSELECT 1=X, GO TO Q24_X EXPERIMENT. ELSE LOOP BACK TO Q14_X FOR NEXT
PERSON. IF NO MORE PEOPLE IN HOUSEHOLD, GO TO Q30.




1Q24-Q29_Y are randomly assigned to one person per household. GIGSELECT references the person
about whom the questions are asked.

                                                                                                8
“GIG” QUESTIONS

[Q24 EXPERIMENT: HALF OF THE SAMPLE WILL RECEIVE Q24a AND HALF WILL
RECEIVE Q24b.]

Q24a. [Sometimes people who don’t have a job do other things to earn money. Did/Sometimes,
in addition to working at a job [or business] where there is a definite arrangement for regular
work on a continuing basis, people do other things to earn money. Outside of a job [or
business], did] [you/[NAME]] do any of the things listed below to earn money last week?

[This might include work you’ve already told us about.]

If you’re not sure where to put work [you/[NAME]] did, choose the category that seems to fit best
Choose more than one category only if you are reporting more than one type of work.


                                                                                                    Yes (1)   No (2)

 a. Provided services to other people (for example, babysitting, house sitting, dog
 walking, yard care, housecleaning, tutoring, picking up dry cleaning, running errands,
 assembling furniture, or providing other personal assistance)

 b. Provided services to a self-employed individual or business (for
 example, consulting on a project, editing, setting up or maintaining a computer system, building
 maintenance or repairs)

 c. Performed as an actor, musician or entertainer (for example, singing at a
 wedding, entertaining at a children’s party or juggling at a street fair)

 d. Drove for a ride sharing service (for example, Uber, Lyft, Sidecar, or a local
 limousine company)

 e. Assisted with medical, marketing or other research (for example,
 participating in a medical study, responding to a survey, or being part of a focus group)


 f. Posted videos, blog posts, or other content online (for example, running a
 travel blog or You Tube channel that generate ad revenues or commissions)

 g. Did other informal work or side job (please specify)


          IF ANY Q24_A-Q24_G=1, GO TO Q24C. ELSE LOOP BACK TO Q14_X FOR NEXT
          PERSON. IF NO MORE PEOPLE IN HOUSEHOLD, GO TO Q30.




                                                                                                                       9
Q24b. [Sometimes people who don’t have a job do other things to earn money. Did/Sometimes,
       in addition to working at a job [or business] where there is a definite arrangement for
       regular work on a continuing basis, people do other things to earn money. Outside of a
       job [or business], did] [you/[NAME]] do other things to earn money last week?

       [This might include work you’ve already told us about.]
       1. Yes
       2. No
       IF Q24b=1, GO TO Q24c. ELSE LOOP BACK TO Q14_X FOR NEXT PERSON. IF NO
       MORE PEOPLE IN HOUSEHOLD, GO TO Q30.

Q24c. Please describe the other work that wasn’t part of a regular job that [you/[NAME]] did last
      week to earn money.

       DISPLAY OPEN-ENDED TEXT BOX

Q24d. Some workers find short, in-person jobs or tasks through companies that connect them
      directly with customers using a website or mobile app. These companies also coordinate
      payment for the service through the app.

       Other workers select short, paid tasks through companies that maintain online lists of
       tasks. These tasks typically take between a few minutes and a few hours to complete
       and are done entirely online.

       Do either of these describe any of the other work that [you/[NAME]] did last week?


                                                                          Yes (1)      No (2)

 [INCLUDE ONE ROW FOR EACH ITEM REPORTED YES IN
 Q24a_X OR JUST DISPLAY YES/NO IF ANSWERED Q24b]


       IF Q15_X=1 OR Q16_X=1 OR Q17_X=1, GO TO Q25. ELSE GO TO Q26_Y AND ASK
       Q26_Y-Q27_Y FOR ALL JOBS MARKED YES IN Q24A OR Q24B.




                                                                                                10
Q25. Earlier you reported [you/[NAME]] had [a/2-3/4 or more] [job[s]/job[s] or business[es]] last
      week. Did you include [the following things/the other work you just reported] in that
      count?


                                                                           Yes (1)      No (2)

 [INCLUDE ONE ROW FOR EACH ITEM REPORTED YES IN Q24a
 OR JUST DISPLAY YES/NO IF ANSWERED Q24b]



GO TO Q26_Y AND ASK Q26_Y-Q27_Y FOR ALL JOBS MARKED YES IN Q24A OR Q24B.

DISPLAY Q26_Y AND Q27_Y ON THE SAME PAGE.

Q26_Y. [Please answer the following questions about the work you did [RESPONSE TO
Q24_Y].]

       [How/To the best of your knowledge, how] many hours did [you/[NAME]] spend
       [Q24_Y/on [your/his/her/his or her/their] work outside of a regular job] last week?

       If less than one hour, report one.

       ENTER HOURS 1-100

Q27_Y. Is this more, less, or about the same amount of time [you/[NAME]] would spend on this
      activity in a typical week?

       1. More
       2. About the same
       3. Less




                                                                                                 11
HOUSEHOLD INCOME

Q30.   [Which/Now thinking about all members of your household, which] category represents
       [your/your household’s] total combined income before taxes during the past 12
       months?
       This includes money from jobs, net income from business, farm or rent, pensions,
       dividends, interest, social security payments and any other money income received.
       1. Less than $5,000
       2. $5,000 to $7,499
       3. $7,500 to $9,999
       4. $10,000 to $12,499
       5. $12,500 to $14,999
       6. $15,000 to $19,999
       7. $20,000 to $24,999
       8. $25,000 to $29,999
       9. $30,000 to $34,999
       10. $35,000 to $39,999
       11. $40,000 to $49,999
       12. $50,000 to $59,999
       13. $60,000 to $74,999
       14. $75,000 to $99,999
       15. $100,000 to $149,999
       16. $150,000 or more
       17. I don't know the answer
       18. I prefer not to answer




                                                                                            12
CONCLUSION

Thank you very much for completing our survey!

We will combine your answers with those provided by other Turkers to answer the following
research questions:

1) Are people willing and able to report information about the people they live with, including
their sexual orientation and gender identity, other personal characteristics, work arrangements
and income?

2) Do people think of work outside of a regular job as employment?

The names, nicknames or initials you have provided to identify the members of your household
will be removed from your responses before anyone looks at them. All of the survey responses
we have received will be stored on a secure computer at the University of Maryland for analysis
by our research team. If requested, researchers at the Census Bureau who are studying the
collection of information about sexual orientation and gender identity will be given access to the
survey data under similarly secure conditions. Statistical tabulations of the responses to the
questions about employment and earnings, but no individual responses, may be provided to
researchers at the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

We did not inform you at the beginning of this survey that we would be asking about sexual
orientation and gender identity. One of the key goals of our study is to learn about how people
respond to questions on this topic when they are asked in the context of a series of more
standard questions about household members’ age, race, education, and so on. Stating up
front that we would be asking about sexual orientation and gender identity could have affected
whether some people chose to attempt the survey and biased our findings.

Now that we have informed you more fully about our research goals, if you would like to have
your survey responses deleted, please send an email to [contact information] with your
Mechanical Turk ID number and we will delete the information you have supplied. This will not
affect your Mechanical Turk payment.




                                                                                                13
Appendix B: Characteristics of Analysis Sample, Global versus Detailed Probe, by Respondents
versus Other Household Members (percent distributions)

                                                       Respondents                 Other Household Members
                                             Global      Detailed                 Global   Detailed
                                             Prompt      Prompt      Difference   Prompt   Prompt       Difference

Age
            18-24/16-24*                       10.9       12.5          1.6ns      17.6      19.8          2.1ns
            25-34                              45.8       45.8          0.0ns      32.9      30.4         -2.5ns
            35-44                              24.8       23.1         -1.7ns      18.2      16.8         -1.4ns
            45-54                              10.8       11.6          1.0ns      12.9      15.3          2.3ns
            55-64                               5.8        5.7         -0.1ns      11.6      11.2         -0.4ns
            65 and over                         2.1        1.3         -0.8ns       6.7       6.5         -0.2ns

Female**                                       49.3       51.7         2.4ns       46.5      47.9         1.4ns

Education
            Less than high school              0.2         0.5          0.4ns       7.0      6.4          -0.6ns
            High school                        8.9         8.6         -0.3ns      21.9      20.8         -1.1ns
            Some college or Associate
                                               35.9       36.6         0.8ns       30.6      36.7         6.1**
            degree
            Bachelors degree or higher         55.1       54.3         -0.9ns      40.5      36.1         -4.4*

Race/Ethnicity
            Hispanic                            7.8        6.8         -1.0ns      10.6      10.8          0.3ns
            Non-Hispanic White                 72.9       74.8          1.9ns      71.8      70.0         -1.8ns
            Non-Hispanic African American       7.5        6.5         -1.0ns       6.5       7.2          0.8ns
            Non-Hispanic other race             8.1        7.9         -0.2ns       8.8       9.0          0.3ns
            Non-Hispanic multiracial            3.8        4.0          0.2ns       2.4       2.9          0.5ns

            Sample size                       1,364       1,340          --       1,128     1,107           --


All survey respondents were age 18 or older, but respondents were asked to report for other household
*

members age 16 and older. The survey sample includes N=93 other household members age 16 or 17.
**
  The survey sample includes N=22 respondents and N=19 other household members reported as
transgender or not identifying as either male or female, or for whom no report on gender identity was
provided. They are included in the denominator when calculating the percent female.
 Online Appendix Table C1: Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing, Detailed Probe Sample,
 Excluding Additional Work in the Research Category


                                                                                              Excluding Additional Work in the
                                                                                                      Research Category
                                                                  Employment              Additional Work
                                                                Status Based on           Activity Identified   Additional Work
                                                                CPS Questions,               by Probing,        Activity Identified
                                                Sample             Percent of                 Percent of       by Probing, Percent
                                                 Size           Detailed Sample           Detailed Sample*      of Row Category

 Total                                           2,447                 100.0                       19.7                       19.7

 CPS not employed                                  406                  16.6                       4.2                        25.4

 CPS employed, 1 job                             1,560                  63.8                       12.0                       18.8

 CPS employed, 2 plus jobs                         481                  19.7                       3.6                        18.1

*All reported values for percent in detailed sample with additional work activity identified by probing significantly different from zero at p<
0.001.
Online Appendix Table C2: Effect of Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing on Employment and Multiple Job Holding
Rates, Detailed Probe Sample, Excluding Additional Work in the Research Category
                                               Employment Rates                                    Multiple Job Holding Rates
                            Sample      CPS      Augmented Difference      (p-      Sample     CPS       Augmented Difference       (p-
                             Size     Questions by Probing                value)     Size    Questions by Probing                  value)


  Full Sample                 2,447       83.4        87.6         4.2   (<0.001)    2,041       23.6        37.9        14.4     (<0.001)

  Self Reports                1,340       94.7        97.1         2.4   (<0.001)    1,269       31.8        48.9        17.0     (<0.001)

  Proxy Reports               1,107       69.7        76.2         6.4   (<0.001)     772        10.0        20.0        10.0     (<0.001)

     Spouse                    542        81.6        84.5         3.0   (<0.001)     442        12.7        21.3           8.6   (<0.001)

     Other Household           565        58.4        68.1         9.7   (<0.001)     330         6.4        18.2        11.8     (<0.001)
     Member
 Online Appendix Table C3: Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing, Full Sample, Excluding
 Additional Work that Totaled Less than Four Hours


                                                                                             Excluding Individuals Who Completed
                                                                                               Less Than Four Hours of Gig Work
                                                                   Employment
                                                                 Status Based on            Additional Work              Additional Work
                                                                 CPS Questions,             Activity Identified          Activity Identified
                                                 Sample           Percent of Full          by Probing, Percent          by Probing, Percent
                                                  Size               Sample                  of Full Sample*             of Row Category

 Total                                            4,933                 100.0                       13.0                         13.0

 CPS not employed                                  814                  16.6                         2.5                         15.1

 CPS employed, 1 job                              3,142                 63.6                         8.9                         14.0

 CPS employed, 2 plus jobs                         977                  19.8                         1.6                          8.1

*All reported values for percent in full sample with additional work activity identified by probing significantly different from zero at p< 0.001.
Note: Six cases dropped from sample due to missing hours information.
 Online Appendix Table C4: Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing, Global versus Detailed Probe, Excluding Additional Work
 that Totaled Less than Four Hours
                                              Employment Status Based on CPS Questions          Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing
                                                       (percent of sample)                                   (percent of sample)
                                                         Not                                                CPS, Not        CPS,         CPS,
                                  Sample
                                    Size     Total      Employed        1 Job      2+ Jobs      Total      Employed        1 Job       2+ Jobs
 Full Sample
     Global prompt                  2,487      100.0          16.6         63.6         19.9        11.3          1.4          8.6           1.2
     Detailed prompt                2,446      100.0          16.5         63.8         19.7        14.8          3.6          9.2           2.0
     Detailed minus global              --         --          0.1          0.2          -0.3        3.6          2.2          0.6           0.8
     (p-value)                                             (0.916)      (0.903)      (0.806)    (<0.001)     (<0.001)      (0.464)       (0.029)
 Self Reports
     Global prompt                  1,363      100.0           5.3         64.4         30.3        18.1          1.3         14.8           2.1
     Detailed prompt                1,340      100.0           5.3         64.5         30.2        18.7          2.6         13.0           3.1
     Detailed minus global              --         --          0.0          0.1          -0.2        0.5          1.4          -1.8          0.9
     (p-value)                                             (0.985)      (0.941)      (0.932)     (0.720)      (0.010)      (0.185)       (0.128)
 Proxy Reports
     Global prompt                  1,124      100.0          30.0         62.6           7.4        2.9          1.6          1.2           0.2
     Detailed prompt                1,106      100.0          30.2         62.8           7.0       10.2          4.8          4.6           0.8
     Detailed minus global              --         --          0.2          0.2          -0.4        7.3          3.2          3.5           0.6
     (p-value)                                             (0.911)      (0.920)      (0.699)    (<0.001)     (<0.001)     (<0.001)       (0.033)
     Spouse
        Global prompt                582       100.0          17.2         73.4          9.5         3.1          1.2          1.5           0.3
        Detailed prompt              542       100.0          18.5         71.2         10.3         8.5          2.6          5.7           1.1
        Detailed minus global          --          --          1.3          -2.2         0.9         5.4          1.4          4.2           0.7
        (p-value)                                          (0.579)      (0.421)      (0.621)    (<0.001)      (0.092)      (0.002)       (0.136)
     Other Household Member
        Global prompt                542       100.0          43.7         51.1           5.2        2.8          2.0          0.7          N/A
        Detailed prompt              564       100.0          41.5         54.8           3.7       11.9          6.9          4.4          N/A
        Detailed minus global          --          --          -2.2         3.7          -1.4       19.1          4.9          3.7          N/A
        (p-value)                                          (0.452)      (0.221)      (0.246)    (<0.001)     (<0.001)     (<0.001)          N/A


Note: Six cases dropped from sample due to missing hours information.
 Online Appendix Table C5: Effect of Additional Work Activity Identified by Probing on Employment and Multiple Job Holding
 Rates, Global versus Detailed Probe, Excluding Work that Totaled Less than Four Hours
                                                     Employment Rates                                         Multiple Job Holding Rates
                                 Sample       CPS      Augmented Difference          (p-      Sample      CPS       Augmented Difference      (p-
                                  Size      Questions by Probing                    value)     Size     Questions by Probing                 value)
 Full Sample
    Global prompt                  2,487         83.4         84.8           1.4   (<0.001)    2,078         23.9       34.2        10.3    (<0.001)
    Detailed prompt                2,446         83.4         87.0           3.6   (<0.001)    2,041         23.6        35.9        12.4   (<0.001)
    Detailed minus global              --         0.0          2.2           2.2      --           --         0.3         1.8         2.2      --
    (p-value)                          --     (0.984)      (0.025)      (<0.001)      --           --     (0.820)     (0.240)    (<0.001)      --
 Self Reports
    Global prompt                  1,363         94.7         95.9           1.3   (<0.001)    1,291         32.0        47.6        15.6   (<0.001)
    Detailed prompt                1,340         94.7         97.3           2.6   (<0.001)    1,269         31.8        47.0        15.2   (<0.001)
    Detailed minus global              --         0.1          1.4           1.4      --           --         -0.2        0.5         0.3      --
    (p-value)                          --     (0.951)     (<0.001)       (0.010)      --           --     (0.933)     (0.984)    (<0.001)      --
 Proxy Reports
    Global prompt                  1,124         69.8         71.4           1.6   (<0.001)     787          10.6        12.2         1.7   (<0.001)
    Detailed prompt                1,106         69.7         74.5           4.8   (<0.001)     772          10.0        17.6         7.6   (<0.001)
    Detailed minus global              --         0.0          3.2           3.2      --          --          -0.6        5.4         5.9      --
    (p-value)                          --     (0.987)      (0.093)      (<0.001)      --          --      (0.710)     (0.003)    (<0.001)      --
    Spouse
        Global prompt               582          82.7         83.9           1.2    (0.008)     482          11.4        13.3         1.9    (0.003)
        Detailed prompt             542          81.6         84.1           2.6   (<0.001)     442          12.7        19.7         7.0   (<0.001)
        Detailed minus global         --          -1.1         0.3           1.4      --          --          1.3         6.4         5.1      --
        (p-value)                     --      (0.623)      (0.907)       (0.091)      --          --      (0.557)     (0.009)     (0.081)      --
    Other Household Member
        Global prompt               542          56.0         58.0           2.0   (<0.001)     305            9.2       10.5         1.3    (0.045)
        Detailed prompt             564          58.4         65.3           6.9   (<0.001)     330            6.4       14.9         8.5   (<0.001)
        Detailed minus global         --          2.4          7.3           4.9      --          --          -2.8        4.4         7.2      --
        (p-value)                     --      (0.411)      (0.012)      (<0.001)      --          --      (0.184)     (0.099)    (<0.001)      --



Note: Six cases dropped from sample due to missing hours information.
