NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FRIEDMAN AND PHELPS ON THE PHILLIPS CURVE VIEWED FROM A HALF
CENTURY'S PERSPECTIVE
Robert J. Gordon
Working Paper 24891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24891

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

This research was supported by the Smith-Richardson Foundation. I am grateful to Hassan Sayed
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Friedman and Phelps on the Phillips Curve Viewed from a Half Century's Perspective
Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 24891
August 2018
JEL No. B22,C22,E24,E31,E64
ABSTRACT
In the late 1960s the stable negatively sloped Phillips Curve (PC) was overturned by the
Friedman-Phelps natural rate model. Their PC was vertical in the long run at the natural
unemployment rate, and their short-run curve shifted up whenever unemployment was pushed
below the natural rate. This paper criticizes the underlying assumption of the Friedman-Phelps
approach that the labor market continuously clears and that changes in unemployment down or up
occur only in response to “fooling” of workers, firms, or both. A preferable and resolutely
Keynesian approach explains quantity rationing by inertia in price and wage setting. The positive
correlation of inflation and unemployment in the 1970s and again in the 1990s is explained by
joining the negatively sloped Phillips Curve with a positively sloped dynamic demand curve. For
any given growth of nominal GDP, higher inflation caused by adverse supply shocks implies
slower real GDP growth and higher unemployment. This “triangle” model based on inflation
inertia, demand, and supply worked well to explain why inflation and unemployment were both
positively and negatively correlated between the 1960s and 1990s, but in the past decade the
slope of the short-run Phillips Curve has flattened as inflation exhibited a muted response to high
unemployment in 2009-13 and low unemployment in 2016-2018. It remains to be seen whether
a continuation of low unemployment will cause a modest and fixed extra amount of inflation,
thus reviving the stable Phillips curve of the early 1960s, or whether inflation will continuously
accelerate as Friedman and Phelps would have predicted.

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
rjg@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
The dominant approach to inflation dynamics in the late 1960s was to posit a tradeoff
between inflation and unemployment along a negatively sloped Phillips Curve (PC) that could
be exploited by policymakers. A lower unemployment rate could be achieved by expansionary
demand policy at the sacrifice of a finite and stable extra amount of inflation. Policy discussions
were framed in terms of points of tangency between the convex PC and concave inflationunemployment indifference curves. Democrats were said to have steeper indifference curves
than Republicans and thus to choose an equilibrium with lower unemployment and higher
inflation.
This framework was challenged in two articles by Edmund Phelps (1967, 1968) and in
Milton Friedman’s (1968) Presidential Address to the American Economics Association. Phelps
and Friedman argued that there was a separate short-run PC for each expected rate of inflation.
Starting at an initial equilibrium unemployment rate (U*) where both the actual and expected
inflation rates were equal, any attempt to reduce the unemployment rate below U* would boost
actual above expected inflation, and expected inflation would then rise one-for-one in response,
shifting the short-run PC upwards. This process of upward shifting would continue as long as
the unemployment rate remained below U*. Any attempt by policymakers to hold U below U*
would fuel a continuously accelerating inflation. In the long run the PC was vertical at U*.
The natural rate revolution of Friedman and Phelps overturned the policy-exploitable
tradeoff in favor of long-run monetary neutrality. But there was still a short-run tradeoff that
could persist for several years, due to the choice by both authors to model inflation expectations
as adaptive, that is, depending on past realized values of inflation. Only a few years later
Robert Lucas (1972, 1973) together with Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1975) claimed to
have overturned the short-run tradeoff by arguing that expectations were “rational” as
economic agents could anticipate in advance any demand expansion policy that was based on a
predictable monetary rule. Since a reduction of unemployment required an error in forecasting
inflation, any predictable change of inflation could not alter the unemployment rate. In short,
according to this “policy-ineffectiveness proposition” (PIP) only an unanticipated “surprise”
monetary-driven demand expansion could affect the actual unemployment rate.
Often events influence the adoption of ideas. The acceleration of actual U.S. inflation in
the late 1960s beyond contemporary forecasts before long provided convincing evidence of the
basic expectations-shifting approach of Friedman and Phelps that underpinned their long-run
neutrality result and defeated those conducting a rear-guard defense of a permanent negative
unemployment-inflation tradeoff. Then in 1974-75 the simultaneous arrival of a sharp spike of
additional inflation together with a deep recession showed that inflation and unemployment
could be positively correlated, and this further evidence against the negative tradeoff was used
by Lucas and Sargent (1978) to announce the “wreckage” of Keynesian macroeconomics.
1

This paper provides a critique of the underlying assumption of the Friedman-Phelps
approach that the labor market continuously clears and that changes in unemployment down or
up occur only in response to “fooling” of workers, firms, or both. The Friedman model can
generate a rise of unemployment only if workers voluntarily choose to work less in response to
a decline in the expected real wage, a mechanism contradicted by involuntary layoffs that occur
in the real world at the prevailing level of wages and prices. The Friedman-Phelps approach is
contrasted with my “triangle model” (Gordon, 1982b) in which long lags of inflation relative to
the history of inflation are interpreted as due to multiple-period overlapping wage and price
contracts as well as delays in price-setting as intermediate goods move through the inputoutput table. This approach is resolutely Keynesian, as the inertia in the inflation process
prevents markets from clearing, so that a downward shift in nominal demand growth is
translated automatically into a downward shift in real demand growth with accompanying
quantity rationing in labor and product markets.
In addition to inertia, the other two sides of the triangle model represent demand and
supply. The demand side operates through the unemployment gap relative to the natural rate,
so that the model incorporates the NRH. The supply side incorporates the positive impact on
inflation of adverse supply shocks like jumps in the price of oil, and the model can thus explain
why inflation and unemployment are sometimes negatively and sometimes positively
correlated while preserving Keynesian economics from the “wreckage” proclaimed by Lucas
and Sargent.
The final sections of the paper review major developments in the behavior of inflation
relative to unemployment since the 1970s. While coefficients in the triangle model were
relatively stable in the 1980s and 1990s, relationships appear to have shifted since then. The
supply side responses have become muted as the effects of oil prices on overall inflation have
diminished, the slope of the short-run inflation-unemployment relationship has flattened, and
the response of current to past inflation has diminished as expectations appear to have become
more anchored at the two-percent inflation target of the Federal Reserve. These changes are
profound enough that Olivier Blanchard (2016) has recently suggested that we may have gone
full-circle back to the 1960s-style tradeoff that Friedman and Phelps revolted against.

2. The PC Tradeoff as Interpreted in the Early to Mid 1960s
The PC began as the result of an empirical investigation of U.K. wage behavior by
Phillips (1958). The relationship had originally been investigated by Irving Fisher with U.S.
inflation data thirty years previously in a long-neglected paper (1926) that was rediscovered
and reprinted in 1972. The PC was christened and brought to America by Paul Samuelson and
Robert Solow (1960). The phrase caught on immediately, and soon the relationship became a
central component of the large-scale econometric models that were being developed in the
1960s as increasing computer power made them possible.
2

Samuelson and Solow examined a scatter plot of the data for the U.S. and noted that the
Phillips relationship did not work either for the 1930s or for the two world wars. The zeroinflation unemployment rate had risen from 3 percent in the remaining prewar years to “5 to 6
percent” in the 1950s. Samuelson and Solow have rightly been criticized for posing a long-run
inflation-unemployment tradeoff available for exploitation by policymakers. They conclude
“We rather expect that the tug of war of politics will end us up in the next few years somewhere
in between their selected points. We shall probably have some price rise and some excess
unemployment” (Samuelson and Solow, 1960, p. 103).
In defense of Samuelson and Solow, they did recognize that the PC relationship could
shift over the longer run. Their examples involved a “low-pressure” (i.e., high-unemployment)
economy in which expectations of low inflation could shift the PC down, or alternatively a shift
to more structural unemployment that could shift the PC up. They regarded either outcome as
possible and notably failed to reason through the long-run implications of a high-pressure
economy with the possibility of a steady increase in inflation expectations and an associated
steady upward shift in the PC.
As shown in Figure 1, the unemployment rate fell below 5.5 percent in 1964 and
remained below 4 percent between 1966 and 1970. The sharp acceleration of inflation (shown
here as the four-quarter change in the deflator for Personal Consumption Expenditures) from
less than 2 percent in 1963 to 5.5 percent in 1970 is consistent with current estimates that the
natural rate of unemployment in the mid-1960s was in the range of 5.5 to 6.0 percent.
Samuelson and Solow would have predicted that four straight years of unemployment below 4
percent would have been compatible with a steady 3 percent inflation, whereas we can see in
Figure 1 that inflation continually accelerated from 1966 to 1970.

3. The Natural Rate Revolution
The first formal rejection of the negatively sloped long-run PC tradeoff was published
by Phelps (1967). There was no explicit modeling of worker or firm behavior, but rather a
simple model with three elements. First, the negatively sloped short-run PC determined the
rate of price change, with no mention of wage change, and responded one-for-one to changes in
the expected rate of inflation. Second, expected inflation responded gradually over time to
movements in the actual inflation rate. Third, a social utility function depended negatively on
the rate of unemployment and on the expected rate of inflation. The inflation rate was constant
and equal to the expected inflation rate only at the long-run equilibrium rate of employment U*.
At any U < U* inflation exceeded expected inflation and so expectations were continually
revised upwards, thus shifting actual inflation up one-for-one, until u returned to U*.
The optimal policy choice depended on society’s rate of time preference and on the
optimal rate of inflation π*, that which was consistent with a nominal interest rate “low enough
to satiate the transaction demand for liquidity by eliminating private efforts to economize on
3

cash balances” (Phelps, 1967, p. 256). With a zero rate of time preference future considerations
dominated, and policymakers should drive the inflation rate down to π* even if that required a
temporary period of underemployment. If the rate of time preference were positive, then
policymakers should temporarily drive down the unemployment rate to enjoy the benefits of
high employment and utilization at the cost of a future inflation rate π>π*. The degree of
temporary over-employment, and hence the future rate of inflation, depended positively on the
rate of time preference. Similarly, if the economy were to start out with π>π* then with a
positive rate of time preference a deliberate raising of unemployment in a recession might be
rejected if the near-term social cost of extra unemployment was judged to exceed the long-term
benefits of reducing π to π*.
In part because it contained a thicket of equations, and in part because it was published
in a British journal, Phelps’ 1967 article did not have nearly the impact on the economics
profession as Friedman’s (1968) Presidential Address to the American Economics Association. 1
Friedman made the same basic point as Phelps (1967), that policy-makers had no ability to
choose any arbitrary unemployment rate in the long run other than what Friedman called the
“natural rate of unemployment,” the same concept as Phelps’ long-run equilibrium rate of
unemployment U*. This unemployment rate would be “ground out” by the microeconomic
structure of product and labor markets. As in Phelps, the natural rate was the only
unemployment rate consistent with the accurate formation of expectations, which required a
constant actual rate of inflation equal to the expected rate. Phelps’ long-run equilibrium theory
became Friedman’s “Natural Rate Hypothesis” (NRH).
Friedman’s argument was set in the framework of an explicit verbal model of the labor
market. Since the nominal wage was evaluated in terms of the current actual product price by
employers and in terms of the expected average consumer price level by workers, employment
could increase only as long as the expected price level lagged behind the actual level (thus
simultaneously allowing a lower actual real wage to induce increased hiring by firms, and a
higher expected real wage to induce a higher labor supply by workers). In equilibrium the
expected and actual price level were equal, and so in equilibrium only one level of employment
and output was possible.
The timing of Phelps two articles (1967,1968) and of Friedman’s address was impeccable
and even uncanny, as we have seen in Figure 1 that the U.S. inflation was in the process of
continually accelerating during 1966-70 as the unemployment rate remained below 4 percent,
clearly below the natural unemployment rate. 2 The acceleration of inflation bewildered
Friedman’s address was delivered in December, 1967, and published in May, 1968. His basic argument was
anticipated in a conference comment, see Friedman (1966).

1

I have always thought that Friedman’s development of the natural rate hypothesis at Chicago reflected the deep
involvement during the 1960s of several Chicago economists as advisers to high-inflation countries in Latin
America, where the lack of correlation between inflation and unemployment was obvious.

2

4

contemporary econometricians, who had previously estimated a “full-employment”
unemployment rate of 4 percent and whose forecasts of inflation had been exceeded by the
actual outcome year after year. The inflation outcome also tainted Arthur Okun’s (1962)
concept of “potential output”, which he had estimated as the value of real GDP consistent at
any given time with a 4 percent unemployment rate.
The initial reaction by many economists to the NRH was that its policy implications
could be ignored because it was inconsistent with U.S. data. In regressions of the inflation rate
on the expected inflation rate and the unemployment rate, at least up until 1971 the estimated
coefficient (α) on expected inflation (proxied by lags on past inflation) was less than unity, in
contrast to the Friedman-Phelps assumption that the PC shifted one-for-one with changes of
expected inflation. Two sets of influences soon defused this line of criticism. First, the
acceleration of inflation in the late 1960s caused the computer to grind out ever higher values of
the α coefficient as the passage of time provided additional observations until finally tests with
a sample period extending to 1971 could not reject the hypothesis that α=1. Second, Sargent
(1971) provided the compelling argument that a coefficient α<1 did not imply that inflation
responded less than one-for-one to expected inflation, because expectations of inflation
themselves could be optimally formed by placing less than a weight of unity on past inflation
values, depending on the time-series properties of the inflation process.
Embarrassed by their failure to forecast the acceleration of inflation, Friedman’s
detractors attacked the verbal model that he used to motivate the natural rate hypothesis. In
what others labelled the “fooling” model, Friedman postulated that employers had expectations
of the price level that were always accurate, but that workers based their decisions on an
expected price level that did not respond until after a substantial lag to a higher actual price
level. In a business expansion, firms raised the wage but raised the price level by even more,
thus reducing the real wage as needed to provide the incentive to hire additional workers. But
workers saw the higher nominal wage and interpreted it as a higher actual real wage, because
they failed to adjust their expectations of the price level. This model of smart firms and dumb
workers was attacked as inherently implausible, because workers had access to monthly
announcements of the Consumer Price Index and indeed observed actual prices as they
shopped almost every day. In Friedman’s world, there could be no business cycle.
Phelps wrote a second paper (1968) that provided a formal model of behavior that
differed from Friedman’s but was subject to the same criticism. In contrast to Friedman’s smart
firms and dumb workers, in Phelps’s world everyone was dumb, i.e., equally fooled. Both firms
and workers saw the price rise in their industry and produced more, not realizing that the
general price level had risen in the rest of the economy. Normally there was frictional
unemployment, as workers regularly quit one firm to go look for more highly paid work at
other firms. But in a situation in which their own firm raised the wage, they stayed with that
firm instead of quitting. Thus the unemployment rate decreased even though, without that
knowledge, all other firms in the economy raised the wage by the same amount at the same
5

time. The workers were fooled into a reduction in frictional unemployment, and the
macroeconomic data registered a decline in the unemployment rate. Hence there was a shortterm correlation between the rate of wage change and the unemployment rate, but this lasted
only as long as expectations were incorrect.
Whether firms or workers or both were fooled, the criticisms directed against the
Friedman fooling model applied to Phelps as well, as firms and workers shared knowledge of
the latest announcements of the aggregate price level every month. If periods of high real GDP
and low unemployment had always been accompanied by an increase in the aggregate price
level, workers and firm would have learned from these past episodes and would have used
their experience to form expectations accurately.

4. Rational Expectations and the “Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition”
Both the Friedman and Phelps models were based on the twin assumptions of
continuous market clearing and imperfect information, and only incorrect information could
push the economy away from its natural rate. There was no rationing in product or labor
markets, and no involuntary layoffs. Soon thereafter in two influential articles, Lucas (1972,
1973) extended their model by adding a third component: rational expectations. Workers and
firms used their knowledge of past history to work out the implications of an observed fall or
rise in wages on the overall wage level. Rational expectations implied that erroneous
expectations errors were not repeated.
Lucas collapsed the distinction between firms and workers and treated all economic
agents as “yeoman farmers” who faced both idiosyncratic shocks to their own relative price and
macro shocks caused by fluctuations in monetary growth and other factors. The agents used
rational expectations to deduce from past history how much of an observed change in the local
price represented an idiosyncratic shock and how much represented a macro shock. When local
price shocks had a high correlation with macro shocks, agents did not adjust production,
knowing that no change in relative prices had occurred. Lucas used this insight to explain why
the PC in a country like Argentina with high macro volatility would be much steeper than in a
country like the U.S. with low macro volatility.
The concept of rational expectations led Lucas and his followers to make a startling
prediction. He argued that anticipated monetary policy cannot change real GDP in a regular or
predictable way, a result soon known as the “Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition” (PIP). In
common with Friedman and Phelps, the Lucas approach implied that movements of output
away from the natural level required a price surprise, so that the central bank could alter output
not by carrying out a predictable change in monetary policy but only by creating a surprise.
By the end of the 1970s the Lucas approach was widely criticized. The problem was not
Lucas’ introduction of rational expectations, but rather the twin assumptions inherited from
6

Friedman and Phelps, namely continuous market clearing and imperfect information.
Deviations of the current actual price level from the expected price were the only allowable
source of business cycle movements. Thus, despite the widespread appeal of the FriedmanPhelps-Lucas approach, it ran aground on the shores of an inadequate theory of business cycles.
With monthly information available on the aggregate price level, the business cycle could last
no more than one month. Even Lucas later confessed that “Monetary shocks just aren’t that
important. That’s the view I’ve been driven to. There’s no question that’s a retreat in my
views” (Cassidy, 1996, p. 53).
The demise of the information barriers model occurred in two stages. First, the theory
was flawed by its inability to reconcile multi-year business cycles with one-month lags faced by
agents in obtaining complete information about the aggregate price level. Second, the attempt
to develop an empirical counterpart of the PIP was a research failure. It floundered on the
inability to develop a symmetric explanation of output and price behavior. Barro (1977)
showed that output was not related to anticipated monetary changes, an implication of PIP, but
he could not demonstrate the required corollary, which was the full and prompt responsiveness
of price changes to anticipated nominal disturbances. This failure reflected the fundamental
conflict between the fully flexible prices required by the information barriers model and the
inflation inertia deeply embedded in the U.S. inflation process. Soon Mishkin (1982) and
Gordon (1982a) showed in historical data that anticipated monetary changes had a strong effect
on output in the short run and on inflation in the long run, preserving long-run but not shortrun neutrality.

5. The Resurrection of the PC
In 1974-75 the simultaneous arrival of a sharp spike of additional inflation together with
a deep recession showed that inflation and unemployment could be positively correlated, as
shown for that period in the data plotted in Figure 1. Indeed we see in the graph that
throughout the period 1974-81, there was a time lead of roughly one year of inflation changes
preceding unemployment changes. This further evidence against the negative tradeoff was
used by Lucas and Sargent (1978) to announce the “wreckage” of Keynesian macroeconomics.
Nevertheless, several years before their pronouncement the resurrection of the PC had begun.
The first element was the new theory of policy responses to supply shocks, developed
independently by Gordon (1975) and Phelps (1978) in two slightly different models that were
later merged by Gordon (1984). The Gordon-Phelps model started from the proposition that the
price elasticity of the demand of the commodity experiencing the adverse supply shock, e.g., oil,
was less than unity, so that following an increase in its relative price, the expenditure share of
that commodity must increase and the expenditure share of all other components of spending
must decrease. For instance, energy’s share of nominal U.S. GDP tripled between 1972 and
1981.

7

The required condition for continued full employment was the opening of a gap
between the growth rate of nominal GDP and the growth rate of the nominal wage to make
room for the increased nominal spending on oil. If nominal wages were flexible, one option
would be for the growth rate of wages to become negative, allowing the growth rate of nominal
GDP to remain fixed. At the alternative extreme with rigid wages, to avoid a decline in nonenergy output, an accommodating monetary policy would be needed to boost nominal GDP
growth by the amount needed to pay for the extra spending on oil, but this would lead to an
inflationary spiral as expenditures responded to the resulting increase in the inflation rate. A
third alternative, and the one that actually occurred in the 1970s, was a combination of wage
rigidity with a partial upward response of nominal GDP growth, which pushed down both real
non-energy spending and employment while boosting inflation. The new model helped to
unify the microeconomic analysis of demand and supply with that of macroeconomic demand
and supply shocks. Just as the output and price of corn or wheat could be positively or
negatively correlated depending on the source of the shift in demand or supply, so the
aggregate unemployment rate and the rate of inflation could be negatively or positively
correlated, depending on the relative importance of aggregate demand or supply shocks.
The econometric specification of the inflation process in what I have called the “triangle
model” (Gordon, 1982b) contained three sets of explanatory variables representing inertia,
demand, and supply. Replacing the expected inflation term was a set of long lags on past
inflation, reflecting the view that the influence of past inflation on current inflation incorporated
generalized backward-looking inertia, not just the formation of expectations. Important sources
of inertia included the set of explicit and implicit contracts that dampened short-term changes
in prices and wages, and the input-output supply chain that created thousands of links of
unknown magnitude and duration between changes in intermediate goods prices and the prices
of final goods, as emphasized by Blanchard (1987). All of these channels interacted to create the
inertia effect, the first leg of the triangle.
This approach was Keynesian because the role of inertia was to make the inflation rate
slow to adjust to changes in nominal demand, and as a result real GDP emerged as a residual,
not as an object of choice as in the Friedman-Phelps-Lucas model. Thus the approach was
compatible with a real world in which employment adjustments were made by involuntary
layoffs rather than by withdrawal from employment as a voluntary choice. In the triangle
model the speed of price adjustment and the speed of expectation formation were two different
issues. Price adjustment could be delayed by wage and price contracts, and by the time needed
for cost increases to percolate through the input-output table, and yet everyone could form
expectations promptly and rationally based on full information about the historical response of
prices to lagged values, to demand shocks, and to supply shocks.
The demand side of the specification process for the inflation rate included the level and
change of the unemployment gap, that is, the difference between the actual and natural
unemployment rates. When combined with a sum of coefficients of unity on the lagged
8

inflation terms, the specification incorporated the NRH and long-run neutrality with respect to
demand shocks. The supply side of the model was represented by a set of explicit supply shock
variables, all defined so that the supply-shock term was set at zero in the absence of supply
shocks. These variables included changes in the relative price of oil and of non-oil imports,
changes in the productivity growth trend, as well as dummy variables to measure the impact of
the 1971-74 Nixon-era price controls in holding down inflation and then, upon their termination
in 1974, adding to the sharp 1974-75 spike of inflation visible in Figure 1.
The first empirical challenge to the triangle model arrived almost immediately with the
Volcker disinflation of 1981-86, when as shown in Figure 1 the inflation rate collapsed from
nearly 10 percent in 1981 to around 3 percent by 1986, much faster than had been forecast by
most analysts at the time. The key to the surprisingly rapid response of inflation to the high
interest rates of the Volcker monetary tightening and the resulting high unemployment of the
1981-82 recession was the role of supply shocks, and in particular the 1981-86 decline in the
relative price of energy and the 1980-85 appreciation of the dollar that reduced the relative price
of imports. 3 Then the late 1980s witnessed a partial repeat of the late 1960s, with a decline in the
unemployment rate during 1987-90 accompanied by a modest acceleration of inflation. The
increase of unemployment during the 1990-91 recession brought with it a prompt decline in the
inflation rate, consistent with the unemployment-gap response of the triangle model.
The behavior of inflation in the 1990s appeared to be an outlier, as the unemployment
rate fell to its lowest levels since the 1960s without an acceleration of inflation. As shown in
Figure 1, the inflation rate was no higher in 2000 than in 1993, despite a decline in the
unemployment rate from 7 percent to slightly below 4 percent. Part of the explanation can be
traced to “beneficial” supply shocks, including lower relative prices of energy and imports and
faster trend productivity growth. Another part of the explanation is that the natural rate of
unemployment appears to have fallen from the 1980s to the 1990s, for reasons that were first
examined by Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger (1999). Quantitative estimates of the decline in
the natural rate, which by then had become known as the NAIRU, were provided by Douglas
Staiger, James Stock, and Mark Watson (1997).

6. Changing Behavior Since 2000
Developments since 2000 suggest that changes have occurred in each of the three
components of the triangle model. On the supply side an increase in the price of oil from about
$30 per barrel in 2004 to a brief peak of $140 in June, 2008, raised the headline inflation rate only
modestly, as shown in Figure 1, and this muted response has been quantified by Blanchard and
Riggi (2013). They attribute the decline in the response of overall inflation to oil price changes
Gordon and Stephen King (1982) developed a six-equation VAR model incorporating the triangle specification
with explicit links from monetary policy to unemployment, the exchange rate of the dollar, the relative price of oil,
and the relative price of non-oil imports.
3

9

to three factors – a smaller share of oil in production and consumption, a decline in real wage
rigidity due in part to a decline in wage indexation and unionization, and more credible
monetary policy.
On the demand side the slope of the PC appears to have flattened, as evident in the
modest decline of the inflation rate in response to the sharp and prolonged increase of the
unemployment rate that occurred between 2008 and 2015. The contrast with the rapid decline
of inflation after the 1981-82 recession is notable, although in the earlier episode the downward
path of inflation was partly propelled by lower oil prices and an appreciating dollar, whereas in
2011-14 high oil prices dampened the downward push on aggregate inflation coming from high
unemployment. Even more important in its implications for monetary policy, the feedback of
past inflation to current inflation through the inertia effect appears to have lessened, so much so
that Blanchard (2016) argues that inflation expectations are anchored. In his interpretation, the
PC has reverted from a relationship between the change of inflation and the level of the
unemployment rate, as implied by the NRH, back to its 1960s Samuelson-Solow relationship
between the level of the inflation rate and the unemployment rate. This means that the
monetary authority can push the unemployment rate below the natural rate at the cost of only a
finite increase of inflation rather than a continuously accelerating, rate of inflation. Without that
acceleration, the long-run PC is no longer vertical and the Friedman-Phelps NRH is rejected 50
years after its conception.
As unemployment declined below 4 percent in 2018, it remained to be seen whether
inflation would increase only modestly along a flat and anchored PC. An alternative
interpretation was that the quiescence of inflation over the previous half-decade had been due
to a further decline in the natural rate while the NRH remained intact. In this second
interpretation there was some unemployment rate low enough to boost inflation, unleash
expectations from their anchor, and generate the same type of accelerating inflation predicted
by Friedman and Phelps 50 years ago.

7. Conclusion
The discovery by Phillips and his American interpreters Samuelson and Solow of an
inverse relationship between inflation and unemployment briefly suggested an exploitable
policy tradeoff that was destroyed by the Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis of the late
1960s. Exploitable tradeoffs were out and long-run neutrality was in. Debates in the early 1970s
centered on the models in which Friedman and Phelps had embedded the Natural Rate
Hypothesis, and particularly the assumption of arbitrary information barriers that prevented
individual workers or firms from learning the value of macro data provided costlessly by the
government. There was also controversy about the further development of the FriedmanPhelps paradigm by Lucas, who combined his assumption of rational expectations with the two
Friedman-Phelps assumptions of continuous market-clearing and information barriers. The
Lucas model implied the policy-ineffectiveness proposition, which held that anticipated
10

changes in money had no effect on output and were entirely reflected in price changes.
Empirical work rejected this framework, showing that monetary surprises had little effect on
output, were incapable of explaining the serial correlation of output, and were inconsistent with
the persistence of inflation.
The paper reviews one aspect of the post-1975 development of the PC literature, the
triangle model that combined inflation inertia with the influence of demand and supply shocks.
Demand shocks created an initial and temporary negative correlation between inflation and
unemployment, and supply shocks created an initial positive correlation that then evolved
depending on the policy response. Adverse supply shocks required policymakers to choose
between higher inflation, higher unemployment, or a combination. The triangle approach
emphasized that the role of past inflation was not limited to the formation of expectations, but
also included pure persistence due to fixed-duration wage and price contracts as well as lags
between changes in intermediate goods and final product prices. Because of this persistence
built into the inflation process, changes in nominal demand growth directly translated into
changes in real output growth, and changes in employment were carried out by layoffs and
other forms of rationing, not entirely by voluntary choices of workers as in the Friedman-Phelps
market-clearing framework. Nevertheless, the triangle model preserved the long-run
neutrality of the Natural Rate Hypothesis.
The triangle model provided an explanation of the positive correlation of inflation and
unemployment in the 1970s and predicted in advance the output cost of disinflation following
the 1981-82 tight money recession. Its parameters remained relatively stable in the 1980s and
1990s, and it explained the absence of accelerating inflation during the low unemployment
period of the 1990s as the result of beneficial supply shocks and a decline in the natural rate of
unemployment. Since 2000 its parameters appear to have shifted, with a diminished response
to supply shocks, a flatter short-run PC slope, and a diminished response to lagged inflation
that has been interpreted as the anchoring of inflationary expectations. It remains to be seen
whether the economy’s response to low unemployment in the next several years is a one-shot
increase of inflation or a steadily accelerating inflation rate as predicted 50 years ago by
Friedman and Phelps.

11

REFERENCES

Barro, Robert J. (1977). “Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States,” American Economic Review 67 (March), pp. 101-115.
Blanchard, Olivier J. (1987). “Aggregate and Individual Price Adjustment,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (no. 1), pp. 57-109.
Blanchard, Olivier J. (2016). “The PC: Back to the ‘60s?” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 106 (May), pp. 31-34.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Riggi, Marianna (2013). “Why Are the 2000s So Different From the
1970s? A Structural Interpretation of the Changes in the Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices,”
Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (no. 5), pp. 1132-1152.
Cassidy, John (1996). “The Decline of Economics,” New Yorker (December 2), pp. 54-57.
Fisher, Irving (1926). “A Statistical Relation Between Unemployment and Price Changes,”
International Labor Review 13 (June), pp. 785-792, reprinted as “I Discovered the Phillips Curve,”
Journal of Political Economy 81 (March/April 1972), pp. 496-502.
Friedman, Milton (1966). “Comment,” in George P. Shultz and Robert Z. Aliber, eds.,
Guidelines, Informal Controls, and the Market Place. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 5561.
Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 58, May,
pp. 1-17.
Gordon, Robert J. (1975). “Alternative Responses of Policy to External Supply Shocks,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (no. 1), pp. 183-206.
Gordon, Robert J. (1982a). “Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the United States, 18901980,” Journal of Political Economy 90 (December), pp. 1087-1117.
Gordon, Robert J. (1982b). “Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of
Unemployment,” in Martin N. Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs, and Inflation. Washington: Brookings,
pp. 89-158.
Gordon, Robert J. (1984). “Supply Shocks and Monetary Policy Revisited,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 74 (May), pp. 38-43.
12

Gordon, Robert J. and King, Stephen R. (1982). “The Output Cost of Disinflation in Traditional
and Vector Autoregressive Models,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (no. 1), pp. 205-42.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Krueger, Alan B. (1999). “The High-pressure U. S. Labor Market of the
19990s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (no. 1), pp. 1-65.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
Theory 4 (April), pp. 103-24.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1973). “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,”
American Economic Review 63, pp. 326-34.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Sargent, Thomas J. (1978). “After Keynesian Macroeconomics,” in
After the PC: Persistence of High Inflation and High Unemployment. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, pp. 49-72.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982). “Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy 90 (February), pp. 22-51.
Okun, Arthur M. (1962). “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,” Cowles
Foundation Paper 190.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). “PCs, Expectations of Inflation, and Optimal Unemployment Over
Time,” Economica 34, August, pp. 254-81.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). “Money-wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilbirum,” Journal of
Political Economy 76, July-August, pp. 678-711.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1978). “Commodity Supply Shock and Full-employment Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 10, pp. 382-99.
Phillips, A. W. (1958). “The Relations Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1862-1957, Economica 25 (November), pp. 283-299.
Samuelson, Paul A. and Solow, Robert M. (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review 50 (May), pp. 177-194.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1971). “A Note on the `Accelerationist’ Controversy,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 3 (no. 3, August), pp. 721-725.

13

Sargent, Thomas J. and Wallace, Neil (1975). “Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy 83 (April), pp.
241-54.
Staiger, Douglas, Stock, James H, and Watson, Mark W. (1997). “The NAIRU, Unemployment,
and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, pp. 33-49.

14

Figure 1. Unemployment Rate vs. Four-Quarter Growth Rate of
Headline Personal Consumption Deflator, 1960:1-2017:4
12
Unemployment

10
8
6
4
2

PCE Deflator

0
-2
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

