                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CHANGES IN HOUSEHOLD DIET:
                         DETERMINANTS AND PREDICTABILITY

                                          Stefan Hut
                                          Emily Oster

                                      Working Paper 24892
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24892


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




We are grateful to Geoffrey Kocks for exceptional research assistance, as well as to Sofia La
Porta, Julian De Georgia and Cathy Yue Bai. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are
those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for,
had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.
Results are calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing
databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Stefan Hut and Emily Oster. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Changes in Household Diet: Determinants and Predictability
Stefan Hut and Emily Oster
NBER Working Paper No. 24892
August 2018
JEL No. I12

                                         ABSTRACT

We use grocery purchase data to analyze dietary changes. We show that households – including
those with more income or education - do not improve diet in response to disease diagnosis or
changes in household circumstances. We then identify households who show large improvements
in diet quality. We use machine learning to predict these households and find (1) concentration of
baseline diet in a small number of foods is a predictor of improvement and (2) dietary changes are
concentrated in a small number of foods. We argue these patterns may be well fit by a model
which incorporates attention costs.


Stefan Hut
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Robinson Hall
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
stefan_hut@brown.edu

Emily Oster
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
emily_oster@brown.edu
            Changes in Household Diet: Determinants and
                                                                      ∗
                                         Predictability

                       Stefan Hut                               Emily Oster
                  Brown University                 Brown University and NBER

                                              July 25, 2018


                                                  Abstract

          We use grocery purchase data to analyze dietary changes. We show that households
          – including those with more income or education - do not improve diet in response to
          disease diagnosis or changes in household circumstances. We then identify households
          who show large improvements in diet quality. We use machine learning to predict these
          households and find (1) concentration of baseline diet in a small number of foods is a
          predictor of improvement and (2) dietary changes are concentrated in a small number
          of foods. We argue these patterns may be well fit by a model which incorporates
          attention costs.




1         Introduction
What causes people to improve the quality of their diet? Are some people more likely to
improve their diet than others? Can these individuals be predicted?
        These questions have policy implications. At least two-thirds of American adults are
estimated to be overweight, and a third are obese.1 Obesity, and related conditions, are
    ∗
     We are grateful to Geoffrey Kocks for exceptional research assistance, as well as to Sofia La Porta, Julian
De Georgia and Cathy Yue Bai. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers
and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in
analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. Results are calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at
The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
   1
     https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html

                                                       1
expensive for the health care system and have both morbidity and mortality consequences
for individuals (Feldstein et al., 2008). Further, it seems clear that poor diet plays a major
role in driving differences in obesity rates, both in the cross section and over time (Cutler
et al., 2003, Bleich et al., 2008, Swinburn et al., 2009). Improving the quality of diet is
therefore a social and policy goal.
       This paper takes a data-driven approach to these questions. First, we document a series
of facts - some confirming existing work, some new - on overall dietary change and on the
features of households with successful diet improvements. Second, we interpret these facts
through the lens of a model and argue this may speak to policy.
       We begin with the facts.
       There is a growing literature within economics which seeks to estimate what changes
in information, circumstances or food options will prompt changes in diet behavior. These
papers estimate the impact of changes in food type availability (Handbury et al, 2015;
Bronnenberg et al., 2012; Allcott et al., 2017, Hut, 2018), food prices (Atkin, 2016) and
health status (Oster, forthcoming). The general approach is to estimate behavioral response
to events and, in most cases, explore demographic heterogeneity in response. This approach
links with predictions of economic theory suggesting that changes in information or the
relative cost of different choices should influence behavior, and the further implication that
some groups (better educated, richer) should respond more than others.
       These papers provide little evidence that dietary choices are malleable. The quality of
diet seems on average insensitive to these stimuli, and in some cases people seem to be willing
to give up substantial health benefits to maintain their preferred diet (Atkin, 2016; Oster,
forthcoming).
       The first part of this paper extends these null results, using the Nielsen HomeScan panel,
a grocery scanner dataset. Nielsen participant households scan grocery (and other) purchases
with a home hand scanner. We construct a measure of diet quality - a “diet score” - using
information from a survey of doctors on the quality of food groups.2 We confirm earlier
findings that healthfulness of household diet is largely unresponsive to diabetes diagnosis
   2
    This measure is described in more detail below and correlates with other measures of diet quality used
in existing literature.



                                                    2
(Oster, forthcoming) and then show it also does not change with diagnosis of other metabolic
disease (hypertension, heart disease, obesity). We show further that significant changes in
household circumstances (childbirth, marriage, divorce, job loss, retirement, etc.) do not
change dietary health. This lack of change is despite the fact that the average diet in the
sample is quite poor.
       We confirm that the lack of dietary response also holds for more highly educated, younger
and richer households. Combined with the earlier work, this suggests that large dietary
improvements are, at best, rare.
       There are, however, some empirical examples in other data of significant dietary change.
Feldstein et al (2008), for example, shows substantial weight loss among a small share of
people diagnosed with diabetes. Identifying these individuals and learning about their fea-
tures, as well as what dietary changes they actually make, may be key to targeting policy
and to better understanding the limits on behavior change.
       The second part of this paper, therefore, takes an alternative approach to the data.
Rather than attempting to identify events which prompt behavior change, we use the data
to find households who show sustained improvements in diet quality. We then ask to what
extent these households can be predicted, what predicts successful change and what changes
in diet are actually made. Our goal here is to generate an auxiliary set of facts - beyond the
observation that behavior change is unusual - which can be used to better inform theory.
       The Nielsen HomeScan panel data is the central input to the analysis. The structure and
size of the data provide some substantial advantages. The panel is large; overall, we observe
160,000 households for an average of 48 months each. In addition, many households are in
the panel for a long period, allowing a detailed look at diet over a long time. The large
sample size is useful when we are looking for rare events like large behavior changes.3
       In Section 4 of the paper we turn to the identification of households with substantial
improvements in diet quality. A central challenge is the problem of mean reversion; this
is a particular issue given that our data is not a perfect measure of all food consumption.
To limit concerns about this we focus on a balanced panel of households with a sustained
   3
    The data also has some limitations. Nielsen does not provide a full picture of realized diet (most notably
it describes only purchases, not consumption, and excludes food away from home) and is observed at the
household rather than the individual level. These are discussed in more detail in the data section.


                                                      3
period of change following a long baseline period. We identify approximately 7% of the
sample as households with substantial improvements in diet quality. On average, these make
large changes, about triple the cross-sectional difference between the score of high school
and college graduates.
   Having identified these households, we ask two questions. First, are behavior changes pre-
dictable, based either on events, demographics or baseline diet? Second, how do households
change their behavior - what food groups, for example, seem most susceptible to change?
   For the problem of prediction, we use a machine learning approach - in particular, a ran-
dom forest algorithm. This allows us to estimate the predictive role of a wide variety of events
and diet features without concerns about over-fitting. We find that the overall predictive
power of events (including those we describe above, and others like changes in government
diet recommendations, major research findings) is nil. Similarly, demographics - either base-
line demographics or changes in household circumstances - also have little predictive power.
Baseline dietary patterns, however, do appear to predict dietary improvement.
   Baseline diet quality impacts subsequent change, and both households with better and
worse diets are more likely to change. In addition, we identify dietary concentration as a
key driver. Household with more concentrated diets - namely, diets where a large share of
expenditures are in a smaller number of groups - are more likely to improve the quality of
their diet in the subsequent months of the data.
   Turning to the question of what changes these households actually make, we find that
dietary changes are also concentrated. A small number of changes account for an outsize
share of the overall dietary improvements among these households. For example, on average
60% of the diet score improvement is accounted for by the Nielsen product group with the
largest change. Even when we limit to product modules - a much narrower classification
such as cookies or yogurt - we find that the group with the largest change accounts for on
average a third of the diet score change, and the top two modules account for half.
   Following the empirical analysis, we turn to discussing implications of these results for
theory of behavior change. We focus on explaining three facts from the data. First, substan-
tial behavior change is rare and does not seem to be prompted by particular events. Second,
it is more common for households with a concentrated diet to change their diet. Third,


                                               4
when households do change their diet the changes are concentrated in a small number of
food groups. These facts are difficult to explain in a simple neoclassical model. Although
limited behavior change overall can be accommodated by a number of modifications, a neo-
classical model will generally predict that when households do improve their diet, they will
do so through small changes in many categories. This derives from a standard assumption
of concave utility of consumption in any good.
   We suggest that a model which includes attention costs (similar to Gabaix, 2014) may
provide a better fit to the data. In this model the household has to pay a cost for each food
group they change, which we theorize is the cost of “paying attention” to that category.
We show that this produces the prediction that dietary changes are concentrated, and that
households with more concentrated diets at baseline will have a lower cost of changing.
Overall, the cost of changing diet in this model is larger than in a standard model, which
may help explain the rarity of such changes.
   From a policy standpoint, this observation may point to the value of policies which em-
phasize simple diet rules or the value of making a small number of changes, rather than
making more blanket recommendations like “eat a balanced diet” or “consume fewer calo-
ries”.
   The first part of this paper contributes to a large literature in public health and a smaller
literature within economics about limitations to generating changes in diet (Handbury et al,
2015; Alcott et al, 2017; Delamater, 2006; Broadbent, Donkin et al., 2011; Ponzo et al,
2017; Raj et al, 2017) as well as to a literature on minimal behavior change in response to
educational interventions (e.g. Diabetes Prevention Group, 2009; Pi-Sunyer, 2014). Finally,
we add to a literature within economics on how people respond to news about their health
(Carrera et al., 2017; Oster, forthcoming).
   We are also among a small (but growing) number of papers within economics which use
machine learning techniques (e.g. Kleinberg et al, 2017; Oster, forthcoming; Gilchrist and
Sands, 2016). The visualization approach we adopt here may be useful to others working in
this space since it allows for a more intuitive description of results.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data we use, and
Section 3 shows the first set of facts on responses to disease and household circumstance.


                                               5
Section 4 describes our identification of “large change” households, and Section 5 analyzes
the changes in this group. Section 6 discusses theory in light of the facts developed, and
Section 7 concludes.



2     Data
This section describes the data used in the paper. The starting point of our empirical
approach will be the ability to observe measures of diet over time. The Nielsen HomeScan
panel is described in Subsection 2.1. Information on the independent variables we consider
appear in Subsection 2.2.


2.1    Diet Data

The primary data used in this paper is the Nielsen HomeScan panel. These data track
consumer purchases using at-home scanner technology. Households in the panel are asked to
scan their purchases after all shopping trips; this includes grocery and pharmacy purchases,
large retailer and super-center purchases, as well as purchases made online and at smaller
retailers. The Nielsen data records the Universal Product Code (UPC) of items purchased
and panelists provide information on the quantities, as well as information on the store.
Prices are recorded by the panelists or drawn from Nielsen store-level data, where available.
We use Nielsen data available through the Kilts Center at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. These data cover purchases from 2004 through 2015.
    Panel A of Table 1 shows some basic demographic features for the sample. The Nielsen
data is intended to be a representative sample of the US on demographic features. In
Appendix Table A1 we show the demographics for the sample used here relative to the
US overall. The Nielsen sample is very similar on most demographics, although the racial
composition is more heavily white.
    Our focus is on the healthfulness of diet. To analyze this, we need to convert the purchase
behavior to metrics of diet quality. To do this, we make use of a survey of doctors which
focused on the quality of food groups in the HomeScan data. We implemented a survey of
17 primary care doctors, providing the survey participants with a list of food items which we

                                               6
could link to the HomeScan data (example: applesauce, lettuce, breakfast bars). We asked
the doctors to indicate, in general, whether they thought this category was a “Good source
of Calories”, a “Bad Source of Calories” or “Neither good nor bad.”
   Based on the survey response, we assign each doctor-item observation a score pjn , for
food item j and doctor n. This score equals 1 if the item was considered good, 0 if considered
neither good nor bad, or -1 if considered bad. We aggregate these scores across doctors to
                                                          P
                                                                pjn
assign each Nielsen food module j a point score pj =           n
                                                               17
                                                                    ,   where pj ∈ [−1, 1]. As such,
pj = 1 if all doctors consider the module good, and pj = −1 if all doctors consider the module
bad. A perfectly neutral module has a score of pj = 0. We then create an overall diet score
as a weighted average of these point values and module spending shares. Specifically, for
individual i we have
                                              X
                                   scorei =       shareij pj
                                              j

where shareij is the expenditure share of household i0 s basket which is made up of food item
j. The score is scaled between -1 and 1, so a household who consumes only foods which all
doctors agree are bad would have a score of -1, and one who consumes only foods which all
doctors agree are good would have a score of 1.
   The average household has a diet score of -0.296 (see Panel B of Table 1). As some
background, Panel B of Table 1 also shows the shares of purchases in the five largest Nielsen
product groups.
   This measure of diet quality has the advantage of using expenditures directly - rather
than relying on adding nutritional data to the Nielsen sample, which introduces considerable
noise. We also argue it serves to capture information about the diet advice that doctors
would give patients about how to change their diet. This is not, however, the only possible
metric of diet quality. In Appendix Table A2 we show this is highly correlated with a variety
of other summary diet measures. This provides some comfort that our evidence is not unique
to this metric of diet quality.


Data Limitations There are some limitations to the HomeScan data. The most important
of these is that we observe only a subset of what households buy and consume. This occurs



                                              7
for two reasons: Nielsen does not include food away from home, and even within the subset of
food at home it is likely not all purchases are recorded. Einav et al. (2010) provide validation
and suggest that approximately half of trips are not recorded in HomeScan, although those
which are recorded are highly accurate. Oster (forthcoming) compares the HomeScan to the
NHANES and to a benchmark calorie intake amount and suggests 65 to 80% of calories are
recorded.
   Our primary outcome in this paper is based on the relative amounts of good and bad
foods in the diet, not absolute levels of food spending. To the extent that we observe a
random subset of purchases, then these shares will be an unbiased measure. Even if we do
not see a random subset, if the treatment does not change scanning behavior we will have
a measure of the impact. Issues will arise if, for example, a treatment changes scanning
behavior differentially across food groups, or changes the consumption behavior with foods
consumed away from home differently than foods consumed at home. This is a limitation
we will be unable to address.


2.2    Household Events

We merge the HomeScan data with other sources to look for events which may correlate
with changes in diet.


Disease Diagnosis Data on disease diagnosis is drawn from the Nielsen Ailment Panel.
This is a complementary survey in which some Nielsen panelists are surveyed about their
health status. Panelists review a long list of diseases and indicate whether they have each
one and, if yes, when they were diagnosed. The diagnosis measures are coarse - they indicate
if it was in the last year, one to two years ago, three to four years ago or more than four
years ago. We know the timing of the survey (January 2010) so we are able to use this to
code diagnosis at the yearly level. We identify households as newly diagnosed in 2009 if they
report a diagnosis within the last year. We focus on three metabolic disease categories: (1)
diabetes; (2) hypertension, high cholesterol and heart disease; and (3) obesity.
   Panel A of Table 2 shows summary statistics on disease prevalence and new diagnosis.
The ailment data is available for 67,467 of the Nielsen households.

                                               8
Changes in Household Circumstances Data on changes in household circumstances
are drawn from the Nielsen panel information on demographics. Panelists are surveyed yearly
about their demographic profiles, so we use this to construct information on changes over
time.
    Based on the data we code several important household events: birth of a child, household
member retirement, household head job loss, departure of children (“empty nest”), divorce
and marriage. In addition, we code changes in household income, as measured by changing
income categories in the Nielsen panelist demographic survey. Panel B of Table 2 shows
summary statistics on changes in household circumstances. Given the nature of the data
collection we expect this to be measured with error, but we believe that these do provide
some information on changes in household circumstances.



3       Event-Associated Changes in Diet
We begin by extending the literature on dietary changes on average, analyzing the impact
of household events on diet in this sample.


3.1     Empirical Strategy

The events we consider occur at the household-year level. Our empirical strategy therefore
uses a household fixed effects regression. The estimating equation is


                                    yit = γi + τt + βTit + it                                  (1)


where yit is the outcome (i.e. the measure of diet) for household i in year t, Tit is the vector
of the treatment variable (years from event – diagnosis, household change), γi is a household
fixed effect and τt is a year fixed effect. The coefficient vector of interest is β. This regression
is identified off of variation within a household over time. The data includes households who
do not experience an event, so even in the case of the disease diagnosis - which all occur in
2009 - we can separately identify year and treatment effects.




                                                 9
3.2       Results

Main Results Figure 1 shows the movement in diet score around disease diagnosis -
hypertension in Figure 1a, obesity in 1b and diabetes in 1c. In the case of diabetes, the diet
score improves slightly around diagnosis. The effect is significant, although small; about
0.1 of a standard deviation. As a benchmark, this is about a third of the cross-sectional
difference in diet score between college educated households and those without a high school
degree. For obesity and hypertension the changes are very small and not significant.
       Panel A of Table 3 shows these effects statistically; because we are running many tests
in this table, we indicate significance both with standard p-value cut-offs and with a Bon-
ferroni correction. The results echo Figure 1. There are some small effects after a diabetes
diagnosis, which are significant even when adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing. There
is no consistent change in behavior after diagnosis with hypertension or obesity.
       In Panel B of Table 3 we show evidence on household changes. After addressing issues
of multiple hypothesis testing, the only significant changes are a short-run worsening of diet
after childbirth and small improvements in diet after retirement and job loss. In the latter
cases, however, it appears that pre-trends may be driving the results. These results are
also extremely small. Divorce, marriage, departure of a child and even household income
increases do not seem to affect diet quality.


Heterogeneity         We can further expand this analysis to consider heterogeneity across de-
mographic groups. In particular for something like disease diagnosis, a simple human capital
theory would predict greater responsiveness among richer and more educated households,
and among younger people. To explore this, we estimate - for each event - the responsive-
ness among household in the top tercile of education or income, and in the youngest tercile.
Theory would predict these groups should respond more than the average person.4
       The results are shown in Table 4, with each row representing an event. We aggregate the
“before” and “after” periods to provide a summary measure of the impact. There is no strong
evidence of heterogeneity in response. More educated, richer and younger households do not
   4
    We may also wonder about heterogeneity along the dimension of baseline diet quality - do those with
worse diets change more? There are mechanical reasons to think this might be true and, indeed, it is true
to some extent. However, the differences are not large.


                                                   10
respond more to any of the events considered, at least not in a consistent way. Although we
do see some limited differences (for example, higher income people respond more to income
changes), we see equally compelling evidence in the other direction (lower income households
respond more to diabetes diagnosis).



4         Identifying Successful Diet Changes
The preceding section echoes the existing literature, showing diets appear to be on average
unresponsive to changes in illness or household circumstances. We know from other literature
that there are at least some individuals who do successfully improve their diet. In this section,
we describe identification of households with dietary improvements in these data.
        We define households with a successful diet improvement as those who change their diet
score by an amount that is both large enough to represent a meaningful change in diet quality
and is sustained. We call these households “changers”.
        Identifying these changers with our data is empirically challenging. If we saw a perfectly
complete measure of diet over many years, the exercise would be straightforward. In our
data, however, we see a subset of what households consume and do not see an infinite length
panel.5 This leads to concerns about mean reversion.
        To give a concrete example: one way to approach this would be to find households with
a large improvement in diet quality from any one month to the next and define these as
successful changer households. In practice, this will not yield a good measure of what we
want. Households who show a large change after a month of low-quality diet are likely to be
those with a generally good diet who just had a single outlying month.
        This problem of mean reversion is closely related to the discussion in Chay et al. (2005),
among others. In this case it is exacerbated by the fact that we do not see all purchases and
people may vary in the fidelity with which they scan items over time.
        We therefore need to define a dietary change in a way that limits this mean reversion
    5
     There is an additional issue here that for virtually all households diets are better in the first half of the
year and worse in the second, and in general spending levels are correlated with diet shares, perhaps because
people are more reliable about scanning some items than others. We adjust for this by initially residualizing
all diet outcomes with respect to calendar month, total spending, and spending as a share of household
average in each month.


                                                       11
problem. We do this by incorporating two restrictions. First, we limit our data to a sub-
sample of households who are observed consistently over a long time period (30 months) and
without major outlier months in terms of total spending. Specifically, we drop the bottom
5% of households in terms of total spending, and also any households with two or more
months in a row with a total spending more than 2.5 standard deviations away from the
mean. Effectively, we try to begin with a sub-sample that is as close as possible to seeing a
full measure of grocery purchases. This sample contains 23,766 households, versus 158,792
in the total sample.
   Second, we identify household dietary changes based on a long pre-period and a long
post-period. We require households to have an improvement in their diet score over a twelve
month period, following a twelve month baseline period.
   Formally, define the diet quality measure in month t as Ht . Further, adopt the notation
min2 to indicate the second smallest value of a set, and max2 as the second largest value of
a set.
   Given this, we define a month t as a “changer” month with respect to unhealthy foods if


                  min2 {Ht−10 , H t−9 , ..., H t−1 } ≥ max2 {Ht , Ht+1 , ..., Ht+9 } + c


where c = 0.05.
   We choose the cutoff value of c = 0.05 to trade off a reasonably sized change with
identification of a sizable number of households. The average change for this group in the
year after versus before the change is 0.28, which is approximately three times as large as
the college-high school difference in the cross-section.
   In addition to this, we also classify households as changer households if they fulfill the
criteria above with a single intermediate month between the two periods. This allows for
households who change more slowly, or over periods which span the months we define.
   We identify 1,613 changer households, approximately 6.75% of the sample. The remainder
of the (non-changer) households will comprise our comparison group. We assign them a
random “change” date for the purposes of graphical comparison.
   Figure 2 shows the movements in the diet score for the identified changer households


                                                   12
(and the non-changers) over a period of 40 months.6 The twenty-four months in the middle
of the graph are the period based on which the households are chosen. During this period
there is a large improvement in the diet score.
      The difference is smaller if we compare the pre-pre-periods (months -24 to -12) to the
post-post-period (months 12 to 24) but there is still a large difference in the diet score before
and after. This suggests we are identifying changes which persist - at least to some extent -
over time.
      Appendix Figure A1 shows changes in other dietary measures for these households. These
figures demonstrate reductions in the share of foods in unhealthy categories (soda, sugar,
sweets, candy) and an increase in the share in healthy categories (fruits, vegetables, whole
grains). There is also an improvement in the nutrient ratio, which is a second composite
measure of diet quality based on nutrient values. In addition, we observe an increase in total
food spend and a decrease in calories, likely reflecting the higher cost per calorie of healthy
food.


Falsification Checks One concern is that these changes reflect not a true improvement
in diet quality but instead an adjustment in scanning behavior. If households start scanning
more, or less, we may incorrectly perceive that as a change in diet quality. We can look at
this directly in the data.
      Appendix Figure A2 shows evidence on scanning behavior at the time of the identified
diet improvement. The first two graphs show purchases of non-food groceries and health
products, which we take as one non-diet measure of scanning behavior. Although these are
both trending, they do not show a large jump (in either direction) at the time of the change.
      In addition, we can look directly at changes in number of trips recorded. To do this, we
calculate the absolute value of the year-to-year change in number of trips in the pre-period,
in the year surrounding the diet improvement, and the post-period. This is the third figure
in Appendix Figure A2. Although on average there is some change in trip frequency for all
households, the households with the diet improvement show no excess change in the year in
which the improvement took place.
  6
    Note that although the middle 24 months are fully balanced, since we require only 30 months to be in
the sample, the overall graph is slightly unbalanced.


                                                  13
        As a final piece of evidence, we can show the power of this test by showing that if there
was a fundamental change, these figures would pick it up. To do this, we create a set of
fake melded households by combining two households together at an arbitrary date. Not
surprisingly, a large share of these households would be identified as “changer” households,
and show similar dietary improvements, etc. However, Appendix Figure A3 show the same
falsification tests for these “fake” changers. These figures show large changes in demographics
and scanning behavior. We take this as evidence that these plots would pick up changes if
the diet improvement were driven by changes in the composition or scanning behavior of the
households.



5         Analyzing Dietary Change
Using the identified changer households, this section asks two questions. First, to what extent
can these households be predicted? Second, what are the patterns of behavior change?


5.1        Predicting Dietary Changes

We begin with prediction. We look at the predictive power of three categories of variables.
First, events - those outlined in Section 3, along with more global events like changes in
government dietary recommendation or research study releases7 . This explores whether the
timing of change is predictable. Second, baseline demographics: are some demographic
groups more likely to change than others? Third, baseline diet features: do some types of
diets seem more amenable to change than others?


5.1.1       Random Forest Learning

To optimize prediction, we use a machine learning model, specifically a random forest. The
random forest is in the class of tree-based machine-learning prediction algorithms.8 They
have been used elsewhere in economics, although not frequently (e.g. Oster, forthcoming;
    7
     In particular, we include the timing of key research study releases on the Mediterranean diet in 2008,
2009 and 2013, and the change in government dietary advice from a food pyramid to a food plate in 2011.
   8
     We describe this briefly here, but interested readers can find more details about machine learning in
general in Friedman, et al. (2009) and about random forests in particular in Breiman (2001).


                                                    14
Kleinberg et al, 2017), and are widely used in other fields. A key advantage of a random
forest relative to some other machine learning algorithms, such as a lasso, is that it allows
for non-linearities and automatic detection of interactions. This has been shown to improve
prediction.
      Broadly, the random forest starts from a prediction tree, which uses a set of inputs to
predict an outcome. Tree-based methods work by partitioning units (here, households) based
on their features into groups which are as similar as possible on the outcome (in this case,
changing their behavior). The procedure works by generating a series of binary splits in
the data based on the values of the input features. In the end, one is left with groups of
households who are as similar as possible on the outcome, and share all the feature splits.
These are the “leaves” of the tree.
      Building only a single tree risks over-fitting. The random forest generates predictions
by drawing many trees using bootstrapped samples of the data, and evaluating fit based on
the out-of-sample performance of the prediction. Random forest is not the only approach to
combining trees but it has been shown to perform well in a variety of applications.
      The key input to the random forest is the feature set used in the prediction. In this case,
we include in the feature set a rich set of demographics and baseline diet characteristics.
The diet characteristics include expenditures by category. In addition, we include a variety
of measures of diet structure, including the “concentration” of the diet in various metrics.
This concentration is measured by the standard deviation of the shares across Nielsen food
groups, Nielsen food modules and the USDA “Thrifty Food Plan” groups (a slightly larger
grouping).
      We grow a random forest using 600 trees. We implement the random forest in R using
the randomForest and randomForestSRC packages.9 Further details on implementation are
in Appendix B.
  9
    We implement the main random forest using the randomForest package. We then use the random-
ForestSRC package to detect interactions using a “minimal depth and maximal v-subtree” algorithm. See
Appendix B for more details.




                                                 15
5.1.2      Results

A visual sense of the predictive power of the random forest output can be obtained by
graphing the true positive rate versus the false positive rate using a Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve. This captures the false positive rate that you have to accept
to get a given true positive rate. A curve which lies on the 45 degree line has no predictive
power: to get 50% of the true positives you have to admit 50% of the false positives. A curve
which lies far above the line indicates more predictive power. The area under the curve
(AUC) summarizes the strength of the prediction. An AUC of 0.5 is not predictive at all,
and an AUC of 1 is perfectly predictive.
   We demonstrate the predictive power of the random forest using various sets of features.
First, Figure 3a shows the ROC curve when we predict the outcome using only events. The
AUC is 0.53, and we can see the line is very close to the 45 degree line. Effectively, we cannot
predict changes in diet based on household events. This is consistent with our lack of effects
in Section 3.
   Figure 3b shows the quality of the prediction using only demographic information. This
is slightly more predictive than events, but the predictive value is still fairly low; the AUC
is 0.59.
   Figure 3c shows the same curve using only baseline diet features. The prediction is much
better; the AUC is 0.73. A useful way to summarize is to note that if we targeted the people
with predictions in the top 10%, approximately 40% of them would be successful changers,
versus 6% of the overall population.
   Figure 3d shows the curve using all features. The AUC here is the same as the baseline
diet alone. This suggests that even when incorporating events and demographics the primary
predictive value is coming from the baseline diet.
   A key question for us is which features in the forest are predictive. A standard way
to summarize this is by reporting variable importance. This identifies the most important
features, where importance is defined as appearing in a large share of the trees and appearing
at a higher tree split. Table 5 lists the top features in the full-feature forest, ranked by their
importance.



                                               16
       These features are in two categories: measures of the quality of the diet, and measures
of diet concentration. Baseline diet and share of foods in low quality diet groups are in the
first set. The various measures of concentration - the standard deviation of shares across
groups, the size of the largest share, etc. - are representative of the second. It is important to
note that the exact foods or concentration measures which appear in this list are somewhat
arbitrary. For example, removing baking supplies does not change the overall prediction
quality. What we take from this is that these two categories - diet quality and concentration
- seem to be the important drivers.
       This importance list, however, misses some of what we are most interested in. In partic-
ular, we are not solely (or even largely) interested in the quality of the final prediction here.
Instead, we are interested in whether this identifies some particular features or combination
of a few features which are associated with behavior change. To comment on this we need,
at a minimum, to understand the shape of the relationship between behavior change and the
important features. The importance ranking tells us only what is important in prediction,
not the structure of the relationship.
       To further develop these results, therefore, we adopt the visualization approach developed
in Hastie et al. (2009) and Jones and Linder (2015). In brief, this approach allows us to make
partial dependence plots illustrating non-parametrically the relationship between a feature
x and the outcome (in this case behavior change). The illustrated relationship includes
the averaged effects of all the interactions of x with the other features, which allows it to
capture the dependence relationship we see in the data.10 Two-dimensional relationships can
be represented by showing these partial dependence plots for some x by groups of another
variable. More details are in Appendix B.
       We begin by visualizing the relationship between single variables and the outcome for
the entire group together in Figure 4. Panel (a) shows the relationship with baseline diet
score and Panel (b) with the top measure of diet concentration (Thrifty Food Plan Groups)
in terms of importance.11 For baseline diet we observe a non-linear relationship. Dietary
  10
     This partial dependence plot is distinct from a marginal dependence plot, which would represent the
marginal impact holding other features constant. Instead, this will capture the fact that other features
correlate with x.
  11
     We note that we could make extremely similar graphs with any of the diet quality measures and any of
the concentration measures.


                                                   17
improvement is more common for households with both better and worse diets at baseline.
   In the case of concentration, the relationship is strongly upward sloping. Households
with more concentrated diets at baseline are more likely to change. Intuitively, a more
concentrated diet is one in which there are a few foods which make up a large share of
purchases.
   Overall, we take from this that behavior change does have some predictable features, and
note the role of concentration as a key predictor.


5.2     Patterns of Behavior Change

Following prediction, the second question we ask is what are the patterns of behavior change
among these households. How do they improve their diet?
   We begin by showing, in the first two columns of Table 6, the food groups with the largest
spending share changes on average. The foods with the largest reductions are frozen pizza,
cookies, soda and ice cream. Those with the largest increases are yogurt, nuts, fruit and
lettuce. The changes in these groups are substantial; frozen pizza, cookies and soda decline
by 30 to 40% from their baseline, and consumption of the healthy food at least doubles in
all cases.
   This result masks significant heterogeneity across households in the largest change areas.
Columns (3)-(4) of Table 6 show the share of households with each food group as their
maximum change group. The changes are dispersed. Thirteen percent of households have
frozen pizza as their maximum group, 12% have yogurt, 10% nuts.
   Motivated by the findings on concentration above, a natural question to ask is to what
extent the changes in diet within a household are also concentrated in a small number of
foods. We analyze this by looking at each food group’s contribution to the overall change
in the diet score. We ask the question: if the household had not made the change in this
particular food group, how much of the change in the diet score would be eliminated? Given
that there is substantial heterogeneity across households in which particular food groups
show the largest change, we structure this analysis to look at the importance of the largest
change group, the largest two change groups, etc., where the particular food in these groups
varies across households.

                                             18
   These results are reported in Table 7. The two rows focus on three different food group-
ings - the top row shows the result when we focus on Nielsen product groups (largest),
the middle for the aggregation based on doctor ranking and the bottom for module groups
(smaller). In each case, column (1) reports the number of groups, and column (2) reports
the average number of groups with positive spending in each year. In the case of product
modules, in particular, there are a lot of modules which are so small that they are only
infrequently purchased; the average household buys food in 118 of 484 possible modules.
   Columns (3) - (5) show the share of the change in the overall diet score accounted for by
the largest change groups - the top group, the top 2 and the top 5. When we look at product
groups, where the average household buys items in 40 groups, the group with the largest
change accounts for 60% of the overall change in diet score. Virtually all of the change is
accounted for by the top two groups. For modules, which are much smaller, the top change
module accounts for 30% of the change, and the top two for half. Nearly all of the change
(82%) is accounted for by the top 5 modules.
   In the random forest output we observed that households with better diets and worse
diets were, on average, more likely to improve their diets. A natural question is, therefore,
whether the concentration patterns are different for those with a high quality versus low
quality baseline diet. Table 8 replicates Table 7 for the top and bottom terciles of baseline
diet. These patterns appear for both groups, but the changes are even more concentrated
for those with a low quality diet at baseline. For this group, the top Nielsen food group
accounts for 80% of the change in the diet score.
   When we look at what foods they change, the households with a better diet at baseline
are more likely to have their largest changes in healthy foods - nuts, fruit, yogurt. Those
with a worse diet at baseline are more likely to change in frozen foods and soda. This is
perhaps consistent with the latter group having more scope to alter their unhealthy food
purchases.
   One question is whether these changes simply reflect the baseline purchase levels of these
goods, in particular in cases where the diet improvements are driven by declines in unhealthy
food group spending. Does this simply reflect a proportional decline beginning with a very
concentrated diet? In fact, the reductions are more than proportional. Among households


                                             19
where the largest change is in unhealthy food groups, 63% of the change in diet score is
accounted for by the food group with the largest changes. This group is, however, only 17%
of the baseline food spending on average.
    Overall, this section paints a picture of these successful diet households making a small
number of sizable changes in their diet, rather than making small changes in many areas.
We turn now to understanding how this, along with the other facts above, may fit within a
model of behavior change.



6     Models of Behavior Change
The discussion above highlights several facts about changes in diet.
    First, substantial changes in diet are rare, and their timing is unpredictable. Second,
diet concentration predicts subsequent behavior change. Third, when households do make
significant changes, these changes are concentrated in a small number of food groups.
    In this section, we turn to the question of how these facts might be accommodated in
a model of behavior change. We argue, first, that a simple neoclassical model will struggle
to fit these facts together. We then argue that a model with attention costs may provide
a better fit to the data. This section focuses on a simple model - one in which we assume
convenient functional forms, etc., with the intention of illustrating one approach to fitting
these data.


Setup

A household chooses consumption from a menu of N possible foods, indexed by i ∈ 1, ..., N .
We simplify the setup by assuming these are all unhealthy foods, which households would
like to limit. Effectively, we consider dietary improvements to be reductions in bad foods,
rather than increases in good foods. This accords with most of the data we observe.
    Households consume xi units of food i and consumption utility is given by

                                            X
                                      U=         φi ln(xi )
                                            i




                                                20
which specifies that households have concave utility in the consumption of each good, and
the factor φi scales how valuable each good is to households. Without loss of generality we
             P
assume that i φi = 1. Order the φi such that φ1 > φ2 > ... > φN .
   Each food i also has a health cost hi per unit, and households have a health budget H
such that
                                                   X
                                              H=        hi xi
                                                    i

   In this setup, H reflects the household’s target level of dietary health. Note that a higher
H implies a less healthy diet, since all foods in the model are unhealthy. In the analysis
below, we consider the case of a household (possibly) reducing their health budget to H − Z.
This captures an improvement in diet. We consider both the utility loss from making this
change under various models and the optimal pattern of change across food groups.


Neoclassical Model We consider first results under a standard neoclassical model. Using
standard constrained utility maximization, we find that with health budget H, households
               Hφi
consume xi =    hi
                     at baseline for all i.
   Proposition 1 below summarizes the changes when moving from a health budget of H to
H − Z. Note that all proofs appear in Appendix C.

Proposition 1 The optimal change in consumption for good i in moving from a health
budget of H to H − Z is ∆xi = − φhi iZ ∀i. The total utility loss is Uloss = ln H−Z
                                                                                    
                                                                                 H
                                                                                      .

   In this model, the optimal pattern of reduction in consumption is to reduce across all
foods consumed, in a manner that is proportional to baseline spend shares. The total utility
loss is a function of the size of the change in diet.
   We can consider the fit of this model to the data. The first fact - that people are
unlikely to change their diet - can be accommodated here by assuming that the benefit to
dietary change is smaller than the loss. Since we have not specified any benefits, this is
straightforward.
   However, the patterns of change observed are not consistent with this model. First, the
utility loss is a function only of the size of the desired change, not of anything about the
baseline diet. The observation that higher baseline concentration increases the chance of

                                                   21
change is not accommodated here. Second, the optimal pattern of behavior change in this
model is to reduce proportionally on all foods. However, we showed above that reductions
are concentrated in a few foods, and are not proportional.
   These facts suggest we may need to introduce some non-standard assumptions to the
model in order to fit these facts.


Model with Attention Costs

We consider now introducing a model with an attention cost. This model draws - at least
intuitively - on the “sparse-max” model of Gabaix (2014), which posits that bounded ratio-
nality may result from attention constraints. Our model is considerably simpler than the
full sparse max operator, but draws on many of the same ideas. In line with that model, this
attention model has underpinnings in the behavioral economics literature on two-systems
and limited attention models (i.e. Kahneman, 2003; Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2010).
   We introduce attention costs in a simple way. At baseline, households are consuming xi
units of each food i. We assume that households pay an attention cost m for each food group
they change. Attention costs are constant whether the change in the food group is large or
small.
   The proposition below summarizes the patterns of change in this model.

Proposition 2 (1) If changing fewer than N food groups it will be optimal to change the
groups with the highest φi first; (2) for sufficiently high m it will be optimal to change fewer
                                                                            
                                                 H(φ1 +φ2 )−Z           Hφ1 −Z
than N food groups; (3) if m > (φ1 + φ2 ) ln H(φ1 +φ2 ) − φ1 ln Hφ1              it will be optimal
to change only group 1.

   This proposition (and the proof in the appendix) shows that under this model the patterns
of behavior change may be concentrated. Proposition 3 summarizes the relationship between
dietary concentration and utility loss from change.

Proposition 3 A household with a more concentrated baseline diet (captured by a higher
φ1 or φ2 ) will have a lower utility cost from changing their diet than a household with a less
concentrated baseline diet.


                                                22
    Based on this proposition we observe that the probability of changing behavior at all is
larger for households with a more concentrated diet. We note, however, that the addition
of the attention cost distorts the behavior change such that the overall cost of changing
behavior is considerably larger than in the neoclassical model.
    Together, these results suggest this model does a better job fitting the facts. By intro-
ducing the idea of attention cost - something which is suggested in the existing literature -
we can match the concentration of dietary change, and the observation that households with
more concentrated diets are more likely to improve their diet. Intuitively, these households
are able to make larger changes at lower cost since they can make more progress with a
single food group.
    This model also provides a natural way to think about why behavior change is challenging.
There may be limited utility loss from making incremental changes in many food groups,
but this is cognitively expensive. Households may be unable to make these changes since
they are limited in their ability to devote cognitive resources.
    To the extent that this model fits the data, it points to possible policy avenues. If
households are challenged by making a large number of changes at once, it may be better to
focus on making a smaller number of changes in high-value categories. Government dietary
advice tends to focus on recommendations like “eat a balanced diet” or “eat fewer calories”,
which are non-specific. Under this model, it may be optimal to focus on specific changes
(for example, limit or eliminate sugar-sweetened beverages). The focus on a smaller number
of simple changes may connect to the idea of the value of meta-rules when making hard
changes, including in diet (i.e. Amir and Ariely, 2007; Payne and Barnett, 2018).



7     Conclusion
This paper analyzes the determinants of changes in diet in a general population. We find,
first, that even in response to seemingly large treatments - for example, major disease diag-
nosis - changes in diet are very limited. Research findings and changes in government policy
advice seem to have a similarly negligible role. There is little predictable heterogeneity.
    We find, however, that there is a small share of households who do show large improve-


                                              23
ments in diet over time. Using a machine learning model we predict who these households
are. We find that some components of baseline diet are successful predictors of behavior
change. Notably, households with a concentrated diet ex ante are more likely to improve
their diet. The patterns of dietary improvement suggest the changes in diet are also largely
concentrated in a small number of food groups.
   We argue for two broad conclusions. First, the fact that behavior change is so limited
even after such large events suggests that it may be a challenge to use education to change
behavior. This is consistent with a literature in economics and elsewhere showing that diets
are not especially malleable (e.g. Atkin, 2016). Second, the evidence in the final section
suggests that the data may be better fit with a model which takes into account households
limited ability to pay attention to changes. This model better fits the facts than a standard
neoclassical model, and suggests a focus on policy which targets a more limited number of
changes to one’s diet.




                                             24
References
Allcott, Hunt, Rebecca Diamond, and Jean-Pierre Dube, “The
    geography of poverty and nutrition: Food deserts and food choices across
    the United States,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
    Research 2017.
Amir, On and Dan Ariely, “Decisions by rules: The case of unwillingness to
   pay for beneficial delays,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2007, 44 (1),
   142–152.
Atkin, David, “The caloric costs of culture: Evidence from Indian migrants,”
    The American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 1144–1181.
Bleich, Sara N, David Cutler, Christopher Murray, and Alyce
    Adams, “Why is the developed world obese?,” Annu. Rev. Public Health,
    2008, 29, 273–295.
Breiman, Leo, “Random forests,” Machine learning, 2001, 45 (1), 5–32.
Broadbent, E., L. Donkin, and J. C. Stroh, “Illness and treatment
   perceptions are associated with adherence to medications, diet, and
   exercise in diabetic patients,” Diabetes Care, Feb 2011, 34 (2), 338–340.
Bronnenberg, Bart J, Jean-Pierre H Dube, and Matthew Gentzkow,
   “The evolution of brand preferences: Evidence from consumer migration,”
   The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2472–2508.
Carrera, Mariana, Syeda A Hasan, and Silvia Prina, “The Effects of
    Health Risk Assessments on Cafeteria Purchases: Do New Information and
    Health Training Matter?,” 2017.
Chay, Kenneth Y, Patrick J McEwan, and Miguel Urquiola, “The
   central role of noise in evaluating interventions that use test scores to rank
   schools,” The American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1237–1258.
Cutler, David M, Edward L Glaeser, and Jesse M Shapiro, “Why have
    Americans become more obese?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    2003, 17 (3), 93–118.
Delamater, Alan M., “Improving Patient Adherence,” Clinical Diabetes,
    2006, 24 (2), 71–77.
Drewnowski, Adam, “Concept of a nutritious food: toward a nutrient density
   score,” The American journal of clinical nutrition, 2005, 82 (4), 721–732.
Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo, “Recording
    discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan data: Are they present and do they
    matter?,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2010.



                                       25
Feldstein, A. C., G. A. Nichols, D. H. Smith, V. J. Stevens,
    K. Bachman, A. G. Rosales, and N. Perrin, “Weight change in
    diabetes and glycemic and blood pressure control,” Diabetes Care, Oct
    2008, 31 (10), 1960–1965.
Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani, The elements
    of statistical learning, Vol. 2, Springer series in statistics Springer, Berlin,
    2009.
Gabaix, Xavier, “A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality,” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1661–1710.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer, “What comes to mind,” The
   Quarterly journal of economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1399–1433.
Gilchrist, Duncan Sheppard and Emily Glassberg Sands, “Something
    to Talk About: Social Spillovers in Movie Consumption,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 2016, 124 (5), 1339–1382.
Group, Diabetes Prevention Program Research et al., “10-year
   follow-up of diabetes incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention
   Program Outcomes Study,” The Lancet, 2009, 374 (9702), 1677–1686.
Handbury, Jessie, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Molly Schnell, “Is the Focus on
   Food Deserts Fruitless? Retail Access and Food Purchases Across the
   Socioeconomic Spectrum,” National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman, “Overview of
   supervised learning,” in “The elements of statistical learning,” Springer,
   2009, pp. 9–41.
Hut, Stefan, “Determinants of Dietary Choice in the US: Evidence from
   Consumer Migration,” 2018.
Ishwaran, Hemant, Udaya B Kogalur, Eiran Z Gorodeski, Andy J
    Minn, and Michael S Lauer, “High-dimensional variable selection for
    survival data,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2010, 105
    (489), 205–217.
Jones, Zachary and Fridolin Linder, “Exploratory data analysis using
    random forests,” in “Prepared for the 73rd annual MPSA conference” 2015.
Kahneman, Daniel, “Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral
   economics,” American economic review, 2003, 93 (5), 1449–1475.
Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig,
    and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Human decisions and machine
    predictions,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
    2017.
Oster, Emily, “Diabetes and Diet: Purchasing Behavior Change in Response
    to Health Information,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
    forthcoming.


                                        26
Payne, Christopher and Rob Barnett, The Economists’ Diet: The
   Surprising Formula for Losing Weight and Keeping It Off, Vol. 1,
   Touchstone, 2018.
Pi-Sunyer, Xavier, “The look AHEAD trial: a review and discussion of its
    outcomes,” Current nutrition reports, 2014, 3 (4), 387–391.
Ponzo, V., R. Rosato, E. Tarsia, I. Goitre, F. De Michieli, M. Fadda,
   T. Monge, A. Pezzana, F. Broglio, and S. Bo, “Self-reported
   adherence to diet and preferences towards type of meal plan in patient
   with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A cross-sectional study,” Nutr Metab
   Cardiovasc Dis, Jul 2017, 27 (7), 642–650.
Raj, G. D., Z. Hashemi, D. C. Soria Contreras, S. Babwik,
    D. Maxwell, R. C. Bell, and C. B. Chan, “Adherence to Diabetes
    Dietary Guidelines Assessed Using a Validated Questionnaire Predicts
    Glucose Control in Individuals with Type 2 Diabetes,” Can J Diabetes,
    Jun 2017.
Swinburn, Boyd, Gary Sacks, and Eric Ravussin, “Increased food energy
    supply is more than sufficient to explain the US epidemic of obesity,” The
    American journal of clinical nutrition, 2009, 90 (6), 1453–1456.




                                     27
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                Panel A: Panelist Demographics
                                               Mean    Standard Deviation          Sample Size
          HH Head Age                           47.7          10.3                   158,792
          HH Head Years of Education            14.4           3.3                   158,792
          HH Income                           $65,932       $45,690                  158,792
          HH Size                               2.59          1.33                   158,792
          White (0/1)                           0.82          0.38                   158,792
                              Panel B: Panelist Shopping Behavior
          Diet Score                           -0.296         0.193                  158,792
          Average Duration in Panel (Months)    47.4           39.5                  158,792
          Shopping Behavior:
          Calories (person/month)              28,286        14,385                  158,726
          Expenditures (person/month)          $81.48        $41.79                  158,742
          Expenditure Shares on Top 5 Groups:
          Carbonated Beverages                 4.88%         6.48%                   158,787
          Bread and Baked Goods                 4.8%          4.1%                   158,787
          Snacks                               4.76%         4.57%                   158,787
          Fresh Produce                        4.60%         4.59%                   158,787
          Milk Products                        4.25%          4.8%                   158,787

Note: This table shows summary statistics for the Nielsen Panelists. Household age, income, and education
are computed at the median of reported categories. Mean values for calories and expenditures are generated
after a 1% winsorization.




                                                   28
                                Table 2: Household Event Information

            A. Disease Diagnosis                  Total # Households     Any Diagnosis     New Diagnosis, 2009
 Hypertension/High Cholesterol/Heart Disease            33,369              52.1%                 5.5%
                  Obesity                               33,369              25.8%                 1.3%
                  Diabetes                              33,369              14.2%                 0.7%
           B. Household Changes                    # Household-Years      % With Event
                  Child Birth                          150,153                1.3%
                  Retirement                           150,153                4.7%
                 Head Job Loss                         150,153               10.1%
                  Empty Nest                           150,153               0.9%
                    Divorce                            150,153                1.3%
                Income Increase                        150,153               18.4%

Note: This first rows of this table shows summary statistics on disease diagnosis for individuals surveyed in
the Nielsen Ailment Panel. The survey was run in early 2010. Diagnosis in 2009 is inferred from reporting
a new diagnosis in the last year. The second panel of rows show the share of household-years with events
indicating changes in family structure or circumstances.




                                                     29
                                    Table 3: Response to Household Events

                                        (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)                (6)
                                       Yr -3         Yr -2      Yr -1 Mean        Treat Yr         Yr +1              Yr +2
                                     b/se/sd       b/se/sd                         b/se/sd         b/se/sd            b/se/sd

 A. Disease Diagnosis
 Hypertension, cholesterol, heart   -0.001372      -0.004221        -0.280739     -0.000167       0.008782*          0.004464
                                     (0.00403)     (0.00315)                      (0.00302)       (0.00382)          (0.00412)
                                      [-0.005]      [-0.016]                       [-0.001]        [0.033]            [0.017]
 Obesity                            -0.001461      -0.006352        -0.282865     0.005475        0.005503           0.000020
                                     (0.00935)     (0.00730)                      (0.00600)       (0.00809)          (0.00934)
                                      [-0.006]      [-0.024]                       [0.021]         [0.021]            [0.000]
 Diabetes                            0.003801      0.005042         -0.301056    0.028719**+    0.040130**+          0.024665*
                                     (0.01020)     (0.00703)                      (0.00887)       (0.00990)          (0.00982)
                                      [0.014]       [0.019]                        [0.108]         [0.151]            [0.093]
 B. Household Changes
 Child Birth                        -0.016759*     -0.006518        -0.295624    -0.016047**+     -0.000940          0.008416
                                     (0.00724)     (0.00467)                      (0.00362)       (0.00530)          (0.00722)
                                      [-0.063]      [-0.025]                       [-0.061]        [-0.004]           [0.032]
 Retirement                         -0.007020*     -0.001770        -0.251780    0.005348**+    0.010832**+         0.014837**+
                                     (0.00295)     (0.00191)                      (0.00169)       (0.00263)          (0.00364)
                                      [-0.027]      [-0.007]                       [0.020]         [0.041]            [0.056]
 Head Job Loss                      -0.004322*     -0.000529        -0.294788     0.001920      0.005849**+         0.007117**+
                                     (0.00210)     (0.00140)                      (0.00115)       (0.00165)          (0.00222)
                                      [-0.016]      [-0.002]                       [0.007]         [0.022]            [0.027]
 Income Increase                     0.000693      -0.001414        -0.292502     -0.001305       -0.001977          -0.002600
                                     (0.00189)     (0.00124)                      (0.00095)       (0.00134)          (0.00179)
                                      [0.003]       [-0.005]                       [-0.005]        [-0.007]           [-0.010]
 Empty Nest                         0.013396*      0.007741         -0.327138     0.001785        0.005451           0.002595
                                     (0.00576)     (0.00402)                      (0.00323)       (0.00458)          (0.00600)
                                      [0.051]       [0.029]                        [0.007]         [0.021]            [0.010]
 Divorce                             0.004318      0.002581         -0.308072    -0.008261*      -0.011903*          -0.014093
                                     (0.00612)     (0.00409)                      (0.00357)       (0.00532)          (0.00725)
                                      [0.016]       [0.010]                        [-0.031]        [-0.045]           [-0.053]
 Marriage                           -0.001566      0.001899         -0.289302     0.004514        0.007962*          0.010324*
                                     (0.00423)     (0.00284)                      (0.00235)       (0.00325)          (0.00428)
                                      [-0.006]      [0.007]                        [0.017]         [0.030]            [0.039]
 Standard errors in parentheses, standard deviation change in square brackets.
 P-values significance: * = 0.1, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01, ***+ = significant at 0.05 using a Bonferroni correction.

Notes: This table shows the impact of disease diagnosis and household composition or circumstance changes on diet score. The
outcome is the diet score we create based on doctor evaluations of the health of food groups. Disease diagnosis is drawn from
the Nielsen Ailment Panel. Information on household circumstance changes is drawn from the yearly Nielsen panelist surveys.




                                                               30
                               Table 4: Heterogeneity in Response to Events

                                                        (1)               (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                       Avg           Education T3   Income T3     Youngest
                 A. Disease Diagnosis
                 Hypertension, cholesterol, heart     0.00578          0.00563       0.00962∗     0.00448
                                                     (0.00307)        (0.00559)     (0.00490)     (0.00487)
                 Obesity                              0.00849          0.00982       0.0160       0.00729
                                                     (0.00668)         (0.0109)     (0.00947)     (0.0107)
                 Diabetes                            0.0302∗∗           0.0398∗      0.0322∗∗     0.0242∗
                                                     (0.00773)         (0.0175)      (0.0113)     (0.0116)
                 B. Household Changes
                 Child Birth                         -0.0151∗          -0.0159       -0.0163∗     -0.0157∗
                                                     (0.00593)        (0.00825)     (0.00707)     (0.00742)
                 Retirement                          0.00604∗          0.00561       0.00638      0.00730
                                                     (0.00288)        (0.00440)      (0.0245)     (0.00379)
                 Head Job Loss                        0.00401          0.00864∗∗     0.00542     0.00886∗∗
                                                     (0.00206)        (0.00299)     (0.00325)     (0.00272)
                 Income Increase                    0.0000367          0.00591∗     0.00937∗∗     0.00503∗
                                                     (0.00153)        (0.00236)     (0.00247)     (0.00211)
                 Empty Nest                           0.00298           0.0155       0.00259       0.0132
                                                     (0.00609)        (0.00845)     (0.00837)     (0.00802)
                 Divorce                             -0.00365          0.00591       0.00443      -0.00292
                                                     (0.00667)         (0.0101)     (0.00906)     (0.00913)
                 Marriage                            0.0109∗           0.0195∗∗      0.0133∗       0.0108
                                                     (0.00435)        (0.00664)     (0.00628)     (0.00599)

                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 Education tertiles: high school, some college, college/grad.
                 P-values significance: * = 0.05, ** = 0.01

Notes: This table shows the heterogeneity in the impact of disease diagnosis or household events by demographic groups.
Column (1) shows the average response over the after period (year t to t+2) versus the before period (t-3 to t-1). Column (2)
show the same for the highest education group (college or more), Column (3) for the top tercile of income and Column (4) for
the youngest tercile of household head age group.




                                                                31
                          Table 5: Important Features in Random Forest

                                           Baseline Diet Score
                                  Share of purchases in baking supplies
                                       SD of Shares, TFP groups
                                     SD of Shares, Nielsen Modules
                                          Frozen Entree Share
                                           Baking mixes share
                                     SD of Shares, Nielsen Groups
                                         Largest Module Share
                                      Fats and Condiments Share

Notes: This table shows the top importance features for the random forest. Standard deviations are measured
in terms of shares across food groups. Groups are defined either by thrifty food plan (TFP) groups, Nielsen
food groups or Nielsen Module Groups (smaller grouping).




                            Table 6: Largest Diet Change Food Groups

                   Spending Changes, Top Items                Top Changes, by Household Shares
   Rank        Name       PP Change Spending Share                Name       Top Item, % of HH
    1       Frozen Pizza             -3.4%                     Frozen Pizza         13.5%
    2          Yogurt                 2.7%                        Yogurt            12.0%
    3           Nuts                  2.4%                         Nuts             10.1%
    4           Fruit                2.4%                          Fruit            9.2%
    5         Cookies                -2.0%                         Soda              7.4%
    6           Soda                 -2.0%                       Cookies             5.9%
    7        Ice Cream               -1.8%                    Breakfast Bars         5.8%
    8          Lettuce               1.5%                       Ice Cream            5.2%

Notes: This table shows the important foods driving diet score changes. The first two columns show the
groups with the largest changes on average. Column 2 reports the percentage point change in spending
share for these groups. The second set of columns shows the distribution of the largest change group across
households. For each item, we report the share of households who have that as their largest change group.




                                                    32
                             Table 7: Concentration of Dietary Changes

                                    Total    With Non-Zero Spend       Top 1    Top 2    Top 5
            Nielsen Group            54               40                .601    .9433    1.407
            Doctor Rank Groups       66               45               .5609     .889     1.42
            Nielsen Module           484             110               .3221    .5027    .8195

Notes: This table shows the concntration of changes among the households who show large changes in diet.
For each set of food categories, we report the total number and the household average number with non-zero
spend. The last three columns report the share of the total change in diet score which is accounted for by
the element of each category with the largest change, the top 2 and the top 5. Note that these figures can
be greater than one if there are offsetting changes in other groups.




              Table 8: Concentration of Dietary Changes by Baseline Diet Quality

                              Panel A: Top Tercile Baseline Diet
                                Total   With Non-Zero Spend  Top 1              Top 2    Top 5
            Nielsen Group         54             41            0.52              0.79     1.20
            Doctor Rank Groups    66             48            0.46              0.74     1.23
            Nielsen Module       484            118            0.29              0.46     0.76
                            Panel B: Bottom Tercile Baseline Diet
                                Total   With Non-Zero Spend  Top 1              Top 2    Top 5
            Nielsen Group         54             37            0.82              1.31     1.85
            Doctor Rank Groups    66             40            0.69              1.06     1.65
            Nielsen Module       484            93             0.39              0.60     0.94

Notes: This table shows the concentration of changes among the households who show large changes in diet.
Panel A includes households in the top third in terms of baseline diet quality. Panel B includes those in
the bottom third. For each set of food categories, we report the total number and the household average
number with non-zero spend. The last three columns report the share of the total change in diet score which
is accounted for by the element of each category with the largest change, the top 2 and the top 5. Note that
these figures can be greater than one if there are offsetting changes in other groups.




                                                    33
                                   Figure 1: Effects of Diagnosis on Diet

                                                           Panel A: Hypertension Diagnosis
                                                            Diet Score − Hypertension/Heart/Cholesterol Diagnosis




                                        .125
                                        .1
                                 0 .025 .05 .075
                                  Diet Score
                                        −.075 −.05 −.025




                                                            −2      −1      Start Diag Yr End Diag Yr       +1   +2
                                                                              Years Relative to Diagnosis



                                                                 Panel B: Obesity Diagnosis
                                                                         Diet Score − Obesity Diagnosis
                                         .125
                                         .1
                                 0 .025 .05 .075
                                  Diet Score
                                         −.075 −.05 −.025




                                                            −2      −1      Start Diag Yr End Diag Yr       +1   +2
                                                                              Years Relative to Diagnosis



                                                                 Panel C: Diabetes Diagnosis
                                                                   Diet Score − Diabetes Type II Diagnosis
                                         .125
                                         .1
                                 0 .025 .05 .075
                                  Diet Score
                                         −.075 −.05 −.025




                                                            −2      −1      Start Diag Yr End Diag Yr       +1   +2
                                                                              Years Relative to Diagnosis



Notes: This figure shows the effect of diagnosis on the diet score of the purchased bundle for three diseases.
The coefficients are derived from the regression specified in Equation (1). The diagnosis year refers to the
year during which the person reports diagnosis; we do not see more detailed timing than this.




                                                                                      34
               Figure 2: Changes in Diet Score for Identified Changer Households

                                              Diet Score of Diet Score Changers
                                0
                                −.1
                           Diet Score
                               −.2
                                −.3
                                −.4




                                        −20       −10               0            10       20
                                                        Month Relative to Change

                                                    Changers               Non−Changers



Notes: This figure shows the trend in the diet score for households identified as “large changers” and those
who are not.




                                                              35
                                                                       Figure 3: Random Forest Output: Prediction Quality

                        Panel A: Events Only                                                                                              Panel B: Basline Demographics Only

                                                  ROC Plot − Testing Set Diet Changers Events                                    ROC Plot − Testing Set Diet Changers Demographics




                                      1.0
                                                                                                                           1.0




                                      0.8
                                                                                                                           0.8




                                      0.6
                                                                                                                           0.6




                                      0.4
                                                                                                                           0.4




                 True positive rate
                                                                                                      True positive rate




                                      0.2
                                                                                                                           0.2




                                      0.0
                                                                                                                           0.0
                                            0.0         0.2      0.4          0.6     0.8       1.0                               0.0      0.2      0.4          0.6     0.8   1.0

                                                                False positive rate                                                                False positive rate




36
                                        Panel C: Baseline Diet Only                                                                                       Panel D: All Features

                                            ROC Plot − Testing Set Diet Changers Baseline Only                                          ROC Plot − Testing Set Diet Changers




                                      1.0
                                                                                                                           1.0




                                      0.8
                                                                                                                           0.8




                                      0.6
                                                                                                                           0.6




                                      0.4
                                                                                                                           0.4




                 True positive rate
                                                                                                      True positive rate




                                      0.2
                                                                                                                           0.2




                                      0.0
                                                                                                                           0.0




                                            0.0         0.2      0.4          0.6     0.8       1.0                               0.0      0.2      0.4          0.6     0.8   1.0

                                                                False positive rate                                                                False positive rate


     Notes: This figure shows the ROC curves from the random forest algorithm. Panel A uses only timing and events in the prediction. Panel B uses
     only baseline demographics. Panel C uses only baseline diet features. Panel D uses all features. The full list of features used in the random forest
     appears in Appendix C.
                      Figure 4: Partial Dependence Plots for Random Forest

                                                                        Panel A: Role of Baseline Diet Score


                                                                      0.4
                             Predicted Probability of Changing Diet




                                                                      0.3




                                                                      0.2




                                                                      0.1




                                                                            −1.0       −0.5                    0.0        0.5
                                                                                                  Diet_score


                          Panel B: Role of Baseline Diet Concentration
                                                                      0.5




                                                                      0.4
                             Predicted Probability of Changing Diet




                                                                      0.3




                                                                      0.2




                                                                      0.1




                                                                                   4          8                      12         16
                                                                                                   SD TFP


Notes: This figure shows the partial dependence plots for the prediction of change in diet score. These
plots are generated as described in Jones and Linder (2015), see Appendix B. The plots capture the partial
dependence between each feature and the outcome, averaging over the characteristics which appear in the
data alongside that feature.




                                                                                                  37
Appendix A: Tables and Figures


                Table A1: Comparison of Demographics: Nielsen versus US Census

                                                      Nielsen Mean          US Census Mean

                     HH Head Age                      47.4                  48.9
                                                      (10.3)

                     HH Head Years of Education       14.4                  13.7
                                                      (3.3)

                     HH Income                        65,932                68,918
                                                      (45,690)

                     HH Size                          2.59                  2.58
                                                      (1.33)

                     White (0/1)                      0.82                  0.72
                                                      (0.38)
Notes: This table shows the demographics of the Nielsen sample relative to the US census in 2010. Standard
errors in parentheses.




                  Table A2: Comparison of Diet Score with Other Diet Measures

                                                               Diet score
                                       Diet score                  1
                                       Unhealthy share          -0.462
                                       Healthy share             0.482
                                       Expenditure score         0.486
                                       Nutrient ratio            0.273
Notes: This table shows the correlation between diet score and other measures of diet quality. Unhealthy
share is the share of expenditures in soda, sugar, sweets and candies categories. Healthy share is the share of
expenditures in vegetables, whole fruits and whole grains. Expenditure score is an overall measure of health
of the diet (Handbury et al., 2015) and nutrient ratio is a measure based good and bad nutrient types in the
diet (Drewnoski, 2005).




                                                      38
                                                     Figure A1: Auxiliary Changes in Large Changers:

                                     Unhealthy Share of Diet Score Changers                                                                        Healthy Share of Diet Score Changers




                                                                                                                               .18
                  .26




                                                                                                                               .16
                  .24




                                                                                                                    Good Share
       Bad Share




                                                                                                                         .14
         .22




                                                                                                                               .12
                  .2




                                                                                                                               .1
                  .18




                               −20          −10               0            10                20                                              −20         −10               0            10       20
                                                  Month Relative to Change                                                                                     Month Relative to Change

                                               Changers                      Non−Changers                                                                   Changers              Non−Changers



                                                                                         Nutrient Ratio of Diet Score Changers
                                                                        .58
                                                                        .56
                                                                 Nutrient Ratio
                                                                   .52  .5
                                                                        .48.54




                                                                                   −20         −10               0            10                       20
                                                                                                     Month Relative to Change

                                                                                                  Changers                             Non−Changers



                                     Total Food Spend of Diet Score Changers                                                                       Total Calories of Diet Score Changers
                                                                                                                               140000
                  240




                                                                                                                    110000 120000 130000
                         230




                                                                                                                        Calories Per Month
         Total Food Spend
       210      220




                                                                                                                               100000
                  200




                               −20          −10               0            10                20                                              −20         −10               0            10       20
                                                  Month Relative to Change                                                                                     Month Relative to Change

                                               Changers                      Non−Changers                                                                   Changers              Non−Changers



Notes: This figure shows the share of purchases in unhealthy foods and healthy foods, as well as changes
in spending and calories for the households identified as diet score changers. Changer status is defined as a
sustained improvement in diet score over a one year period following a one year baseline.




                                                                                                           39
                                                    Figure A2: Scanning Behavior, Large Changers
                    56




                                                                                                                                              50
                             54
        Non−Food Grocery spend




                                                                                                                                   Health Products spend
                                                                                                                                                    45
             50      52




                                                                                                                                     40
       48




                                                                                                                                              35
                    46




                                  −20   −10               0            10                                    20                                             −20           −10               0            10       20
                                              Month Relative to Change                                                                                                          Month Relative to Change

                                          Changers                                            Non−Changers                                                                  Changers               Non−Changers
                                                                                 3
                                                             Abs Diff Mean Trips Year After−Before
                                                                       2.6       2.4 2.8




                                                                                   Yr Before                              Change Yr                                        Yr After


                                                                                                             Diet Score Changers                           Non−Changers



Notes: This figure shows several measures of scanning behavior for the households identified as diet score
changers. Changer status is defined as a sustained improvement in diet score over a one year period following
a one year baseline. The first two figures show purchases of non-food groceries and health products. The
third figure shows the year-to-year change in average number of trips around the change date.




                                                                                                                         40
                               Figure A3: Scanning Behavior in Constructed Household Large Changers
                 60




                                                                                                                                                 45
      Non−Food Grocery spend
                          55




                                                                                                                                      Health Products spend
                                                                                                                                                      40
                50




                                                                                                                                       35
        45       40




                                                                                                                                                 30
                                −20   −10               0            10                                        20                                             −20            −10               0            10       20
                                            Month Relative to Change                                                                                                               Month Relative to Change

                                        Changers                                               Non−Changers                                                                    Changers               Non−Changers
                                                                                                 10
                                                           Abs Diff Mean Trips Year After−Before
                                                                  4          6  2       8




                                                                                   Yr Before                                Change Yr                                         Yr After


                                                                                                              Frankenstein Changers                           Non−Changers



Notes: This figure shows scanning behavior changes among fake, composite households which are identified
as large changers. We construct these households by appending two households together. We identify the
households which show large improvements in diet quality as “changers”. These are not true changers
but cases where the household switches in the data. These figures show the corresponding changes in our
measures of scanning behavior.




                                                                                                                           41
Appendix B: Machine Learning Details
B.1 Random Forest Implementation
The random forest was created in R using the randomforest package. The following features
are included in the analysis:

   • Household demographics (age group, education, income, household size, marital status,
     employment status, and race)

   • Changes in other health behaviors, including magnitude of changes in alcohol and
     smoking expenditures, dummy variables for whether these changes were large, and
     dummy variables for whether the head of the household quit smoking

   • Other health behaviors (amount of spending on cigarettes, alcohol, diet aids, and
     vitamins)

   • Local health and economic characteristics (median household income and obesity rate)

   • Share of expenditures in each food category as defined by the USDA Thrifty Food Plan
     (TFP)

   • Share of expenditures on each food item as defined by the Nielsen product groups

   • Concentration of food expenditures across all food categories (standard deviation and
     maximum of spending among TFP and Nielsen groups)

   • Concentration of food expenditures across unhealthy food categories (standard devia-
     tion of spending among unhealthy TFP groups)

   • Average fraction of food expenditures on unhealthy food categories

   • Average difference between household nutrition in January and the rest of the year

The command is built with 600 trees in classification mode with a node size of 1. The output
is predicted probability.


B.2 Interaction Identification and Partial Dependence Plots
Interaction detection was completed with the randomForestSRC package in R using a
“maximal v-subtrees and minimal depth” algorithm as described in Jones and Linder (2015).
The random forest was created with 1000 trees, using the same features as above. The


                                            42
algorithm then measures the importance of an interaction between two variables w and v by
averaging the “minimal depth of w in the maximal subtree of v” (Jones and Linder 2015) for
all of the trees in the random forest. A maximal subtree of w refers to the largest subtree
that has a root node on w (see Ishwaran et al., 2010). The intuition behind the procedure
is that features with a higher importance appear at higher splits (closer to the root node)
in each tree. The minimal depth of v represents the distance between the highest maximal
subtree for variable v and the root node of the whole tree, and is therefore a measure of
variable importance. This idea can also be applied to detect interactions by examining so-
called second-order maximal subtrees (Ishwaran et al., 2010). The interaction between v and
w can be captured by calculating the minimal depth of w in the maximal subtree of v, and
averaging this across the trees in the forest.
    The output is an n-by-n matrix, where n is the number of variables in the random for-
est. The values on the diagonals represent the relative importance of individual variables,
normalized between 0 and 1, and the values on the off-diagonals represent the importance of
interactions as calculated by the “maximal v-subtrees and minimal depth” method. Com-
paring the relative values of the off-diagonal entries allows for ranking the importance of
interactions between each pair of features.
    Partial dependence plots are used to visualize the size and direction of the interactions
identified above. The partial dependence plots are presented as a modification of the plots
in Jones and Linder (2015). As the authors describe in more detail, partial dependence plots
are created by generating a synthetic dataset for each value of the variable of interest. This
value is assigned to all observations, while the other features in the data are left unchanged.
Each synthetic dataset is then ’dropped’ down the forest and used to generate predicted
probabilities. Averaging over these predictions generates the mean predicted probability of
change for each value of the variable of interest. These are graphically represented in a
partial dependence plot.
    To construct the partial dependence plots for two variables, we group one variable into
terciles of its values among observations in the random forest. Within each tercile, a curve is
plotted to represent the impact of changes in the second variable on the predicted probability
of the outcome variable from the random forest. A 95% confidence interval for the curve is
also constructed at each value. Differences in the shapes of the curves across terciles visually
indicate an interaction between the two variables in the random forest. Partial dependence
plots were constructed using the random forests from the randomForestSRC package using
the ggplot visualization package in R.




                                              43
Appendix C: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1

We are looking for the solution to the following problem:


                                                       X
                                         maxxi U =         φi ln(xi )
                                                       i

                                               s.t.
                                                   X
                                              H=     hi xi
                                                       i

                      P
Note that we assume i φi = 1. We can solve using a standard constrained maximization
approach, and this yields the result that xi = Hφ
                                                hi
                                                   i
                                                     .

Proof of Proposition 2

This proof proceeds in 3 parts. First, we show that if you change only a subset of foods it is
optimal to change the ones with the highest φi (Claim 1). Second, we show that it may be
optimal to reduce fewer than N foods if m is sufficiently large (Claim 2). Third, we show
that if m is sufficiently high it is optimal to change only one group (Claim 3).

Claim 1 We first show that if a household changes only one group it is optimal to change
group 1 (with the highest φi ). In order to reduce the health budget by Z changing only
good i the household must change ∆xi = hZi . The utility loss from this change is Uloss     i
                                                                                                =
             
         i −Z
φi ln Hφ
       Hφi
                − m. The claim is that this loss is decreasing in φi . Since the loss is negative,
this implies that the derivative of the loss function with respect to φ1 is positive:
                                                  
                                         Hφi − Z             Z
                                ln                     +           >0
                                          Hφi              Hφi − Z

The first part of this is negative, the second is positive. We know that Z ∈ [0, Hφi ] (so
it is bounded between no reduction and completely eliminating xi from the diet). On one
side, as Z goes to zero, both pieces of this also go to zero, but the ln(.) function converges
more quickly to zero so the positive element dominates. As Z goes to Hφi the ln(.) goes to
negative infinity and the second part goes to positive infinity. But since the ln(.) function
converges more slowly, the figure remains positive. Since this is positive on both extremes
and is monotonic, it will be positive everywhere.


                                                   44
   This shows that if only one group would be changed it would be the group with the
highest φi.
   Now consider a case where the attention cost is such that it makes sense to change more
than one group, with one group changing Z1 and the other Z2 . Note that the allocation of Z
across the two groups will be a function of hi and φi but it is clear this will be split. Assume
Z1 > Z2 . The optimal choice to reduce Z1 is to reduce on the group with the highest φi
(namely, group 1). To then further reduce Z2 it is optimal to reduce on the group with the
remaining highest φi (namely, Group 2). The logic continues through other groups. This
completes the proof of this claim.

Claim 2 The utility loss from reducing all N foods is
                                                                      
                                         all                 H −Z
                                        Uloss     = ln                     − Nm
                                                               H

The utilty loss from (optimally) reducing a subset j of foods is

                                                  j                           
                                     subset
                                                  X                 xi − ∆xi
                                    Uloss     =         φi ln                      − jm
                                                  i=1
                                                                       xi

where ji=1 ∆xi hi = Z.
       P

   It is trivial to observe that there are some values of m for which the subset loss would
be lower, since j < N and m is not bounded.

Claim 3 Claim (1) says that if only one group is changed it will be group 1. We show now
that there is a value of m for which it is optimal to change Group 1 but not Group 2.
    Note from above that the optimal baseline levels of x1 and x2 are Hφ
                                                                       h1
                                                                          1
                                                                            and Hφ
                                                                                 h2
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      , respec-
tively. The loss from changing only good 1 is:
                                                                          
                                        1                       Hφ1 − Z
                                       Uloss   = φ1 ln                         −m
                                                                 Hφ1

                                                                                     Z−∆x1 h1
   Denote the change in group 1 ∆x1 and note that ∆x2 =                                h2
                                                                                              .   We can solve for the
optimal ∆x1 to minimize utility loss:
                                                                                               
               2                    Hφ1 − ∆x1 h1                          Hφ2 − Z + ∆x1 h1
              Uloss   = φ1 ln                               + φ2 ln                                   − 2m
                                        Hφ1                                    Hφ2
This yields
                                                                Zφ1
                                               ∆x1 =
                                                            h1 (φ1 + φ2 )

                                                             45
And hence:

                                                     Zφ2
                                         ∆x2 =
                                                 h2 (φ1 + φ2 )
We can now compare the losses in the two cases. The loss from changing 1 will be smaller
than two if :
                                              
                                       Hφ1 − Z
                               φ1 ln             −m>
                                        Hφ1


                                                                         
      φ1 (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z)          Hφ1           φ2 (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z          Hφ2
φ1 ln                        − ln          +φ2 ln                       − ln          −2m
          h1 (φ1 + φ2 )              h1               h2 (φ1 + φ2 )             h2

This occurs if the following condition holds
                                                                                          
                                         H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z                           Hφ1 − Z
                 m > (φ1 + φ2 ) ln                                   − φ1 ln
                                          H(φ1 + φ2 )                               Hφ1
If this is true, then the only change made is in group 1.

Proof of Proposition 3

We start by showing this for the case when the household changes only one food group. The
utility loss from reducing the health budget by Z when changing only one group is:
                                                                    
                                1                    Hφ1 − Z
                               Uloss   = φ1 ln                           −m
                                                      Hφ1

A diet is more concentrated the larger is φ1 . We proceed to show that the utility loss from
changing one food group is increasing (less negative) in φ1 :


                                                            Hφ21
                                                                                      
                       ∂Uloss            Hφ1 − Z                                   Z
                              = ln                       +         ·
                        ∂φ1               Hφ1              Hφ1 − Z                Hφ21

                                                        
                          ∂Uloss             Hφ1 − Z               Z
                                 = ln                        +           ≥0
                           ∂φ1                Hφ1                Hφ1 − Z
    This is greater than or equal to zero as long as Hφ1 −Z ≥ 0, which has to be true because
Z ∈ [0, Hφ1 ] (it is bounded between no reduction and completely eliminating x1 from the
diet).
    For the case when a household changes two food groups, we use the optimal change levels

                                                  46
∆x1 and ∆x2 derived in Claim 3 to find that the utility loss is:
                                                                                                        
                                                      φ1 (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z)                            Hφ1
                         U loss = φ1 ln                                                    − ln
                                                          h1 (φ1 + φ2 )                                h1
                                                                                             
                                             φ2 (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z                           Hφ2
                         +φ2 ln                                                − ln                    − 2m
                                                 h2 (φ1 + φ2 )                              h2
   A diet is more concentrated ifφ1 is higher, so we take the derivative with respect to φ1 :
                                                                
                                         H(φ1 Hφ2 ) − Z                         Z
                                ln                                   +                    ≥0
                                          H(φ1 + φ2 )                     H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z
    This is greater than or equal to zero as long as H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z ≥ 0, which has to be
true because when changing two food groups Z ∈ [0, H(φ1 + φ2 )] (it is bounded between no
reduction and completely eliminating x1 and x2 from the diet). Similarly, for a given φ1 , a
diet is more concentrated if φ2 is higher. It is easy to show that the derivative of the utility
loss with respect to φ2 is also positive.
    The above shows that as diet is more concentrated at baseline, which occurs when φ1 or
φ2 are higher, utility losses are smaller. Lastly, we demonstrate that the cutoff for changing
only one food group is decreasing in φ1 .

                                                                                
    ∂m                       H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z                         Hφ1 − Z                     Z           Z
        =           ln                                    − ln                         +                  −
    ∂φ1                       H(φ1 + φ2 )                             Hφ1                  H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z Hφ1 − Z

We want to show that this derivative is weakly negative:
                                                                       
                   H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z                          Hφ1 − Z                  Z           Z
          ln                                     − ln                         ≤           −
                    H(φ1 + φ2 )                              Hφ1                   Hφ1 − Z H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z
    We know that Z ∈ [0, Hφ1 ] since if a household changes one food group it can at most
eliminate that food entirely from the diet. First, consider the case when Z = 0. In this case,
the derivative is exactly equal to zero. Then consider the case where Z = Hφ1 −  for  → 0.
In this case the derivative is negative:
                                                                            
                              Hφ2 +                           Hφ2 +                  Hφ1 −  Hφ1 − 
                   ln                             − ln                             ≤          −
                             H(φ1 + φ2 )                      H(φ1 + φ2 )                       Hφ2 + 
                   |                              {z                           }       |      {z       }
                                                 →−∞                                              →+∞

   Lastly, we show that the derivative is decreasing in Z. Taking the derivative with respect
to Z:




                                                                     47
                     −1          1       Hφ1          H(φ1 + φ2 )
                             +       −         2 +
                  H(φ1 + φ2 ) Hφ1 − Z (Hφ1 − Z)    (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z)2
   Simplifying:

                                  Z                 Z
                                            2 −            <0
                           (H(φ1 + φ2 ) − Z)    (Hφ1 − Z)2
   This is negative as long as φ2 > 0.
   Put together, these results demonstrate that both the number of food groups changed
and the utility loss associated with that particular change are decreasing in baseline con-
centration. Therefore, a household with a more concentrated baseline diet faces an overall
lower utility loss from changing behavior.




                                            48
