                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE CHALLENGE OF HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT




                                   Alan S. Blinder




                               Working Paper No. 2489




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 1988




The Richard 1. Ely lecture presented at the meetings of the American Economic
Association, Chicago, December 28, 1987 and to be published in the May 1988 issue
of the American Economic Review. I am gratefulto Will Baumol, Ben Bernanke, Avinash
Dixit, Bob Eisner, Steve Goldfeld, Bob Gordon, Dan Hamermesh, David Romer, Harvey
Rosen, Bob Solow, and Larry Summers. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the
Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2489
                                               January 1988




                      The Challenge of High Unemployment




                                  ABSTRACT




     It is argued that policymakers, macroeconomists and microeconomists

should all take high unemployment more seriously. The shortcomings of

existing theories of unemployment are discussed, and a new definition of

involuntary unemployment is proposed. A model is sketched in which falling

aggregate demand leads to "Keynesian" unemployment because labor is

heterogeneous and relative wages matter. Microeconomic theory is criticized

for assuming away unemployment and, in the process, radically changing the

answers to some basic questions in trade theory and public finance. Finally,

some speculative explanations are offered for the low unemployment now found

in states like New Jersey and Massachusetts.




                                               Alan S. Blinder
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Princeton Uniersity
                                               Princeton, NJ 08544
     The Ely lecture is an occasion to indulge in big think, to eschew

equations and "speak prose" —— a respite from the daily grind of vector

autoregressions, Euler equations, and phase diagrams. I intend to take full

advantage of this privilege tonight. Judging by past Ely lectures, it is also

an occasion either to celebrate the profession (or one's own contributions to

it) or to chide it. Some combination of flaws in my character and flaws in

our discipline incline me toward the latter.

     My topic is the challenge of high unemployment, one which both

policymakers and economists have failed to meet. The challenge to

policymakers is to reduce unemployment. About this, I will be brief and to

the point. The challenge to economists is to explain high unemployment and

understand its implications for things economic. Here I will dwell longer.



I. THE CHALLENGE TO POLICYMAKERS

     The failure to provide productive employment for all those willing and

able to work has long been one of the major weaknesses of market capitalism.

Since the mid 1970s, it has been shamefully debilitating. If one picture is

worth a thousand words, Figure 1 will help shorten the lecture. It shows

unemployment rates in the United States and the European OECD contries in two

different periods: 1961—1974 and 1975-1985. The contrast is stark.

    The costs summarized in this graph are enormous for the U.S. and

colossal for Europe. And the corresponding Okun gaps, wide as they are,

understate the full costs. A high-pressure economy provides opportunities,

facilitates structural change, encourages inventiveness and innovation, opens

doors for society's underdogs, and yields a fiscal dividend that can be

spent, among other things, on public charity. All these promote the social



                                      1
cohesion and economic progress that make democratic mixed capitalism such a

wonderful system when it works well. A low-pressure economy slams the doors

shut, breeds a bunker mentality that resists change, stifles productivity

growth, and fosters both inequality and mean—spirited public policy. All this

makes reducing high unemployment a political, economic, and moral challenge

of the highest order.

     To make the point in extreme form, think about the U.S. economy during

World War II, when unemployment virtually vanished, the economy flexed its

muscles, and America truly became a land of opportunity. Among the remarkable

features of this period was a 16% rise in real consumer spending between 1939

and 1944 despite the wholesale redirection of economic activity toward war

production. Now imagine that there was no war and all those soldiers and

equipment went abroad to work, not to fight, sending home no goods, just

remittances. But leave in your minds all the rationing and other nasty

Harberger triangles caused by the shortage economy. Ask yourself whether the

utility of the representative American would have been higher under these

hypothetical conditions or under the actual conditions of 1939 —-   or,
abstracting from secular growth, even 1987 for that matter. My suggested

answer, you can tell, is yes.

     A debater's point, you say, for wartime unemployment rates were absurdly

and unsustainably low. Probably so. But remember that just 14 years ago the

unemployment rates (using U.S. concepts) were 3.2% In the United Kingdom,

2.7% In France, and 0.7% in Germany. These are surely not unimaginable

worlds. And think of the social dividend that would be reaped if those

countries got unemployment even halfway back to where it was in 1973. Or

think about the present-day United States. While many people see today's 6%

national unemployment rate as "full employment," the unemployment rate is



                                       2
more like 3-4% in Massachusetts and New Jersey. Those two states and parts of

others do show clear signs of labor scarcity: Help-wanted signs are

everywhere and wages are rising faster than the national average. For all I

know, there may even be people whose marginal utility of leisure exceeds

their wage. But there are no signs of chaos, and shortages of goods and

services are rare. The local economies are, as a matter of fact, doing quite

well, thank you. Wouldn't it be nice if the whole country were in such good

shape? Aren't we wasting something precious if it could be?

     Yet in the United States and, especially, in Europe, those in authority

often accept high unemployment with an air of resignation, as If it stemmed

from acts of nature rather than from acts of man. This is an attitude

conducive to paralysis; and so we wind up with an excess supply of excess

supply.

     The European and American experiences differ both quantitatively and

qualitatively. While there is much we do not know about the details, the

broad outlines of the origins of high European unemployment are familiar

enough. Intransigent trade unions and well-intentioned but unintelligent

governments have erected a web of microeconomic barriers to full employment

that both make labor more expensive and transform wages from variable into

fixed costs. These include (with different weights in different countries)

high minimum wages, excessive severance pay, heavy fixed costs of employment,

restrictions on hiring and firing, support for the closed union shop,

meaningless licensing requirements, heavy—handed workplace rules, and

impediments to geographic mobility.' There is nothing at all "natural" about

unemployment that results from such misguided micro policies, and economists

rightly oppose them.

    But there is also an important macro component to the slack we see in



                                      3
Europe today. And in the United States, which has avoided the horror stories

of European labor markets, restrictive policy is virtually the whole story

behind the Great Recession of the 1980s. Put plainly, governments here and

abroad have used high unemployment to exorcise the inflationary demon.

     Unfortunately, economists are terribly divided on the relative

Importance of the micro and macro explanations for high unemployment. Some

think macro policy played a major role in the drama; others assign it only a

bit part. This internal schism, I am afraid, contributes to the policy

paralysis -- which brings me to the role of economists, beginning with

macroeconomists.



II. THE CHALLENGE TO MACROECONOMISTS

     Every science has its game playing and puzzle solving. It's harmless,

good clean fun, helps sharpen the mind, and occasionally turns up something

spectacularly useful. Economics is no exception, nor should It be. But I want

to suggest that contemporary academic economists have taken a good thing too

far, pushed the game—playing aspects beyond the region of even positive

marginal returns, and disengaged themselves from the practical policy

concerns that affect the lives of millions. We will not contribute much

toward alleviating unemployment while we fiddle around with theories of

Pareto—optimal recessions -— an avocation that might be called Nero-Classical

Economics.

     It wasn't always that way. A century ago, Alfred Marshall concluded the

Inaugural lecture for his chair at Cambridge with these words:

     It will be my most cherished ambition ... to increase the numbers
     of those whom Cambridge, the great mother of strong men, sends out
     Into the world with cool heads but warm hearts, willing to give
     some at least of their best powers to grappling with the social
     suffering around them.2



                                       4
Even after translating the soppy Victorian prose into the modern vernacular,

Marshall's sentiments are frightfully out of touch with the realities of

contemporary academia, where a stubborn fixation on the real world is apt to

be considered boorish, if not downright anti-intellectual.

     Yet is Marshall's ideal really foolishly romantic? Isn't it better than

Nero's? Didn't Keynes have a point when he longed for the day when economists

would be as useful as dentists? Greater concentration on real, rather than

imagined, problems need not make economics less scientific. Why, for example,

are so many scientists now working on AIDS and cancer? Yes, I know that part

of the answer is the one Willy Sutton gave when asked why he robbed banks:

That's where the money is. But another part of the answer is: That's where

the suffering is. It's a good answer, too.

     Don't get me wrong. I am not suggesting that we all forsake mathematics

for social work. Being a do-gooder may not be the best way to do good; nor

should that be the sole concern of a scientist. Nor am I suggesting more

top—notch, policy—oriented research will banish the scourge of high

unemployment. Vested interests, Ideological cant, and sheer Ignorance surely

hold more sway over policy than does economic science. I am suggesting

something far more modest: that a major redirection of the work of hundreds

of economists might conceivably raise the quality of national economic policy

from, say, 3 to 4 on a scale of 10. Hell, Keynes did more than that by

himself.

     As I see it, the challenge of unemployment to macroeconomists is

fourfold: to define Involuntary unemployment, to explain It theoretically, to

give the theory empirical content, and then to devise policies to reduce it.




                                       5
FIRST CHALLENGE: DEFINE IT

     Some economists, you know, lean toward the tautological view that

anything done without literal compulsion must of necessity be voluntary.

Others detect elements of involuntarism whenever constraints become too

constraining. It may be that involuntary unemployment Is like pornography:

It's hard to define, but you know it when you see It.

     Actually, defining involuntary unemployment is no trick at all in the

mythical case of homogeneous labor. If labor supplied exceeds labor demanded

at the going wage, the difference is literally and unambiguously involuntary.

This simplistic view of the world identifies involuntary unemployment with

wages that will not fall -— a point to which I will return. But with

heterogeneous labor the simple definition no longer works, arid the whole

concept gets slippery. What wage do we mean? Which types of labor?

     In the Keynesian oral tradition, the term "involuntary unemployment"

signifies two major ideas. The first is that there are Identifiably bad

times, called recessions or depressions, when the unemployment rate rises and

signs of economic distress are apparent. The second, and more controversial,

is that unemployment tends to be too high on average. Pursuing the analogy to

pornography, perhaps we should treat the term involuntary unemployment as

synonymous with "pornographic unemployment": joblessness without redeeming

social value.

     This suggests an operational definition. Ask the following simple

question of job losers and job leavers: Would you willingly take your

previous job back on the terms now available in the market? If the answer is

yes, the person is involuntarily (or pornographically) unemployed. This seems

a straightforward test whenever there is well-defined previous job, but it

cannot be readily applied to new entrants or reentrants.3 Fortunately, job



                                       6
losers and job leavers constitute 60-70% of total measured unemployment in

the U.S. and about 75—80% of the rise in unemployment during recessions.4 So

conceptual difficulties with new entrants and reentrants are of minor

practical importance. We can probably get an excellent Indication of changes

in involuntary unemployment by looking only at job losers.

     The definition helps distinguish Involuntary (or socially useless)

unemployment from voluntary (or socially useful) unemployment. People who are

enjoying leisure rather than working at what they perceive as unusually low

wages would not be considered involuntarily unemployed since they presumably

would not take their old jobs back on the previous terms. But few of the

unemployed seem to be doing that, and the facts that real wages are (a) close

to a random walk5 and (b) not very cyclical6 cast serious doubt on the

empirical importance of intertemporal substitution in labor supply.

Similarly, people who are actively pursuing productive job search are not

uselessly unemployed. Certainly, there are such people; but probably not

many. We know, for example, that the average job seeker spends only a few

hours a week on search and rarely rejects a job offer.7

     The mention of search brings up the second challenge: explaining high

unemployment theoretically.



SECOND CHALLENGE: EXPLAIN IT THEORETICALLY

     In my view, one main reason for our lack of progress in explaining high

unemployment is that academic economists have spent too much time and energy

debating whether involuntary (or pornographic) unemployment exists and too

little theorizing why. Furthermore, too much of our theoretical debate has

taken place within the confining strictures of homogeneous labor, where the

question reduces to whether and why "the wage rate" is sticky. That Is a



                                      7
reasonable question; but it is not the only question.

    Once we force ourselves to think seriously about the heterogeneity of

labor, the very concept of wage rigidity loses precision. For example, is it

the average level of wages or the structure of relative wages that is sticky?

Instead of sterile debates about why rational people would leave unexploited

Harberger triangles lying on the table, we start thinking about things like

relative status and coordination failures. These are important issues. I

suspect they may be central to understanding high unemployment. But they

simply cannot arise in a homogeneous labor market.

     Let me illustrate by pursuing the tantalizing question raised by search

theory: Why doesn't an unemployed person take the first job she finds while

continuing to look for a better one? As a stylized example, why don't

unemployed steelworkers go to work at McDonald's? And, if they do not, should

we consider their unemployment voluntary?

     The traditional search—theoretic answer is straightforward and almost

certainly wrong. It holds that search is so much more efficient off the job

than on the job that the efficiency gains from searching while unemployed

outweigh the lost income. No evidence supports this hypothesis. We know that

people can search better on the job in some labor markets. Even in markets

where search is best done while unemployed, it is hard to believe that a few

hours of search activity per week interfere unduly with holding a job --

unless geographical relocation is necessary.
     An alternative explanation posits the existence of substantial

transactions costs from taking and leaving an interim job. On this view, the

dislodged steelworker rationally refuses the job at McDonald's because his

in-and—out costs exceed the value of the wages he could earn during a few

weeks spent flipping hamburgers. This explanation is logically coherent and



                                      8
even believable for people who anticipate an extremely short spell of

unemployment.8 But most unemployment is accounted for by long spells. For

example, 54% of all unemployment in 1984 was accounted for by those

unemployed for 27 weeks or more.9 And besides, it Is hard to see how the

In-and-out costs of taking a short-term job could possibly amount to much

more than one day's time. That can hardly explain voluntarily forsaking

several weekst wages.

     Another possibility is that workers who lose "good" jobs worry about

being stigmatized by taking "bad" jobs. I could make this explanation sound

less like pop sociology and more like modern economics by gussying It up with

words like signalling, asymmetric information, and adverse selection. I could

even say It with algebra --   but   not right after dinner. In whatever guise,

the Idea is simply that unemployed steelworkers do not want potential

employers thinking of them as hamburger flippers. To those willing to venture

beyond the confines of neoclassical economics, this is an appealing notion.

But there Is one big problem. An unemployed steelworker can lose the stigma

and keep the income by taking the McDonald's job, omitting It from his

resume, and telling prospective employers that he is unemployed.

     So let me suggest an alternative hypothesis based on a very old idea,

one which all social scientists but economists find compelling and for which

Robert Frank (1985), in particular, has argued eloquently: that people care

deeply about their relative status in society. To be more precise, suppose

utility depends not just on the level of income but also on one's position in

the Income distribution. Suppose further, and this Is the critical leap, that

you retain the relative status attached to your old job until you take a new

one. Thus an unemployed steelworker remains a steelworker --     both   In his mind

and In the minds of others --   until   he takes a new job; then his status




                                          9
changes. If concern about status is high enough and the gap between the

available wage and unemployment compensation Is low enough, the individual

may prefer unemployment as a steelworker to employment on an inferior job.

     Direct empirical evidence on this hypothesis is difficult to come by,

though Frank (1985) has offered evidence for the importance of relative

status in a wide variety of contexts, some of them even biological.10 So,

once again, a thought experiment may help. Suppose a plant closing costs a

steelworker his job. After two weeks of puttering around the house, he walks

past the local McDonald's and sees a Help Wanted sign. Does he walk In and

take the job? I think not. Now     not? Is it because It would interfere with

his job search? Not likely. Is it because he doesn't want personnel directors

at other steel mills to think of him as a fast—food worker? Perhaps. But how

would they know? I suggest that it may really be because he doesn't want his

friends and neighbors -— and, especially, doesn't want himself ——   to   see him

in that low—status position.11

     Though based on concern for social status rather on coordination

failures, this idea is reminiscent of an old Keynesian saw: that workers

resist wage reductions because they are concerned that other wages will not

follow suit. To hone and quantify our intuition, consider the following

simple example that applies to either case.

     Utility for individual I depends on his own real income and on the ratio

of his own wage to some comparison wage, wi/wj. Using Cobb-Douglas utility

for convenience, utility while employed is:



                    U =
                          [)w              U0.

Now suppose the worker loses his job and must choose between accepting a job




                                      10
paying Awj (A < 1) or remaining unemployed and receiving income bwj (b < A)

from unemployment insurance, home production, or whatever. If he takes the

job, utility is:

                           Aw
        (1)
                 U=[__iJCt(xwj)l=xu0.
                      Wj

If
                           i
     he turns it down, he gets:


        (2)        =
                       [
                           Wj
                                ] (bw1) = bU0
Thus he will prefer unemployment to the low-paying job if and only if:

                   (3) b1>x
      When there is no concern for relative status, (ct =   0),    only income

matters and the bad job is preferred to unemployment as long as b < A        .   But
as    gets bigger, the lefthand side of (3) gets larger and the possibility

that the worker might refuse the job grows. A convenient way to look at this

is to ask how large b (the replacement rate) must be to induce the worker to

turn down a job that offers a wage of Xwj. Table 1 tabulates the answer for

various combinations of A and . For example, if      =   0.2,     the worker will

turn down a job paying half his previous wage if his replacement rate is

above 42%. The gap between 50% and 42% may not be exciting. But if a is as

large as 1/2, the critical replacement rate drops to 25% —— meaning that the

worker prefers unemployment and a 75% drop in income to a job paying half his

previous wage.

      Precisely the same comparison arises in the Keynesian case of

uncoordinated wage cutting. If workers assume that those earning wj will not

take a wage cut, they expect to receive (1) if they accept a 100(1-A)% wage

cut and (2) if they refuse and lose their jobs. Condition (3) is thus the

condition for preferring a layoff to a wage cut when you do not expect other



                                        11
wages to fall. It turns out also to be the condition for refusing the wage

cut when you do expect other wages to fall, for if you take a cut and retain

your job, you get X1U0 while If you refuse and lose your job, you get



[.J]a (bw1)' =
                     b1X U0 .      The latter exceeds the former if and only if
   j

(3) holds.

       Perusing Table 1 makes it clear that the value of a is of great moment.

If a   is   small, concern for social status cannot take us very far in

explaining unemployment. If a     is   large, it becomes a powerful explanator. To

"estimat&' a, I again ask you to introspect. Imagine that in one case your

university raises only your salary by 10% while in another it gives k% to

everyone. How large must k be for these two events to give you the same

satisfaction? Table 2 shows some answers for several values of a and raises

of different sizes. For example, if a =      0.2,    a 10% raise given just to you is

as good as a 12.7% raise across the board. Each of you can make your own

judgment, but this strikes me as less concern with relative status than most

real people have. Similarly, the a =      0.8    column strikes me as much more.

Personal introspection tells me that a       is   between 0.2 and 0.5. For example,

if a   = 1/3,   a 10% raise for me only makes me just as happy as a 15.4% raise

for everyone in my university. That strikes me as roughly correct.

       This much concern with relative status is enough to matter. For example,

the entry that would appear in Table 1 for a =         1/3 and A = 0.5   Is 0.35,

meaning that I would rather accept unemployment and a 65% drop In income than

take a job at half my present wage.

       Now what I have just presented is an idea, not a model. It has been said

that an economist Is someone who sees that something works in practice and

wonders if it also works in theory. I will not be so obtuse as to try to




                                            12
                        Table 1

      Replacement Rate Needed to Turn Down Job




.90   .90         .88             .81    .59

.80   .80         .76             .64    .33

.70   .70         .64             .49    .17

.50   .50         .42             .25    .03

.30   .30         .22             .09    .002




                          13
                                      Table 2


                           Utility-Equivalent Raises



           a = 0.2             a =   0.5.               a =   0.8
Just for         For     Just for         For       Just for       For
   You        Everyone      You        Everyone       You       Everyone

    5%          6.3%         5%             10.3%      5%            27.6%

   10%         12.7%        10%             21%       10%            61.1%

   15%         19.1%        15%             32.3%     15%           101%

   20%         25.6%        20%             44%       20%           149%




                                            14
build a theoretical model incorporating this idea at this late hour. But the

dim outlines of such a model are already implicit in an important recent

paper by Laurence Ball and David Romer (1987b). Working with prices of goods

rather than wages of labor, they show that a large real rigidity coupled with

a small fixed cost of changing nominal prices can explain large

non—neutralities of money. By analogy, I conjecture that it is possible to

show that monetary shocks have large effects on employment when workers care

about relative wages and firms have small fixed costs of changing nominal

wages.

    This is just one example of the possibilities that arise once we leave

the mythical world of homogeneous labor-—as I think we should. Happily, the

latest developments in the never-ending quest for microfoundations of

macroeconomics make heterogeneity an essential part of the story. I refer, in

particular, to theories of unemployment based on imperfect information,

efficiency wages, insider-outsider distinctions, and monopolistic

competition. And I would like to see concern with relative wages and

"fairness" Included on this list, maybe at the top.

     Models of labor markets with imperfect information stress such things as

unobservable differences in productivity and inability of management to

monitor the performance of individual workers. The central message of this

burgeoning literature is that wages may not be able to clear markets because

they are too busy doing other things. Insider—outsider models recognize the

inherent asymmetry in the positions of incumbent workers and challengers.

Heterogeneity of goods is, of course, the essence of monopolistic competition

models. And efficiency-wage models provide many reasons why firms might

deliberately set wages above market—clearing levels -—   for   example, to reduce

turnover or to encourage greater work effort.



                                      15
      Each of these approaches contributes something to giving theoretical

coherence to the Keynesian Intuition that unemployment is often too high.

However, I do not wish to oversell the results, for the welfare economics is

a bit dicey. In imperfect—information and efficiency-wage models, "too high"

generally means higher than in some unattainable perfect-information

equilibrium. In monopolistic competition models, output is lower than it

would be under perfect competition. In these cases, policy interventions are

not always called for and, If they are, make not take the form of macro

stabilization policy.'2 Still, I find all this a refreshing departure from

the scholastic dogma of High Neoclassicism.

     However, these new models have so far contributed little to explaining

the changes in unemployment that we observe in time series and that we call

business cycles. Indeed, some seem Ill-suited to the task. Hysteresis models

may be the most promising in this regard, especially in the European context,

for they show how changes in demand can essentially drag supply along —-    in   a


neat reversal of Say's Law.

     Finally, these models shed little light on why nominal shocks have

strong real effects, for each is fundamentally a story about relative prices

or real wages. As I just indicated, one way to transform a real rigidity into

a nominal rigidity is to add costs of changing nominal prices or wages.

Akerlof and Yellen (1985) add fixed costs of changing prices to a model with

efficiency wages.13 Blanchard and Kiyotakl (1987), building on the insights

of Mankiw (1985), do the same in a monopolistic competition model. I believe

combining costs of changing money wages with a strong concern about relative

wages and/or "fairness" is a promising approach to explaining how

fluctuations in demand produce fluctuations in employment.

     This theoretical work Is still in its infancy (some of it is still in



                                      16
utero) and is not without difficulties. While costs of changing prices

certainly exist, it is hard to believe that they are large. That is why Ball

and Romer's (1987b) demonstration that large monetary non-neutralities can

result from the interaction of small nominal rigidities and large real

rigidities is so important. However, costs of changing quantities also

undoubtedly exist; so it is not clear that adjustment costs logically lead to

rigid prices and flexible quantities. Finally, theories based on fixed costs

of changing prices ("menu costs") need to be recast in a dynamic framework

which recognizes that optimal strategies are likely to be variants of the

(S,s) rule of inventory theory in which firms adjust prices at different

tinies.14

     The Keynesian promised land is not yet in sight; but we may, at long

last, be emerging from the arid desert and looking over the Jordan. Let me

use the license granted me on this occasion to peer beyond where we can

really see and speculate briefly on the outlines of a model that is both

theoretically respectable and can be explained in mixed company without

embarrassment. The model I envision —-   but   do not have -- has three main

ingredients.

     The first is efficiency wages, so there is no tendency for labor markets

to clear in the naive neoclassical sense. Large firms, most of which have

market power and some fat in their cost structures, pay wages high enough to

maintain a queue of qualified job seekers and to retain the workers they

have. They do so because turnover is disruptive, because higher wages attract

superior applicants, and, perhaps most importantly, because workers perform

better when they feel they are well paid.15 The result is excess supply and

unemployment in equilibrium. I propose to call this unemployment involuntary,

though nothing of substance rides on the name.



                                      17
        The second ingredient is the hypothesis that workers care deeply about

relative wages. This accomplishes two things. It rationalizes firms'

decisions to pay efficiency-wage premla. And it explains why a worker laid

off from a "good job" may prefer unemployment to a "bad job," at least for a

while. The latter makes it possible for secondary labor markets to clear, or

even to have excess demand, while involuntary (or socially useless)

unemployment exists in primary labor markets.

        Third, small costs of changing nominal wages and prices, coordination

failures ("I'll cut my wage if you'll cut yours"), and notions of fairness16

combine to prevent full adjustments to moderate shocks, whether nominal or

real.

        Consider what might happen in such a model if aggregate demand declines.

Sales fall In many sectors of the economy, but unevenly. Although prices

might drop in sectors experiencing extreme declines In demand, fixed costs

keep most prices fixed. Virtually no wages fall due to firms' fully rational

fears that wage cuts would lead to lower productivity, perhaps because wage

cutting is widely perceived to be unfair.'7 Instead, most firms reduce output

arid employment.

        The cyclically—sensitive durable goods industries will be hit hardest by

a typical downturn. It seems to be an interesting fact, which I will not

attempt to explain, that they also pay very high wages.18 Many of the

workers laid off by those high-wage, cyclical industries will refuse

low—status jobs in less cyclical Industries, preferring to be unemployed

steelworkers than employed hamburger flippers. Falling incomes lead to

still-lower demand for goods, in a Keynesian multiplier process. Social

welfare, I submit, falls.




                                         18
THIRD CHALLENGE: EXPLAIN IT EMPIRICALLY

     Economics is not an art form. So we must not be content with a coherent

and vaguely sensible theory of unemployment -- welcome as that would be. We

must give the theory empirical content, test it, and estimate its central

parameters.

     In a sense, macroeconomics has progressed further on the empirical front

than on the theoretical front. The truth of the matter is that empirical

Keynesian models equipped with Phillips curves that allow for supply shocks

have done rather well lately. Furthermore, the Phillips curve has been one of

the strongest links in the empirical chain. Despite frequent reports of their

demise, Bob Gordon's equations are alive and well and living near Chicago.19

Academic economists jettisoned the Phillips curve not because of empirical

failures but because of a priori theoretical objections.2° If we keep

behaving like that, we may never become as useful as dentists.

     What macroeconomics needs next is to give the new generation of

Keynesian microfoundations some empirical teeth. You can think of this as

providing theoretical justification for the Phillips curve, if you wish. I

prefer to think of it as providing empirical justification for all the

theorizing.



FOURTH CHALLENGE: DEVISE POLICIES TO REDUCE IT

     Logically, of course, this is the last step. But Keynes did not work

that way, and the world will not wait while we perfect our models.

     Observation of real economies suggests that the qualitative effects of

demand management policies are more or less as taught in the elementary

textbooks, or at least in most of them. Among other things, that means there

will be an inflationary price to pay if unemployment is reduced by



                                      19
stimulating aggregate demand. It is the drive to subdue inflation, not any

lack of knowledge about how to manipulate aggregate demand, that has

accounted for high unemployment these past dozen years.

     The nature of the policy challenge depends sensitively on whether or not

the natural rate hypothesis is valid. If it is, then we can do no more than

seek to flatten the Phillips curve or reduce the natural rate by labor—market

policies. That remark is a place to begin a lecture, not to end one, so I

will not pursue it further.

     More enticing possibilities emerge if the natural rate is not so

natural. Suppose, for example, that the equilibrium level of unemployment is

strongly affected by hysteresis. Then a boost to demand might give the

economy much more than a temporary high; it might actually lower unemployment

permanently. My Keynesian instincts tell me that the low—unemployment

equilibrium must be better than the high—unemployment one.

     U.S. data for the 1980s look pretty consistent with the natural rate

hypothesis to me -—   with   a natural rate in the 5.5%—6% range. But there is

room for doubt. However, both the evidence of the senses and econometrics

shun the natural rate hypothesis for Europe,21 where none of the

microeconomic factors comes close to explaining a quadrupling of

unemployment. There a dose of expansionary policy might do the world a world

of good.




III. THE CHALLENGE TO MICROECONOMISTS

     Macroeconomics has long been regarded as the poor cousin of

microeconomics, and with some justification. Surely it is mainly

macroeconomists who have sullied the family name. But that is not because



                                         20
microeconomists have dealt with unemployment better; far from it. For the

most part, microeconomic analysis ignores unemployment, as if it were an

institutional detail of no great import.

     Working within a full-employment framework would be justifiable on

division—of-labor grounds if the premise of the neoclassical synthesis had

been fulfilled. But plainly it has not been. Governments have failed to

maintain anything like full employment and therefore have not created the

conditions under which standard microtheory applies. Alternatively, the

microeconomist's fixation on full-employment models might be legitimate If

allocative decisions neither affected nor were affected by the overall level

of employment. This might be true in some applications,22 but there is no

reason to think It holds generally. Let me illustrate with two examples.



INTERNATIONAL TRADE THEORY

     My first example is trade theory. Virtually all economists support free

trade; but a frustratingly large number of noneconomists do not. Members of

our fraternity are constantly amazed at the depth and strength of

protectionist sentiment, which we view as evidence of either rent-seeking

behavior or low Intelligence. Doubtless, some protectionists qualify under

both rubrics. But I want to suggest there is more to the matter.

     One reason for economists' near-unanimous support of free trade is our

use of the long—run, full-employment framework for policy evaluation. In our

world, workers displaced by foreign competition move into industries in which

our country has a comparative advantage. That can only raise productivity; so

both GNP and social welfare should rise. How, except as viewed through the

distorting lenses of a special pleader, could that be bad?

     But people unencumbered by advanced degrees In economics see trade



                                      21
policy differently. They live in real space and time, where unemployment

truly exists and workers displaced by foreign competition often move into

unemployment rather than into new jobs. So they reason that our GNP will fall

if our markets are opened to free trade. How, except in the strange world of

the economic theorist, could that be good?

     The two world-views generate rather different predictions. Which is

right?

     Consider a concrete example. Korean firms learn how to make television

sets efficiently and want to export them to the United States. The TV

industry and its workers petition Congress for a strict quota to "save jobs."

Economists scoff at the Idea. According to standard trade theory, America can

only gain by opening its borders to Korean TV5. A quota cannot save jobs; it

can only trap labor in an Industry in which the United States has no

comparative advantage.

         Though oversimplified and missing many of the qualifications a good

trade theorist would want, this conclusion probably characterizes the typical

economist's view of the matter. And it is also probably the right view for

the long run. It might even be right for the short run, if the unemployment

rate were 4%. But suppose Korea learns how to make TVs when the U.S.

unemployment rate is 10%. Who can honestly assure a displaced factory worker

that she will quickly find a new job at a wage close to her present one, as

she would in the world envisioned by Ricardian comparative advantage? Isn't

it more likely that she will suffer a spell of joblessness, perhaps a lengthy

one? Aren't these short-run costs relevant to any social decision?

     I anticipate your response and I agree with it: The appropriate solution

is not to erect trade barriers but to pursue a vigorous full—employment

policy so that displaced workers will be quickly reemployed. That is



                                         22
precisely my point. Conditions of full employment are necessary to validate

standard propositions in trade theory. High unemployment calls many of these

propositions into question. Both the positive predictions of trade theory and

its normative prescriptions may be wrong. For example, Brecher (1974) showed

years ago that, when unemployment results from a rigid real wage, free trade

may reduce both employment and welfare. Furthermore, if unemployment were

eradicated by abolishing the wage floor, patterns of trade might reverse.

Those who are wary of free trade may have a valid point in the presence of

unemployment, as even Adam Smith realized.23 At the very least, trade

adjustment assistance should perhaps become a more integral part of the

advocacy of free trade.24

     Now, I am not trying to argue for protectionism. Though we may all be

dead in the long run, someone will be alive. And a nation that protects one

senile industry after another winds up looking like a nursing home for state

capitalism. Economists correctly seek to avoid this outcome. Besides, the

mere existence of unemployment does not by Itself imply that protection is

better than free trade.

     I an arguing, however, that trade theorists could do their job —-    the
job Marshall wanted them to do --   better   if they paid more attention to the

short run. At a minimum, it would narrow the communication gap between

economists and the public. We insist on speaking in a long-run equilibrium

dialect to people who live in a short-run disequilibrium world. No wonder

what we say sounds Greek to them. We could, I believe, spend more time in

their world without abandoning our own. And, If we did, everyone would

benefit. Isn't that an unexploited Harberger triangle?

     The phenomenon of unemployment, of course, is not unknown to trade

theorists; and some interesting work has been done. But ask yourself what



                                       23
fraction of the enormous trade—theory literature deals with unemployment.

10%? 5%? Can that be an optimal allocation of resources?



PUBLIC FINANCE

      My second and last case In point, public finance, is a far greater

offender. Once we get past the sizable literature on unemployment insurance,

hardly any work In public finance even recognizes the existence of

unemployment. Looking at this allocation of scholarly resources tempts me to

prescribe a Pigouvian tax on full—employment theorizing.

      Here is what we typically tell our youth about the Incidence. An excise

tax Is imposed on commodity A. In consequence, the price of A rises and the

quantity falls. Resources released from the A industry migrate into the B, C,

o   ... industries,   where prices therefore fall and quantities rise. In the

end, labor and capital are reallocated, relative prices adjust to the tax

distortion, and another deadweight loss is born -- about which we teach our

students to worry deeply. Chances are that neither the price level nor

aggregate employment ever arises.

      Ordinary people may be forgiven for wondering if something important has

not been left out of the story. Will displaced workers really be quickly

reemployed in other Industries? Aren't they more likely to experience a

transitional period of joblessness, perhaps a long one? And won't the excise

tax raise the price level? Old-fashioned macroeconometric models, you'll

note, share this common-sense view. Plug an excise—tax hike into the DRI or

Wharton model and you'll get back increases in both prices and unemployment.

(You won't get the Harberger triangle, which is a shortcoming of these

models.) Maybe, just maybe, the macro models are right and the micro

theorists wrong.



                                          24
     I am not looking to score debater's points here. My claim is that many

of the most cherished results of incidence theory change fundamentally once

we allow for unemployment.

     Consider, for example, the simple idea that an Increase in an excise tax

raises the price of the commodity to consumers. In one of the few papers on

public finance theory in the presence of unemployment, Dixit (1976) showed

that falling employment might so depress demand that the price of the taxed

commodity actually falls.

     Or consider what may be the most basic theorem of public finance: the

irrelevance of the side of the market on which a tax is levied. We all have

had fun explaining to our beginning students why it doesn't matter whether

the payroll tax is levied on employers or employees. Then why, perhaps we

should wonder, do Congress, labor, and management all think the decision so

momentous? Sheer lack of understanding? Maybe. But maybe not.

     I submit that part of the answer is, once again, that we economists

insist on thinking long-run equilibrium while everyone else lives In

short—run disequilibrium. The truth of the matter is that the incidence of

the payroll tax may differ dramatically in the short and long runs; and, as

Hamermesh (1980) showed with an empirically-based simulation model, the short

run may not be so short.

     To see why, let us trace through what would happen if Congress abolished

the employee's share and raised the employer's share by an equal amount -- a

non-event in the eyes of conventional theory. Initially, contractual wages

are fixed, so both labor costs and take-home pay would rise. That, as we

know, would create excess supply in labor markets, wages would fall, and so

on. You can all complete the story leading to the conclusion that, in the

end, nothing will have changed.



                                     25
    True enough. But the end is not the beginning. By blithely skipping

over the adjustment period, we miss something important. Immediately after

the law changes, firms are paying more and workers are receiving more; so

capital bears the entire burden of the tax change ——   just   as our mythical

Congress intended. Had Congress shifted burdens in the opposite direction,

labor would have lost out in the short run. So Congress's decision really

does matter, at least for a while. No wonder workers and capitalists fret

over where the tax is levied and are mystified by economists' indifference.

We call them myopic. They call us out of touch. Both, I am afraid, are right.

     Essentially this same point underlies an interesting recent paper by

Poterba, Rotemberg and Summers (1986) which shows that a balanced-budget

shift from direct to indirect taxation will reduce employment in a Keynesian

model with nominal rigidities, but not in a classical full—employment model.

In a similar vein, van de Klundert and Peters (1986) coax a number of

fascinating results out of a disequilibrium simulation model reminiscent of

Dixit's theoretical paper. They find, for example, that a sales tax given

back in a lump sum reduces employment dramatically more in the Keynesian

first period than in the classical steady state.

     Thus the differences between the long—run equilibrium results that we

know and love (and teach to our young) and the short-run disequilibrium

results that people actually experience are no mere quibbles. They may be

fundamental. And that may be one reason why our advice so often falls on

deaf ears.

     Once again, the solution is not to abandon long-run analysis. The

long-run questions are important and meaningful, and here economists are

often right and the public wrong. Rather, the solution is to allow some

consideration of short-run employment effects to creep into and temper our



                                      26
analysis.



IV. VISIONS OF SUGAR PLUMS...

     Lest I have failed to say anything provocative so far, let me conclude

by trying once again, on this third night after Christmas, to get visions of

New Jersey --   or,   if that is impossible, Massachusetts -—   dancing in your
heads.

     America now has a remarkable swath of prosperity in its northeast

quadrant. It starts around Boston, runs through most of New England and down

to the New York metropolitan area, then continues through central New Jersey

and Philadelphia and on into Delaware, Maryland, and Washington, D.C.,

finally ending in portions of Virginia and North Carolina. By world

standards, this is a very large economy; and, within it, unemployment rates

of 4% and below are common.

     Three questions cry out for answers. First, what created the boom?

Second, how have these prosperous states managed to sustain such tight labor

markets without blowing the lid off inflation? Third, could the entire United

States accomplish something similar?

     Both New Jersey and Massachusetts moved from the basket cases to

showcases in a scant eight years.25 New Jersey's unemployment rate went from

2.7 percentage points above the national rate in 1976 to 2.3 points below in

1984. Massachusetts' unemployment rate went from 2.6 points above the

national rate to 2.7 points below between 1975 and 1983. How?

     The answers are not well known and are probably not simple. Obviously,

it was not Keynesian demand management by the state governments. However,

rapid aggregate demand growth did play an important role in Massachusetts,

which benefited from strong defense spending and "exports" of high-technology



                                         27
manufactures to the rest of the United States. But New Jersey's economic

renaissance came while its manufacturing sector was dwindling from 33% of

private sector employment to only 23%. Services, especially information

services, and construction led the way.

    At the national level, we understand how to stimulate demand. So the

more interesting question is how New Jersey and Massachusetts have kept

inflation in check despite stunningly low unemployment rates.26

    Two hypotheses can be ruled out immediately. The first is that stingy

unemployment insurance and other tight-fisted government policies lowered the

natural rates of unemployment. None of this is remotely close to the truth in

either state.27 The second hypothesis Is that immigration or, alternatively,

the use of guest workers provided these states with large Influxes of labor

at more or less fixed wages. No such thing happened. In fact, population

growth in Massachusetts and New Jersey has been slower, and wage growth

faster, than in the rest of the country. And I can assure you that New Jersey

sends more guest workers -- we call them commuters --   to   New York than New

York sends to New Jersey.

    The reasons must lie elsewhere. Let me offer two speculative

possibilities. The first is hysteresis. Whether because outsiders became

Insiders, because high employment led to high capital formation, or because

rapid growth stimulated innovation, the equilibrium unemployment rates In

these two states may now be far lower than they were in 1975. If that Is the

explanation, we are left wondering whether the entire United States might do

something similar.

    The second has to do with openness. Each state of the union Is a small

open economy with fixed exchange rates and no trade barriers vis-a—vis the

others. In can therefore acquire the goods its citizens demand at more or



                                      28
less fixed prices in the huge national market. That is why textiles, shoes,

refrigerators, and automobiles cost no more in New Jersey and Massachusetts

than in the other 48. Nontraded goods, of course, are a different matter.

Housing prices in the Boston and Princeton areas (indeed, in all the suburbs

of New York), for example, are legendary. Were these states closed to trade

with the rest of the country, their inflation rates would undoubtedly be much

higher.

     But what about the nation as a whole? America is certainly not a small

economy. Nor is it as open to trade with the rest of the world as Individual

states are with the rest of the nation. Nor is the exchange rate fixed. So,

if the national labor market tightened dramatically, we could not count on an

infinitely elastic supply of imports to keep inflation as subdued as in New

Jersey and Massachusetts. However, we could count on the world market to

provide some moderation of Inflationary pressures in tradable goods -—    at
least as long as the rest of the world was not also in an exuberant boom. So

perhaps the nation, with a balanced monetary and fiscal expansion and

thorough-going free trade in goods (but not in labor), could emulate the

Massachusetts and New Jersey success stories to some degree.

     This is an important respect, I believe, In which free trade helps

support a policy of low unemployment. And I argued earlier that low

unemployment helps support free trade. That raises the tantalizing

possibility of a virtuous circle in which high levels of aggregate demand

create tight labor markets while open international trade moderates

Inflationary pressures. Now, that would truly be a grand neoclassical

synthesis. But, to get there, policymakers, macroeconomists, and

microeconomists all must rise to meet the challenge of high unemployment.

    To do so effectively, we must leave the rubble of academic Star Wars




                                      29
behind us. We must stop arguing over easy questions with known answers (like

whether socially useless unemployment exists), and start worrying about

difficult questions with unknown answers (like which of the theoretical

explanations for unemployment are empirically important). Macroeconomics

these last 15 years has accomplished far too little that would make Alfred

Marshall proud. It is time we gave that grand old man his due.




                                      30
     'Among the many possible references that could be cited, see the special

1986 supplement of Economica or Gennard (1985).

     2A. Marshall, "The Present Position of Economics," in Pigou (1925, p.

174), original in 1885. I thank Avinash Dixit for finding this quotation.

     3Clark and Summers (1979) have argued persuasively that many reentrants

are really job losers. The definition also applies to such people.

     4Data on unemployment by reason are available only for the last four

recessions. In those recessions, job losers and leavers accounted for 70%,

73%, 93%, and 80% of the peak—to-trough rise in the unemployment rate (using

NBER cycle dates). The vast majority of this was from job losers. A

regression of the job loser rate on time, a constant, and the overall

unemployment rate (monthly data, January 1967 to February 1987) produces a

coefficient of 0.75 on the latter.

     5Altonji and Ashenfelter (1980).

     6Geary and Kennan (1982), Bus (1985).

     7Clark and Summers (1979, pp. 54-55). Only 10 percent of unemployed

people in the specIal 1976 job-search survey reported rejecting a job offer.

     81n such cases, intertemporal substitution is also an attractive

explanation.

     9See Summers (1986), Table 5, page 353.

     10lnterviews conducted by Jean Baldwin Grossman (1980) found that most

firms adjusted above—minimum wages promptly after the statutory increase in

the minimum wage in January 1979.

     11As evidence for this, labor economists have found that high previous

wages lead to high reservation wages. See, for example, Kiefer and Neumann



                                        31
(1979).

     12Ball and Romer (1987a).

     13Akerlof and Yellen actually assume what they call "near rationality."

This is equivalent to rationality in the presence of fixed costs.

     14Caplln and Spulber (1987) Illustrate the idea; but their analysis

pertains only to steady states with constant s and S. In reality, s and S

will undoubtedly be time varying. See, for example, the analysis in Blinder

(1981) or Bar-Ilan and Blinder (1988).

     15Akerlof (1982), Akerlof and Yellen (1987).

     16Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1986).

     17 Kahneman et al. (1986), also Kaufman (1984).

     181n part, the high wages are compensation for the volatile emplopment.

But I doubt that this is the whole story, for if low-wage, stable jobs were

just as desirable as high-wage, variable ones, why would there always be

queues of prospective workers at the high—wage firms?

     19Gordon (1988).

     20Blinder (1986), Blanchard (1987).

     21Blanchard and Summers (1986).

     22For example, some micro policies are too small to have meaningful

macro effects (e.g, airline deregulation). Another possibility is that

central bank policy fixes real GNP.

     23Mylnt (1958).

     24Riordan and Staiger (1987) show that trade adjustment assistance is

welfare improving if terms of trade shocks are large enough. In their model,

the unemployment results from informational asymmetries.

     250n Massachusetts, see Ferguson and Ladd (1986) and Bradbury and Browne

(1987). The New Jersey story has been studied much less. See the 18th



                                         32
Annual Report of the State's Economic Policy Council.

     26lhere is no CPI for New Jersey. But inflation rates in both the

Philadelphia and New York City areas have been slightly below the national

average. Inflation in the Boston area has run only slightly higher than

national inflation.

     27The taxpayers' revolt in Massachusetts is sometimes cited; but the

timing is all wrong. Tax cuts began in 1981, but the "miracle" occurred

between 1975 and 1983.




                                      33
                                 Bibliography


Akerlof, George A., "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange,"

   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XCVII, No. 4, November 1982,

    pp. 543-569.

Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Vellen, "A Near-Rational Model of the

    Business Cycle with Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 1985 Supplement, pp. 823-838.

Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen, "The Fair Wage/Effort Hypothesis

    and Unemployment," University of California, Berkeley, 1987,

    unpublished.

Altonji, Joseph and Orley Ashenfelter, "Wage Movements and the Labour Market

    Equilibrium Hypothesis," Economica, Vol. 47, No. 187, August 1980,

    pp. 217—245.

Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "Are Prices Too Sticky?", National Bureau

    of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 2171, February 1987(a).

Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality

    of Money," June 1987(b), unpublished.

Bar-han, Avner and Alan S. Blinder, "Consumer Durables and the Optimality

    of Usually Doing Nothing," January 1988, unpublished.

Bils, Mark J., "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from

    Panel Data," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 93, No. 4, August

    1985, pp. 666-689.

Blanchard, Olivier J., "Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey," National

    Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 2285, June 1987.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic Competition and

    the Effects of Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review, September

    1987, pp. 647-666.


                                      34
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Hysteresis and the

    European Unemployment Problem," National Bureau of Economic Research,

    Macroeconomics Annual 1986, pp. 15-78.

Blinder, Alan S., "Keynes After Lucas," Eastern Economic Journal, Vol. XII,

    No. 3, July-September 1986, pp. 209-216.

Blinder, Alan S., "Retail Inventory Behavior and Business Fluctuations,"

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1981, pp. 443-505.

Bradbury, Katharine L. and Lynn E. Browne, "The State of the New England

   Region," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1987, unpublished.

Brecher, Richard A., "Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of

    International Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1974,

   pp. 98-116.

Caplin, A. and 0. Spulber, "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money,"

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987.

Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Labor Market Dynamics and

   Unemployment: A Reconsideration," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

   1, 1979, pp. 13—72.

Dixit, Avinash, "Public Finance in a Keynesian Temporary Equilibrium,"

   Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 12, No. 2, April 1976, pp. 242-258.

Ferguson, Ronald F. and Helen F. Ladd, "Economic Performance and Economic

   Development Policy in Massachusetts," Harvard University, Discussion

   Paper D86—2, May 1986.

Frank, Robert H., Choosing the Right Pond, Oxford University Press, 1985.

Geary, Patrick T. and John Kennan, "The Employment-Real Wage Relationship:

   An International Study," Journal of Political Economy 90, August 1982,

   pp. 854-71.




                                      35
Gennard, John, "Job Security: Redundancy Arrangements and Practices in

    Selected OECD Countries," OECD, Paris, 1985.

Gordon, Robert J., "The Role of Wages In the Inflation Process,"

    American Economic Review, May 1988.

Grossman, Jean Baldwin, The Response of Wages to the Minimum Wage: Theory and

    Empirical Evidence, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, M.I.T., May 1980.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., "Factor Market Dynamics and the Incidence of Taxes

    and Subsidies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XCV, No. 4,

    December 1980, pp. 751-764.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and R. Thaler, "Fairness as a Constraint

    on Profit Seeking," American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4,

    September 1976, pp. 728-741.

Kaufman, Roger 1., "On Wage Stickiness in Britain's Competitive Sector,"

    British Journal of Industrial Relations, March 1984, pp. 101—112.

Kiefer, Nicholas M. and George R. Neumann, "An Empirical Job-Search Model,

    with a Test of the Constant Reservation-Wage Hypothesis," Journal of

    Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 1, February 1979, pp. 89—107.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A

    Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of Economics,

    May 1985, pp. 529-537.

Myint, H., "The 'Classical Theory' of International Trade and the

    Underdeveloped Countries," Economic Journal, 1958, pp. 317-337.

New Jersey Economic Policy Council, 18th Annual Report, Trenton,

    October 1986.

Pigou, A. C., Memorials to Alfred Marshall (Macmillan: London), 1925.




                                      36
Poterba, James M., Julio J. Roteniberg, and Lawrence H. Summers, "A Tax—Based

    Test for Nominal Rigidities," American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4,

    September 1986, pp. 659-675.

Riordan, Michael and Robert W. Staiger, "Sectoral Shocks and Structural

    Unemployment," Stanford University, July 1987, unpublished.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Why Is the Unemployment Rate So Very High near Full

    Employment?", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1986, pp. 339—396.

Van de Kiundert, Th. and P. Peters, "Tax Incidence in a Model with Perfect

   Foresight of Agents and Rationing in Markets," Journal of Public

   Economics 30, 1986, pp. 37-59.




                                      37
           IJ.'w.i1'   I                t1E3.




                                                LI
                                                     I ¶3 ? .4
'..   I.
                                                     1.•'-J   ?
                                                     1 ¶)         i.




                               ik




                           FIGURE   1
