                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE EFFECTS OF SEXISM ON AMERICAN WOMEN:
                     THE ROLE OF NORMS VS. DISCRIMINATION

                                     Kerwin Kofi Charles
                                      Jonathan Guryan
                                         Jessica Pan

                                     Working Paper 24904
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24904


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2018




We thank seminar participants at the NBER, ASSA Meetings, University of Chicago, UC-
Berkeley, Iowa State University, American University, Princeton University, Purdue University,
the University of Michigan and many colleagues for helpful comments and discussions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kerwin Kofi Charles, Jonathan Guryan, and Jessica Pan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Sexism on American Women: The Role of Norms vs. Discrimination
Kerwin Kofi Charles, Jonathan Guryan, and Jessica Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 24904
August 2018
JEL No. J12,J13,J16,J22,J31,J7,Z10

                                        ABSTRACT

We study how reported sexism in the population affects American women. Fixed-effects and
TSLS estimates show that higher prevailing sexism where she was born (background sexism) and
where she currently lives (residential sexism) both lower a woman's wages, labor force
participation and ages of marriage and childbearing. We argue that background sexism affects
outcomes through the influence of previously-encountered norms, and that estimated associations
regarding specific percentiles and male versus female sexism suggest that residential sexism
affects labor market outcomes through prejudice-based discrimination by men, and non-labor
market outcomes through the influence of current norms of other women.


Kerwin Kofi Charles                            Jessica Pan
Harris School of Public Policy                 Department of Economics
University of Chicago                          National University of Singapore
1155 East 60th Street                          1 Arts Link
Chicago, IL 60637                              Singapore
and NBER                                       jesspan@nus.edu.sg
kcharles@uchicago.edu

Jonathan Guryan
Northwestern University
Institute for Policy Research
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
j-guryan@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction

The average American woman’s socioeconomic outcomes have changed dramatically over
the past fifty years. In the labor market, her wages and probability of employment have
risen substantially compared to the average man’s (Blau and Kahn, 2017); at every age,
she is less likely to have ever been married (Isen and Stevenson, 2008); and she has fewer
children over her lifetime and is older when she bears her first (Bailey et al., 2014). A
large literature analyzes the evolution of these average changes, but virtually no work has
studied heterogeneity in women’s outcomes across markets in the U.S.1 We document large
cross-state differences in women’s outcomes, even within the same geographic region of the
country. These gaps have persisted for decades and we show that that they are not accounted
for by standard individual controls or market-level factors.
        This paper assesses how, and by what mechanisms, cross-market differences in prevailing
sexism affect these persistent residual cross-market differences in women’s outcomes. In
principle, sexism might take many forms but we focus on negative or stereotypical beliefs
concerning the ability or appropriateness of women engaging in market work rather than
home production. Our analysis defines prevailing sexism in a market as the extent to which
its residents believe that: (i) that women’s capacities are inferior to men’s; (ii) that the
family unit is hurt when women focus on activities outside the home; or (iii) that men and
women should occupy specific, distinct roles in society.
        The prevalence of sexist beliefs in the population seems naturally relevant for two forces
that the literature has long speculated partly determine women’s outcomes. One of these
potential forces is gender discrimination. If their sexist beliefs lead some persons to take
actions that make it more difficult or less financially rewarding for women to engage in
    1
     Some factors whose roles in driving average national changes have been studied include the contraceptive
pill (Goldin and Katz, 2002; Bailey et al., 2014); technological changes in home and market production
(Greenwood et al., 2005; Weinburg, 2000; Black and Spitz-Oener, 2010); shifts in occupational sorting (Hsieh
et al., 2013); and women’s educational gains (Charles and Luoh, 2003; Goldin et al., 2006; Blau and Kahn,
2006). Two of the small number of papers to have studied cross-market differences are Beaudry and Lewis
(2014) who study cross-market wage differences; and Black et al. (2014), who study differences in married
women’s labor supply across cities.


                                                     1
a market activity compared to otherwise identical men, then women would experience a
form of “taste-” or “prejudice-based” discrimination (Becker, 1957). Since the aspect of
sexism we study concerns views about women working outside the home, we focus on gender
discrimination in the labor market.2 Prevailing sexism could also affect a woman’s outcomes
by partly shaping her preferences. Since at least Smith (1759), economists have understood
that an individual’s utility function partly depends on the social influences to which they are
exposed, and this idea has been formally analyzed in more recent theoretical work (Akerlof
and Kranton, 2000; Benabou and Tirole, 2006; Acemoglu and Jackson, 2017). As an element
of the social norms that she partly internalizes or adheres to, the sexist beliefs of people
around her might affect a woman’s tastes, expectations, and beliefs, and thereby her choices
and outcomes.
      We assume that any discrimination that people in the market where she lives and works
direct towards a woman is a function of their own sexism and not of the sexism of persons
elsewhere. By contrast, because norms might alter preferences in a long-lasting or even
permanent way, they could affect a person’s decision-making beyond the place and time of
her exposure to them. Thus, wherever she lives as an adult, a woman’s outcomes could be
partly affected by the norms that prevailed where she spent her formative years. Building on
this idea, the paper introduces a distinction between sexism where an adult woman spent her
formative years (“background sexism”), and where she currently lives (“residential sexism”).
Residential sexism, we argue, affects an adult woman through two possible channels: the
norms she currently confronts and perhaps internalizes, and sexism-based discrimination
in the labor market. Background sexism affects an adult woman’s outcomes through the
lasting influence of norms she previously internalized and skills she may have obtained when
younger.
      We measure sexism in different states using data from the General Social Survey (GSS),
which for several years has asked respondents a series of questions concerning their beliefs
  2
     Of course, women may be the victims of sexism-based discrimination in other settings that we do not
study, such as in the housing market.


                                                   2
about women’s capacities, and roles, and place in society. Using a sample of internal migrants
(persons born in one state but currently living in another) drawn from several waves of data
from the Census and American Community Survey (ACS), the first part of our analysis
examines how outcomes for these adult migrants are affected by sexism in their states of
birth and state of residence.
       Estimating the causal effect of background sexism is relatively straightforward, under the
assumption that whether people are born in one place rather than another (and thus into
one level of background sexism rather than another) is as good as random. OLS or fixed
effects estimates of the causal effect of background sexism would therefore not be biased
because of correlation between people’s innate productive traits and average sexism where
they happened to be born. Of course, background sexism might affect productive skills
that women acquire at some point in their lives, even if it is unrelated to traits like innate
intelligence that they were endowed with at birth. We estimate versions of the models we
use to measure the effect of background sexism with and without controls for own schooling.
The education a person obtains is the most important of these acquired traits and likely
strongly correlated with other acquired skills that we do not observe.3
       Unlike background sexism, which one can argue is plausibly exogenously assigned at birth,
an adult migrant undoubtedly selects the residential sexism she faces through her choice of
where to live. To account for potential endogneity bias problems arising from any tendency
of women with certain latent productive traits to sort to locations with particular levels of
sexism, we estimate the causal effect of residential sexism using Two Stage Least Squares
(TSLS). The instruments we use are based on two exogenous costs of migration suggested
by previous work: the physical distance between markets; and the settlement patterns of
previous generations of migrants. The variation that under-girds these instruments has been
used to study domestic and international migration, but never for the questions analyzed in
   3
     If prevailing sexism in their market affects people’s schooling, adding controls for schooling would be
‘’‘over-controlling” since any difference in outcomes arising from the change in schooling caused by larger
background sexism is part of the effect of higher background sexism.



                                                     3
this paper.4 The instruments strongly predict variation in residential sexism, conditional on
background sexism, even for internal migrants from within the same geographic region of
the country.
       We find that among male and female internal migrants, who currently live in a given
state, gender gaps in wages and employment are larger the higher the level of sexism where
they were born. Also, compared to other female migrants living in the same state, women
who were born in more sexist places marry and have their first child at appreciably younger
ages. All of these effects are economically large, ranging between one-quarter to one-third
of a standard deviation for a standard deviation higher level of background sexism. These
results indicate that background norms that she was previously exposed continue to affect
American women’s adult life outcomes, even after they have left the market where they were
exposed to these beliefs.
       To estimate the causal effect of residential sexism, the TSLS models compare persons
who migrated from states with very similar levels of sexism but who were induced to locate
into different levels of residential sexism because of exogenous migration costs. We find
that, holding background sexism constant, adults induced to move to more sexist places by
the instrumental variables marry and bear children younger, and have larger gender gaps
in employment. Interestingly, our TSLS results show no larger gender gap in wages among
workers in states with higher residential sexism. Except for wages, the estimated effects of
higher residential sexism are of the same sign but are much bigger than the corresponding
estimates for background sexism.
       We argue that the measured effect of residential sexism is a blend of the influence of
internalized residential norms plus externally-imposed discrimination. The final part of the
   4
     See Card (2001) and Munshi (2003) for influential work linking pre-existing settlement patterns of people
from ethnic or national groups to the location decisions of subsequent waves of international immigrants.
Several subsequent papers use of the same idea to instrument for immigrant inflows into particular cities
(Card, 2001; Cortes, 2008; Cortes and Tesseda, 2011). In terms of domestic migration, Boustan (2010) ex-
ploits established settlement patterns among black migrants to instrument for black in-migration to different
cities. The idea that distance is a fundamental cost of migration an assumption in numerous models in urban
economics and of migration. Among the papers that have used relative distance to instrument for where
movers locate are Boustan et al. (2010) and Ortega and Peri (2014).


                                                      4
paper explores the importance of the two mechanisms. We first examine how the estimated
effect of residential sexism varies across outcomes and by whether mean sexism is measured
among men or among women. We reason that discrimination should account for a larger part
of the overall effect of residential sexism for labor market outcomes than for non-labor market
outcomes, which it affects only indirectly. In addition, we expect any effect attributable to
discrimination to be at least as strongly related to the sexism of men as to that of women,
since men’s greater prevalence in positions of decision-making authority in the labor market
gives them greater latitude to engage in discriminatory actions. For this part of the analysis,
we measure labor market outcomes using the Current Population Survey (CPS), and we
create selection-corrected wages to approximate the offer wage distribution.
   Regressing adults’ outcomes simultaneously on average sexism among men and among
women in the state of residence, we find that selection-corrected wage and employment gaps
are strongly related to mean male sexism among men but not to average sexism of women.
In striking contrast, when a woman marries or has her first child systematically vary only
with average female residential sexism but not at all with men’s mean sexism. We take these
results to show that the effect of residential sexism on a woman’s labor market outcomes is
due almost entirely to discrimination from men, whereas its effect on her non-labor market
outcomes derives from her internalization of (or adherence to) the sexist norms of other
women where she currently lives.
   To test whether residential sexism’s effect on labor market outcomes is truly due to
discrimination, we next relate gender gaps in these outcomes to different percentiles of the
male and female sexism distributions. Consistent with what a model of taste-based labor
market discrimination against women by sexist men would predict, we find that the gender
gaps in selection-corrected wages and in employment probability in a market: (a) are not
related to any percentile of female sexism; and (b) are negatively related to the median of
male sexism, but not to any other percentile of the distribution of male sexist beliefs.
   The results for women’s non-labor market outcomes are strikingly different. These out-


                                              5
comes are not related to any percentile of male sexism. They also are not related to the
median of female sexism, varying systematically instead with other percentiles of female sex-
ism in the market. The unimportance of the median compared to other percentiles of female
residential sexism contrasted with the findings for median male residential sexism and labor
market outcomes suggests that the latter results arise not because outcomes always load on
the “middle” of a sexism distribution but rather from the causal mechanism of discrimina-
tion. It is also striking that non-labor market outcomes do not load onto any specific part
of the distribution of female residential sexism. This pattern is perfectly consistent with the
operation of norms which, unlike the sharp associations predicted by prejudice-based dis-
crimination models, are not predicted to operate chiefly through any particular percentiles.
   One body of work the paper extends is the previous literature studying gender-related
beliefs and norms. A large literature in sociology has stressed the importance of norms for
women’s outcomes (Kiecolt and Acock, 1988; Burt and Scott, 2002). There is an active
literature in economics on gender norms as well. Some of this work has examined how
beliefs about gender roles affects women’s outcomes across countries (Fortin, 2005) and over
time within the U.S. (Fortin, 2010). Other work has examined how female employment in
immigrant families’ origin countries persist to later generations in the U.S. (Fernandez and
Fogli, 2009; Blau et al., 2011). Alesina et al. (2013) examine the cultural persistence of
gender norms over the very long term. How norms affect decision-making within a family
has been explored by Fernandez et al. (2004), Bertrand et al. (2015) and Bursztyn et al.
(2017). Drawing the formal distinction between background and residential sexism and the
mechanisms by which they operate; accounting for the endogeneity of norms one is currently
exposed to; separating the effect of men’s versus women’s beliefs; and evaluating how sexism’s
influence differs across outcomes and over time are all ways in which our paper extends the
previous literature.
   We also extend the massive literature on discrimination - particularly work studying taste-
(or prejudice-) based discrimination. Charles and Guryan (2008) show that blacks’ labor


                                              6
market outcomes are related to different percentiles of white racial animus exactly as taste-
based model of discrimination of Becker (1957) would predict. These specific predictions are
very different from those we confirm regarding percentiles of sexism and women’s outcomes.
Our results help to bolster the argument that taste-based discrimination may be an important
determinant of outcomes for disadvantaged groups in the economy.5
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents
new descriptive facts that motivate the rest of the analysis. In Section 3, we describe
background and residential sexism and outline the empirical framework for estimating their
causal effects. Section 4 discusses the two instrumental variables and presents first-stage
results. Section 5 presents estimates of causal effects. Section 6 evaluates the relative
importance of discrimination versus norms for the causal effect of residential sexism. Section
7 concludes.



2         Data and Summary Statistics

2.1        Cross-State Differences in Outcomes

We study four socioeconomic outcomes over the period from 1970 to 2017: women’s hourly
wages and labor force participation relative to those of observationally identical men, and the
ages at which women aged 20-40 married and had their first child. Information on marriage
and childbearing comes from the 1980-2000 Decennial Censuses and from the 2012 three-year
aggregate American Community Survey (ACS) (2010-2012), which we combine to create a
“2012” sample. Because the Census/ACS does not track children across households, we infer
how old a woman was when her first child was born from the reported age of her eldest child
living in the same household. This part of the analysis is restricted to women aged 20 to
    5
    For an alternative view, see Flabbi (2010), who estimates a search model of the labor market with
matching, bargaining, employers prejudice and workers labor force participation decisions and argues that
prejudice is not a relevant factor in explaining the slow-down in gender wage convergence in the U.S. in the
1990s.




                                                     7
40 so her the oldest child is likely to be still residing in the mother’s household. Whenever
possible, we follow the convention in labor economics of using the Current Population Survey
(CPS) to measure wages and labor force participation.6 However, as we describe below,
much of our analysis can only be done using Census/ACS data. The two data sources yield
qualitatively similar results for various descriptive exercises, which is reassuring about the
quality of the Census/ACS labor market data. A final note about the data is that in order to
avoid conflating issues concerning gender with the potentially different set of considerations
having to do with race, the paper only studies adult whites.
       The paper focuses on persistent differences across states in women’s outcomes since 1970.
Table 1 presents cross-state summary statistics of the four outcomes studied over the entire
study period, and separately for the early and later halves of that time. The left hand side
of the table shows unadjusted versions of the statistics, and the right hand side presents
conditional measures that have been regression-adjusted for age and education.
       Over the earlier half of our study period, gender wage and labor force participation gaps in
the different states averaged 26.6% and 39.3 percentage points, respectively. Although these
gaps are still disturbingly large, they have declined sharply since the mid-1990s, falling to
15.2% and 21.8 percentage points today, respectively. Women’s non-labor market outcomes
have also changed substantially. For example, whereas the share of women aged 20-40 in
a state who have never married averaged 24% across states between the early 1970s and
mid-1990s, during the latter half of the study period, this mean rose to 41.8%. Similarly,
the cross-state mean age of first birth among women aged 20-40 who have ever given birth
grew by 0.7 years between the late and early halves of the time frame we study.
       While these mean trends may be familiar from previous work, two things in the table
are likely not as well-known. First, the close similarity between the regression-adjusted and
   6
    As Autor et al. (2008) note the point-in-time wage and employment information provided by the
May/ORG make it a superior source of labor market information, and especially information related to
the distribution of wages, compared to the March CPS and Census/ACS, which provide only retrospective
annual earnings information. See the Data Appendix for more details on the construction of the hourly wage
measure.



                                                    8
Table 1: Cross-State Summary Statistics of Women’s Labor Market and Non-Labor Market
Outcomes
                   Table 1: Cross-state Variation in Labor Market and Non-Labor Market Outcomes
                                                    Panel A. Labor Market Outcomes
                                 Unconditional                                         Residual
                   1977-2017       1977-1997        1998-2017          1977-2017      1977-1997       1998-2017
                       (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                          Female-Male LFP Gap
Mean                 -0.162           -0.241          -0.147             -0.159         -0.232          -0.148
SD                   0.031            0.029            0.038              0.030         0.028           0.037
Max-Min              0.122            0.121            0.141              0.118         0.123           0.135
                                            Female-Male Wage Gap, Conditional on Working
Mean                 -0.254           -0.360          -0.206             -0.269         -0.361          -0.251
SD                   0.036            0.039            0.038              0.033         0.036           0.033
Max-Min              0.191            0.189            0.189              0.172         0.169           0.174


                                                 Panel B. Non-Labor Market Outcomes
                   1980-2012       1980-1990       2000-2012            1980-2012        1980-1990    2000-2012
                                               Female Share Nevermarried (Age 20 to 40)
Mean                 0.246           0.243           0.418                 0.168           0.161        0.316
SD                   0.053           0.052           0.054                 0.053           0.049        0.059
Max-Min              0.227           0.219           0.234                 0.217           0.194        0.243
                                                Female Age at First Birth (Age 20 to 40)
Mean                 23.58           23.58           24.28                 23.67           23.58        24.37
SD                   0.655           0.554           0.789                 0.428           0.381        0.484
Max-Min               2.66           2.30             3.19                  1.75            1.55         1.99

No. of states          44             44               44                  44              44             44
     Note: LFP and wage gaps (log hourly wages) are for whites aged 25-64 in MORG/ORG CPS.
     Residualized results control for gender-specific year effects and state fixed effects, years of schooling
     and age dummies. The non-labor market outcomes are estimated using Census/ACS data on white
     women aged 20 to 40 at time t. Residualized versions control for year fixed effects, number of years
     of schooling and age dummies. Data are from the sample of 44 states used in the main analysis
     (ie, states with necessary information in GSS on sexist beliefs).




                                                            9
raw statistics indicate that individual-level controls like age and education explain very little
of average cross-state differences in womens outcomes. The other result in table that has
received very little previous attention is the remarkable stability of cross-state differences in
all four outcomes. Whether measured in terms of the standard deviation or the max-min
gap, neither raw nor regression-adjusted average state-level outcomes have converged over
time. Instead, cross-state differences either remained essentially constant or widened slightly.
       Not only have the size of mean cross-state gaps changed little over time, but each state’s
ranking in the cross-state distribution of outcomes has also been relatively constant. States
where women’s outcomes ranked in 1980s at the top, middle or bottom for any outcomes
relative to other states held essentially the relative positions throughout our period of study.7
Formally, state×year effects add no further explanatory power in state-level regressions with
state and time fixed effects.8 Figure 1, which plots the outcomes over time after collapsing the
states into 9 Census divisions, illustrates the lack of both cardinal and ordinal convergence
in women’s outcomes across states.


2.2       Sexism Data From GSS

Our information on sexism comes from the General Social Survey (GSS). The GSS is a
nationally representative survey that, for several years, has asked respondents various ques-
tions concerning their attitudes or beliefs about women’s place in society. Our analysis uses
responses to the eight questions, which were asked most consistently in the 1977-1998 waves
of the GSS.
       Two of these questions (“Women should take care of running their home and leave running
the country up to men” and “It is much better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever
outside the home and women takes care of the home and family”) elicit beliefs about women’s
and men’s appropriate roles inside and outside the home. Two other questions touch on
   7
     The correlation coefficient between states’ ranking across all states between the first and last year of our
study period for residualized labor force gaps, wage gaps, share ever married by age 40 and mean age of first
child were, respectively, 0.72, 0.6, 0.93, and 0.84.
   8
     See Appendix Table A1 for these results.

                                                       10
Figure 1: Mean Residual Labor Market and Non-Labor Market Outcomes by Census Divi-
sions

  A. Gender Gap in Labor Force Participation              B. Gender Gap in Hourly Wages, Conditional on Employment




  C. Female Share Nevermarried (Age 20 to 40)             D. Female Age at First Birth (Age 20 to 40)




   Note: LFP and wage gaps are estimated using MORG/ORG CPS data for sample of whites aged 25
   to 64. The non-labor market outcomes are estimated using Census/ACS data for women between
   20 and 40. Outcomes are residualized of gender-specific year effects, state fixed effects, individual
   years of schooling, and age dummies. Means are for 9 Census Divisions over time.




                                                    11
beliefs about women’s capacities (“Would you vote a female for President?”, “Are men
better suited emotionally for politics than are most women?”). Finally, respondents’ stated
agreement or disagreement with statements such as “A working mother can establish just as
warm and secure a relationship with her children as a mother who does not work,” reveals
beliefs about whether working mothers can juggle their dual roles effectively.”9
       We drop GSS respondents who are younger than 18, and recode the data so that larger
values reflect higher sexism. Using their responses to all of the eight questions, we create
a unidimensional index of a person’s overall sexism. The sexism index subtracts off from
the individual’s response to each question the average response from the entire population
to the same question in 1977, then divides by the standard deviation in the first year that
the question is asked.10 We next create an aggregated state-level version of the standardized
index by averaging these individual-level measure at each quantile point across survey years.
Each state’s sexism at a given percentile is the average over all years for which we have data
for the state. There happens to be substantial stability in cross-state differences in sexism
over time, even as sexism has declined everywhere. As a result, we lose little useful variation
by taking means over all years that the state is observed.11
       Figure 2, which identifies states by their average overall sexism, shows the geographic
distribution of sexist beliefs. Sexism is highest in the Southeast and least extreme in New
England and the West. The figure shows that there is substantial variation in mean sexism
across states within each geographic region of the country - a fact which we will exploit in
the analysis to follow.
       Before turning to our formal analysis, Table 2 presents simple correlations between the
average level of sexism in a state and state-level means of the outcomes we study. Panel
   9
     See the Appendix Table A2 for GSS variable abbreviation and summary for each of the eight questions
about gender beliefs.
  10
     This procedure is similar to that used by Charles and Guryan (2008) in their study of racial prejudice.
  11
     We see this from regressions that relate state-level sexism to state, year and state×year fixed effects.
Analysis of the R2 indicates that state×year fixed effects account for 13-20% of the variation over times in
state level outcomes, indicating that there is relatively little differential variation in state means over time
and thus little convergence. See Appendix Table A3 for regression results.



                                                      12
                          Figure 2: Mean Overall Sexism in U.S.




Note: Data are from several years of the General Social Survey (GSS). See text for further details.




                                                13
(A) shows simple means of the various outcomes, which have been adjusted only for gender-
specific year effects. Panel (B) shows results after the underlying individual-level data has
been residualized of age and education and year effects. The results show that higher mean
overall sexism in a state is correlated with a larger gender employment rate gap, and with
earlier marriage and childbearing among women in the state. Interestingly, the simple gender
wage gap among workers in a state is not correlated with mean sexism in the state. The same
pattern is evident in Panel (B) of the table. For reasons made clear below, the results in
Table 2 are merely suggestive of a causal link between average sexism in a state and women’s
outcomes. Moreover, it is not clear how these simple associations relate to the mechanisms
through which we believe sexism operates. In the next section, we define these constructs
more precisely and outline the framework and methods we use to estimate and interpret the
causal effect of prevailing sexism on women’s different socio-economic outcomes.



3        Framework and Empirical Approach

3.1        Setup

Let br indicate the set of adults who were born in a particular state b ∈ [b1 , b2 . . . , b50 ] and
who currently reside in a given state r ∈ [r1 , r2 , . . . , r50 ].12 Denote women in a br group
by the indicator variable fbr . Assume that men’s outcomes in the economy are determined
exclusively by two (possibly unobserved) sets of factors: θb , which are individual productive
traits like experience or ability; and ϕr which are characteristics of the market of residences,
such as the quality of public transportation or availability of childcare there. By contrast,
let women’s outcomes depend not only on productive individual and market characteristics,
but also on prevailing sexism, which affects them through two possible mechanisms: market
discrimination and norms.
       We assume that sexism among the people where she lives or has lived affects an adult
  12
       Our empirical work will use data from only 44 states because of data availability in the GSS.


                                                       14
               Table 2: Mean Overall Sexism in State and Women’s Outcomes


                                             Log Wage Gaps,
                                              conditional on
                             LFP Gap (Female working (Female-     Share of Females   Average Female Age
                                 - Male)          Male)            Nevermarried         at First Child
                                   (1)             (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                                     A. Unconditional Outcomes
Sexist Beliefs in State of
Residence                       -0.018***         0.000                -0.046***         -0.520***
                                 [0.004]         [0.007]                 [0.006]           [0.080]
R-squared                           44              44                     44                44
Observations                      0.292           0.000                   0.469             0.406
                                                       B. Residualized Outcomes
Sexist Beliefs in State of
Residence                       -0.017***         -0.005              -0.040***           -0.279***
                                 [0.004]         [0.006]               [0.005]             [0.046]
R-squared                           44               44                   44                  44
Observations                      0.292            0.017                0.458               0.351

Sample                         CPS 1977-2017, Age 25 to 64         Census/ACS 1980-2012, Age 20 to 40
Note: The table reports coefficients (standard errors) from OLS regressions of various outcomes on
mean sexism in state. The labor market outcomes are estimated from white men and women aged
25-64 in 1977-2013 May/ORG CPS. Non-labor market outcomes in columns (3) and (4) use data
on white women aged 20-40 from 1980 to 2000 Census and 2012 ACS. Unconditional regressions
include state fixed effects and gender-specific year effects. Regressions for residualized results
include controls for years of schooling and age dummies. Robust standard errors weighted by the
inverse of the variance of the outcome reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1%, **5%, *10%.




                                                   15
woman through two types of mechanisms: norms and discrimination. We use the term
“norms” to refer to the set of social conventions, mores and influences with which a per-
son comes into contact. One type of norms, which we call background norms, Nb , are the
social influences and mores in the place where she grew up and which affect the traits and
preferences that a woman brings into her adulthood. Exposure to these norms during her
formative years potentially determine a woman’s preferences through internalization or un-
conscious emulation. In addition, through pre-market discrimination, norms where she was
born and raised might have led people and institutions there to provide her with different
training or education during her youth relative to what was provided to boys, or caused her
to make different human capital investment relative to boys.
       Apart from the skills and elements of her preferences that were determined earlier in
her life partly from exposure to background norms, two other forces determine her adult
outcomes. One of these is the influence of what we call residential norms. These are social
mores and practices in the market where she currently lives. The second force operating on
an adult woman of a given level of skill is market discrimination, Dr . Following the standard
formulation in economics, we define market discrimination as the amount by which others’
actions reduce the economic payoff an adult woman gets from market activity relative to
that of an otherwise identical man doing the same thing.13
       We assume that these three forces - the things that determine skills and preferences a
woman brings into adulthood, the influence of social mores she encounters as an adult, and
any market discrimination she faces - are functions of prevailing sexist beliefs in the relevant
markets. Specifically, we assume that


                                          Nb = δ b S b + u 1

                                          Nr = δ r S r + u 2                                       (1)

                                          Dr = β S r + u3
  13
    The paper studies discrimination against adult women in the labor market and not in other settings,
such as the housing market.


                                                  16
where S b is mean overall sexism where the woman was born and S r is average overall sexism
where lives. Residential sexism is an element of the norms that she’s currently exposed to
and is the basis upon which some persons discriminate against her when she engages in labor
market activity. These effects are captured by the terms β and δ r . Although she no longer
lives there, background sexism potentially affects her current outcomes because the norms
where she grew up may have affected enduring aspects of her latent preferences and skills.
This effect is captured by the parameter δ b . The mean-zero terms u1 , u2 , and u3 represent
all other determinants of discrimination and the two types of norms.
    Mean outcomes for br persons, Ybr , are given by the sum of the “neutral” components
θb and ϕr , which affect both men and women, plus a portion attributable to discrimination
and norms, which affects only women. That is,


                            Ybr = fbr (Dr + Nr + Nb ) + θb + ϕr .                         (2)


To avoid clutter, we suppress observable controls in (2) and throughout the paper. Substi-
tuting from (1) yields the main regression equation in the paper


                        Ybr = fbr [(β + δ r )S r + δ b S b ] + θb + ϕr + vbr              (3)


where vbr is a random, mean-zero statistical error. We seek to estimate the causal parameters
β, δ r and δ b .


3.2      OLS: Specification and Bias Concerns

Inherited, pre-determined ability such as innate “intelligence” or “motivation” are typically
assumed to be randomly distributed across people at birth. OLS or fixed-effects estimates
of the causal effect of background sexism, δ b , should therefore not be biased because of
correlation between these latent traits people are born with and the level of sexism that



                                                17
prevailed where they happen to have been born.14
       Unlike pre-determined abilities, skills that people invest in or are provided during their
formative years, most notably the amount and quality of their schooling, might be affected
by the amount of sexism where they were born and raised. To account for the possibility
that the causal effect of background sexism on adult outcomes operates in part by changing
agents’ education, our preferred OLS models for estimating δ b do not control for education.
The resulting estimated coefficient on the background sexism captures the part of its effect
on outcomes that operates through schooling. By contrast, our preferred specifications for
estimating the effect of residential sexism always control for schooling, which is in general de-
termined before the person’s exposure to residential sexism. This approach follows standard
procedure in the discrimination literature, which focuses on differences in outcomes between
adults, holding constant their level of observable skill (education). In the Appendix, we
present results showing that for both background and residential sexism, our main results
are generally unaffected by whether we control for education or not.
       Because of possible systematic sorting, OLS performed on (3) is unlikely to yield unbiased
estimates of the two causal effects of residential sexism, β and δ r . Women might choose
where to live based on locations’ levels of sexism directly or on the basis of other market
characteristics that are correlated with market sexism. Residential sexism could therefore
be endogenous in a naive OLS regression like (3), so that the observed relationship between
higher sexism in a market and the outcomes of women living there reflects both the causal
effect of sexism plus the fact that women with particular latent traits are more likely to
live in such places in the first place. We use Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) methods
to deal with the possible endogeneity of residential sexism. Using TSLS also addresses any
measurement error bias arising from the fact that our analysis treats a person’s labor market
as their state of residence which almost certainly mis-measures their true labor market - the
place where they live, work and socially interact.
  14
    This assumption is implicit in previous papers studying the effect on immigrants’ outcomes of cultural
practice in countries from which they moved to the U.S.


                                                   18
    It is worth emphasizing that even after endogeneity bias has been accounted for, the
estimated effect on residential market sexism from the TSLS analysis is the sum of the causal
effect of discrimination plus the causal effect of internalized residential norms - (β+δ r ). In the
final part of our analysis we attempt to shed light on the importance of the two mechanisms
of discrimination and internalized residential norms for residential sexism. We focus first on
the more fundamental problem of obtaining an unbiased estimate of the causal effect of S r in
equation (3). Below, we outline our approach for isolating exogenous variation in residential
sexism for use in the TSLS analysis.



4     Exogenous Variation in Residential Sexism

4.1    Determinants of Migration Decision

The potential endogeneity problem in (3) for which TSLS is intended to correct is that the
level of residential sexism observed for migrants born into a given level of background sexism,
is a function of the latent productive factors θb and ϕr . We assume that, in general, the
residential sexism chosen by migrants born in state b, who therefore had background sexism
S b , may be written


                       S r (b) = γS b + ρ1 Z1 (∆bj ) + ρ2 Z2 (κbj ) + θb + ϕr + ξbr ,           (4)


where ξbr is a random error term. The two terms Z1 and Z2 , are functions that depend on
fixed costs of migration that must be incurred by anyone (whatever their individual traits)
who moves between locations. They are the source of exogenous variation in the TSLS
analysis.
    The variable ∆bj is a vector measuring the distance between the state b from which a mi-
grant moves to every other state j (measured as the distance between the states’ population-
weighted centroids). Relative distance is a fixed migration cost, meant to reflect the fact


                                                    19
that it is simply logistically more difficult for people to move farther from their initial loca-
tions, irrespective of their individual traits or features of the two markets. (See, for example,
Boustan et al. (2010) and Ortega and Peri (2014)).
   Figure 3 assesses the plausibility of this assumption for internal migrants in the U.S.
whom we study. Focusing on all adults across multiple Census years living in states dif-
ferent from where they were born, the figure is a histogram of the distances between the
migrants’ states of residence and states of birth. Since other factors besides relative distance
determine migrants destinations the plotted relationship does not decline perfectly smoothly.
Nonetheless, the figure clearly shows that internal migrants in the U.S. are systematically
less likely to move to states that are farther away, irrespective of the state from which they
are moving. If the probability that a migrant leaving b ended up in j, in fact, depended
systematically only on how relatively far j is from b compared to other other destinations,
plus some random error, the expected level of residential sexism observed among migrants
from b would be given by
                                                   X
                                     Z1 (∆bj ) =          S j /∆bj .                         (5)
                                                   b6=j

An equivalent way to think of Z1 (∆bj), then, is as the portion of the expected residential
sexism for migrants moving from states with sexism S b that is attributable to the exogenous
relative spatial location of various states.
   The existing literature suggests that where previous generations of migrants from given
initial location have historically settled represents a second fixed cost of migration for the
subsequent movers. Various papers, mostly studying international migration, posit that
the “enclaves” formed by previous migrants affect the ease with which later movers can
adjust to different possible destinations (see, for example (Card, 2001)). These historical
migration patterns thus represent a plausibly exogenous driver of the location choices of
current migrants, since the factors that drove previous waves of migrants to settle where
they did are arguably otherwise unrelated to later migration decisions.
   The internal migrants studied in this paper moved from their states of birth after 1970.

                                               20
  Figure 3: Distance of States Residence from States of Birth Among U.S. Migrants
              Figure 3: Distance from State of Birth among Internal Migrants




  Note: Data are from several years of the Census and ACS. See text for details.
Notes: The data is from the 1990 Census.




                                                21
We proxy for pre-existing enclaves these migrants confronted using the share of people born
in state b who lived in a different state j in 1970, or κbj . Using the same logic used for relative
location of a birth state, the portion of current location decisions of migrants’ attributable
to exogenous pre-existing migration patterns is given by

                                                   X
                                     Z2 (κbj ) =          S j × κbj .                           (6)
                                                   b6=j



    Given the foregoing, equation (4) is a first stage regression for the endogenous variable
S r in equation (6), where Z1 (∆bj ) and Z2 (fbj ) are instrumental variables whose “strength” is
captured by the parameters ρ1 and ρ2 . Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) regression performed
on this system allows us to estimate the causal effect of residential sexism - β + δ r .


4.2     First-Stage Results

The two panels of Figure 4 illustrate the variation the two instrumental variables isolate. The
x-axis of Figure 4a is mean sexism in different states of birth. Although there is substantial
variation in background sexism, many states have very similar levels of S b . For example,
migrants from Massachusetts and Maryland were born into very similar background sexism.
The y-axis in the figure plots the value of the instrumental variable based on distance,
Z1 (∆bj ).
    The figure shows that the component of migrants’ destination decision attributable exclu-
sively to the exogenous accident of where their state of birth is located geographically relative
to all other states predicts that migrants from Maryland and Massachusetts would move to
markets with very different levels of sexism. Looking across the figure, one sees similar vari-
ation for different pairs of states with similar background sexism - Pennsylvania/Louisiana,
Tennessee/West Virginia and New York/Ohio to name some examples. Figure 4b repeats
this exercise for the instrumental variable Z2 (κbj ), which is based on the amount of historical
migration flows from the origin state (pre-existing “enclaves”). Here also one sees substan-


                                                   22
tial variation in predicted residential market sexism, conditional on the level of background
sexism from which the migrant comes.
       Whether Z1 (∆bj ) and Z2 (κbj ) are valid instruments for the TSLS analysis depends on
how much of the variation in S r (b) they explain, holding constant S b . The first stage results
in Table 3 answers this question. We conduct this analysis on the main sample of internal
migrants in the Census/ACS, born in states of birth b and living in different states r. We
collapse the more than 6 million individual observations on adult male and female migrants
down to (state of birth × state of residence × gender × year) cells, yielding slightly more
than 15000 observations once empty br cells with no reliable sexism data are dropped.15
       The regressions in Table 3 relate sexism in the market to which a given group of migrants
move to the two instrumental variables. All the models in the table control for the migrant
group’s background sexism, and include fixed effects for the Census region of state b, inter-
actions between region effects and gender fixed effects, and interactions between year fixed
effects and gender dummies. The results in the first two columns show that each of the IVs
is separately strongly related to residential sexism, and explains a sufficiently large portion
of the variation in the potentially endogenous regressor to remove any “weak instrument”
concern. This is especially true of the “enclave” or “historical settlement pattern” measure,
for which the F-stat of 33 far exceeds the conventional threshold of 10. When the two vari-
ables are entered simultaneously, only the enclave IV remains strongly significant. This is
not surprising; where migrants settled in the past was likely based on temporary factors from
that time period plus the historically important propensity to not move too far from home.
Again the F-stat on the pair of IVs is comfortably above 10.
       One might be concerned that the IVs could be correlated with the labor market traits
or family and marriage preferences of migrants. For example, perhaps being (exogenously)
surrounded by a particular level of average sexism in nearby states causes only certain types
  15
     It should be noted that we use different samples for the labor market and non-labor market results. The
latter uses only women, so has about half the number of observations after collapsing the individual-level
data. We conduct a separate first-stage analyses using the sample on which the subsequent TSLS analysis
is performed. The first stage results are very similar across samples.


                                                    23
Figure 3A: Relationship between Predicted Sexism based on Geographic Distance in State of Residence and
                                         Sexism in State of Birth
  Figure
Figure  3A:4:Relationship
              Predicted between
                          Residential Sexism
                                 Predicted    based
                                           Sexism    on:on(a)
                                                  based        DistanceDistance
                                                            Geographic  Betweenin State
                                                                                  State ofofResidence
                                                                                             Birth andand
  Other States and, (b) Historical Destination      of Previous
                                         Sexism in State of Birth Migrants from State of Birth




Figure 3B: Relationship between Predicted Sexism based on 1970 Mobility Patterns in State of Residence and
                                         Sexism inSexism
                        (a) Predicted Residential  State ofGiven
                                                            Birth Relative Location
Figure 3B: Relationship between Predicted Sexism based on 1970 Mobility Patterns in State of Residence and
                                         Sexism in State of Birth




                      (b) Predicted Residential Sexism Given Historical Migration



                                                   24
Table 3: First Stage Results: Effect of Relative Distance and Enclave Instrumental Variables
on Residential Sexism

                                                                 LFP sample
                                               Outcome: Overall Sexism in the State of Residence
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)
            Distance IV                        0.258***                     0.066        0.067
                                                [0.068]                    [0.064]      [0.065]
            Enclave IV                                      0.264***      0.232***     0.232***
                                                             [0.046]       [0.041]      [0.040]

            F-stat of excluded instrument        14.6          33.2          19.0         19.5

            Controls:
            Outmigration Rate                                                              X
            Overall Sexism in State of
            Birth*Female                          X             X             X            X
            Overall Sexism in State of Birth      X             X             X            X
            Region of Birth FE                    X             X             X            X
            Female*Year FE                        X             X             X            X

            Observations                        15,103       15,103         15,103      15,103
            R-squared                            0.074        0.083          0.083       0.083
    Notes: The data are from the 1980, 1990, 2000 US Census and 2010-2012 ACS (3-year aggregate).
    The sample is restricted to whites age 25 to 64 for the labor market outcomes and age 20 to 40 for
    the non-labor market outcomes (females only) who are not currently living in their state of birth.
    Sexist beliefs are normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation 1 across the 44 states
    with available information to construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS (excluding DC). The
    Distance and Mobility IV are standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the sample
    of states.




                                                      25
of people to move in the first place compared to people in places where the nature of sexism
in nearby states is different. Our analysis compares migrants who grew up in the same level
of sexism. Suppose that persons from states with similar background sexism have the same
distribution of preferences regarding the sexism they would like to live under as adults, all
else equal. Then, to the degree that the propensity to migrate in the first place is driven by
sexism in neighboring states, the fraction of people migrating from two states with similar
sexism but with different levels of the IVs should differ systematically. The regressions in
the fourth column of the table adds the out-migration rate from each origin state b as a
control to account for at least some of the latent traits of migrants that could be correlated
with the IVs. The results show that this control does not change the main conclusion of the
first stage analysis.16



5      Benchmark Causal Effects

This section presents the main benchmark estimates of the effects of the two types of sexism
on adults’ various outcomes. We first show results for background sexism, then present and
discuss TSLS estimate of the effect of exposure to higher residential sexism.


5.1     Fixed Effects Estimates for Mean Background Sexism

Our estimates of the causal effects of background sexism come from fixed-effects regressions
which are variants of regression (3) and of the form:


                                   k
                                  ybr = δ b (fbr × S b ) + Γr + θb + ubr                                (7)


where Γr is a vector of state of residence fixed effects. Under our assumption that the
community into which someone is born is randomly assigned, S b is uncorrelated with the
  16
    In the TSLS below, the results are essentially unaffected by which of the four first-stage specification
shown in the four columns of Table 3 the analysis uses. Results for these various exercises available upon
request.


                                                    26
error term in the regression. Obviously, any feature of the state of residence, including its
level of sexism and fixed features ϕr are subsumed in the state of residence fixed effects in
regression (7). Below, we estimate the causal effect of S r using the TSLS approach described
previously.
   In (7), δ b measures the causal effect on migrants’ adult outcomes where they live now of
the level of overall sexism into which they were born. Table 4 presents the regression results.
Recall, because background potentially partly determines the skills and preferences that a
person brings into adulthood it could affect both men’s and women’s adult outcomes. The
coefficient for the level sexism variable in the table is the estimated effect for men, while the
coefficient on sexism term that is interacted with the female dummy variable measures the
differential effect for women. The first two columns show results for labor market outcomes.
As seen in Column (1), labor force participation rates are lower for men born in states with
higher levels of overall sexism. Higher background sexism has a significantly larger impact on
women’s labor force participation relative to the effect for men. The results imply that, for
groups of migrants currently living in the same state, gender gaps in labor market outcomes
are bigger the higher the amount of sexism in their states of birth.
   For a sense of the magnitude of these estimated effects, a standard deviation increase in
sexism in one’s state of birth (approximately the difference between having born in California
rather than Mississippi, or in Minnesota rather than Texas) reduces men’s labor force partic-
ipation rate by 0.9 percentage points. For women, the same increase in the amount of sexism
in their state of birth reduces labor force participation rates as adults by an additional 0.7
percentage points. The decline in relative female labor force participation associated with a
one-standard deviation increase in sexism in one’s state of birth is about 3.5 percent of the
mean unconditional female-male labor force participation gap across migrants’ states of birth
and close to 40 percent of the standard deviation of gaps across states. A standard deviation
increase in average sexism is roughly the same size as the interquartile range across states.
The results for the wage gap among workers shown in the second column are qualitatively


                                               27
similar, albeit not statistically significant.
       For both labor force participation and wages, we estimate versions of (7) that control
for own education, age, and the mean NAEP reading and math test scores in the state of
birth.17 Controlling for these measures does not affect estimates effect of background sexism
on women’s labor force participation relative to men’s, but causes the estimated effect for
men to go to zero. For men’s wages too, we find no effect of background sexism after
accounting for education. These results indicate that the effect of higher background sexism
for men in Table 4 operate entirely through the schooling people are provided because they
were born and raised in a more sexist place. However, higher background sexism worsens
women’s labor market outcomes beyond anything having to do with this general education
effect.
       The third and fourth columns of Table 4 show results for migrant women’s non-labor
market outcomes. The samples on which these regressions are run contain only women
aged 40 or less. Again, the estimated effects of background sexism are large and strongly
statistically significant. For two adult women living in the same state but born elsewhere,
the one from a state where sexism one standard deviation higher is 2.1 percentage points
more likely to have been married and is bear her first child approximately 0.2 years sooner.
These very strong effects are not significantly affected by controlling for own or state level
education (see last four columns of Appendix Table A4). This suggests that the sexism where
women were born (and likely raised) affects their outcomes through channels other than
their schooling. As we have argued, a good candidate explanation is that being exposed to
sexist norms earlier in life affects her preferences, with consequences for her decision-making
throughout her life.
  17
       See Appendix Table A4.




                                                 28
Table 4: Effect of Background Sexism on Labor Market and Non-Labor Market Outcomes
    Table 3: Effects of Sexist Beliefs in State of Birth on Labor Market Outcomes and Non-Labor Market Outcomes

                                      Labor Force     Log Wages, conditional
                                      Participation        on working          Never Married    Age at First Birth
                                           (1)                   (2)                (3)              (4)
                                                  All Migrants                      Female Migrants Only
  Sexist Beliefs in State of Birth:
  Overall*Female dummy                -0.007***               -0.003
                                        [0.002]               [0.003]
  Overall                             -0.009***               -0.008            -0.021***          -0.196***
                                        [0.003]               [0.006]             [0.003]            [0.045]

  Controls:
  State of Residence*Female FE             X                     X
  Female*Year FE                           X                     X
  State of Residence FE                    X                     X                   X                  X
  Year FE                                  X                     X                   X                  X
  Region of Birth FE                       X                     X                   X                  X

  Observations                       15,103             15,063              7,522            7,453
  R-squared                           0.928              0.927              0.801            0.769
   Note: The table reports coefficients (standard errors) from OLS regressions of residual state-level
   female-male employment and log hourly wage gaps on sexist beliefs in the state of birth. Residual
   female-male employment and wage gaps are estimated using the sample of whites age 25 to 64
   from the 1977-2017 May/ORG CPS data and control for years of schooling, age dummies, gender-
   specific year effects and state fixed effects. The non-labor market outcomes are from a sample of
   white females age 20 to 40 from the 1980 to 2000 Census and 2010-2012 ACS (3-year aggregate)
   and control for the number of years of schooling, age dummies and year fixed effects. Sexist beliefs
   are normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation 1 across the 44 states with available
   information to construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS. Robust standard errors weighted
   by the inverse of the variance of the outcome reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1%, **5%,
   *1%.




                                                         29
5.2       TSLS Estimates for Mean Residential Sexism

We next present TSLS estimates of the effect of residential sexism on migrants’ outcomes.
In principle, these results account for endogeneity and measurement error problems in naive
OLS models, which are also shown in the table for easy comparison. The TSLS models use
both the relative-distance and historical settlement pattern instrumental variables discussed
above.18 Analogous to Table 4, the coefficient on the un-interacted residential sexism variable
is the estimated effect of higher residential sexism on men, while the coefficient on the
sexism variable that is interacted with gender is the differential effect for women. In this
TSLS framework, these causal effects measure how their outcomes are affected for migrants
induced to live in a particular level of residential sexism because of the instruments. Recall
that the regressions control for mean sexism in the state of birth so the estimated residential
sexism are from comparisons of persons born into similar background sexism.
       The labor market results in Table 5 indicate that living in a more sexist state has no effect
on the likelihood that a man participates in the labor force. This result holds for both the
OLS estimates in column (1) and for the TSLS results in columns (2) and (3). By contrast,
we find that higher residential sexism has a strong negative effect on a woman’s labor force
participation. Together, these estimates imply that higher residential sexism decreases the
relative labor force participation rate of women compared to men who were born into the
same level of background sexism. The results in columns (4)-(6) of Table 5 show that higher
residential sexism significantly lowers wages of men, with OLS and TSLS estimates that
are nearly identical. Interestingly, unlike the participation results, we find no larger adverse
effect on women’s wages compared to men’s from higher sexism where they live. Thus, our
results imply that higher residential sexism does not increase gender wage gaps conditional
on employment.
       Table 6 presents TSLS estimates of the effect of residential sexism on women’s non-labor
  18
    TSLS results from models that use only one of the instruments are qualitatively similar and are available
on request.




                                                     30
   Table 5: TSLS Estimates of Effect of Residential Sexism on Labor Market Outcomes

                                                     Labor Force Participation              Log Wages, conditional on working
                                              OLS                     TSLS                 OLS                     TSLS
                                               (1)             (2)               (3)        (4)            (5)              (6)
     Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
     Overall*Female Dummy                    -0.011**       -0.033***        -0.033***     -0.004         0.023             0.023
                                              [0.004]        [0.010]          [0.010]     [0.008]        [0.022]           [0.022]
     Overall                                   -0.005         -0.003           -0.002    -0.067***      -0.068**          -0.062**
                                              [0.003]        [0.005]          [0.006]     [0.014]        [0.028]           [0.027]

     Controls:
     Outmigration rate in state of birth                                         X                                           X
     Overall Sexism in State of
     Birth*Female                               X               X                X          X              X                 X
     Overall Sexism in State of Birth           X               X                X          X              X                 X
     Region of Birth FE*Female                  X               X                X          X              X                 X
     Female*Year FE                             X               X                X          X              X                 X

     Outcomes residualized of:
     Education, Age dummies                     X               X                X          X              X                 X

     Observations                            15,103          15,103           15,103      15,103         15,103           15,103
     R-squared                                0.917           0.906           0.907        0.823          0.819            0.818
Note: The data from the 1980, 1990, 2000 US Census and 2000-2012 ACS (3-year aggregate). The sample is
restricted to white individuals age 25 to 64 who are not currently living in their state of birth. Sexist beliefs
are normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation 1 across the 44 states with available information to
construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS (excluding DC). In Columns (2) and (3), sexist beliefs in the
state of residence (Overall*Female and Overall) are instrumented using both the Distance and Mobility IVs,
respectively. ***significant at 1%, **5%, *1%.



market outcomes. Recall that the regression in this table are estimated on the sample of
women aged 40 or less. The results show that, compared to other women who were born
into similar levels of sexism, female migrants living in more sexist states are more likely to
have ever married and bear their first child at appreciably younger ages. These patterns
are found both in the OLS regressions and in the preferred TSLS models. The OLS and
TSLS estimates are both strongly statistically significant and do not appreciably differ in
magnitude. Compared to the fixed effects results in Table 4 the estimates in Table 6 indicate
that, whereas the two types of sexism act in the same direction on a woman’s marriage and
age of first childbearing, the effect of residential sexism on these outcomes is substantially
larger - nearly two and a half times as big as the effect of the sexism into which she was born
as a child.
    Overall, our benchmark causal estimates indicate that both background and residential

                                                                     31
Table 6: TSLS Estimates of Effect of Residential Sexism on Non-Labor Market Outcomes

                                                    Never Married (Age 20 to 40)       Female Age at First Child (Age 20 to 40)
                                               OLS                   TSLS                OLS                    TSLS
                                                (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)
     Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
     Overall                                 -0.029***      -0.039***      -0.037***   -0.197***      -0.197**       -0.242**
                                              [0.006]        [0.011]         [0.012]    [0.035]        [0.090]        [0.090]
     Controls:
     Outmigration Rate in State of Birth                                       X                                         X
     Overall Sexism in State of Birth           X               X              X          X               X              X
     Region of Birth FE                         X               X              X          X               X              X
     Year FE                                    X               X              X          X               X              X
     Outcomes residualized of:
     Education, Age dummies                     X               X              X          X               X              X
     Observations                             7,522           7,522          7,522      7,453           7,453         7,453
     R-squared                                0.698           0.690          0.693      0.481           0.481         0.480
Note: The data from the 1980, 1990, 2000 US Census and 2000-2012 ACS (3-year aggregate). The sample is
restricted to white females age 20 to 40 who are not currently living in their state of birth. Sexist beliefs are
normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation 1 across the 44 states with available information to
construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS (excluding DC). In Columns (2) and (3), sexist beliefs in the
state of residence (Overall*Female and Overall) are instrumented using both the Distance and Mobility IVs,
respectively. ***significant at 1%, **5%, *1%.



sexism strongly affect adult women’s outcomes. Being born into a higher level of sexism
reduces a woman’s relative labor market outcomes and leads her to marry and have children
sooner, wherever she ends up living as an adult. The substantial long-term effects of sexism
into which a woman happens to have been born are mostly dwarfed by the even bigger
effects of higher residential sexism, which act in the same direction on her outcomes. Wages
are the exception to this pattern. While larger background sexism reduces wages, we find
that higher residential sexism has no statistically significant effect on the gender log wage
difference. Residential sexism seems to chiefly affect a woman’s labor market outcomes on
the extensive, work/non-work margin with scant effect on relative wages.
    A noteworthy feature of the TSLS results in Table 5 is that the participation point
estimates are about three times as large as the corresponding OLS results. Strikingly, there
is no similar difference between OLS and TSLS for the non-labor market estimates in Table
6. What type of endogenous sorting would cause OLS estimates of the negative effect of
residential sexism on the likelihood of participation, in particular, to be biased towards

                                                                    32
zero?19 This type of bias implies that, for some reason, female migrants who are observed
living in more sexist states have relatively high levels of latent labor force attachments.
Something that might generate this pattern is if women who move to states with higher
sexism are systematically more likely to have been made to do so by their jobs. Because
these women would be disproportionately likely to be working after moving, their presence
in the set of all female migrants living in a state imparts a downward bias to estimates of
the negative effect residential sexism on labor force participation. By isolating variation
in location that is attributable only to exogenous relative distance or historical settlement
patterns, the TSLS models hopefully remove this bias.



6     Mechanisms for Causal Effect of Residential Sexism

We have argued that the causal effects of background sexism reflect the long-term effect of
norms one was exposed to earlier in life. By contrast, the effect of higher residential sexism
reflects not only the effect of her internalization of norms that currently surround her where
she lives now, but also discrimination imposed upon her in the market. How much, if any,
of the effect of higher residential sexism is due to discrimination rather than norms? In this
section, we conduct a variety of analyses to shed light on this question.


6.1     Average Male and Female Sexism for Different Outcomes

We begin this portion of our analysis with an assessment of the differential effect on the
two types of outcomes of average sexism in a market among men and women. Two ideas
motivate this exercise. First, the portion of the overall effect of residential sexism attributable
to discrimination should be larger for outcomes like wages and labor force participation
which labor market discrimination can directly affect, compared to outcomes like the ages
  19
     OLS regressions might also suffer from attenuation bias caused by the fact that the use of the coarse
geographic area of the state as the labor market mis-measures the market in which women interact and
work. One might have expected any such mis-measurement to also cause substantial attenuation bias in the
non-labor market results, yet the OLS and TSLS for these regression are very similar.


                                                   33
of marriage or fertility which are affected only indirectly by market discrimination, if at
all. Second, should there be discriminatory action in the labor market, one would expect
it to more closely tied to sexism among men than among women. This is because men’s
historically greater prevalence in positions of decision-making authority in the market likely
provides them with greater ability to engage in discriminatory action compared to sexist
women.
   Using GSS reports of respondent gender, we create separate measures of sexism for men
and women in each state. Figure 5 plots the mean of these male and female sexism indices
for the different states. The figure shows that although the two measures are very strongly
positively correlated, they are far from perfectly so. Men are, on average, more sexist than
women in most states, but the extent to which this is true varies substantially from state to
state and there are several states for which mean sexism among women is higher than that
for men. From the figure, it is clear that there is significant variation in one of the mean
sexism measures conditional on information about the other - an important requirement for
the analysis we conduct below.
   We estimate a series of regressions relating different outcomes in a state simultaneously
to average male and average female sexism in the state. This part of our analysis does not
require the migrant sample used above, with information about state of birth and state of
residence. Therefore, instead of the Census/ACS, we use data from the CPS. As discussed
above, the CPS is the preferred source of data on labor market information in the U.S. Data
on two non-labor market outcomes in the table still comes from the Census/ACS. All the
regressions in the table control for education and age dummies and for observed state-level
characteristics.
   The results in column (1) of Table 7 show that the gender labor force participation gap
in a state is significantly larger the more sexist the average man in the state, but exhibits
no statistically significant relationship with the state’s average female sexism. Mirroring the
wage results found previously for overall sexism with the Census wage data, the results in


                                              34
              Figure 5: Sexism Among Men and Among Women in Each State




    Note: Data are from the General Social Survey. The standardized female and male sexism indices
    have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the cross-state sample (44 states).



column (2) of the table show that the wage gap in a state measure using CPS data does not
vary at all with mean sexism among either men or women in the state.
   In column (3) we study the gender difference not in the wages received by workers but
rather in the wages that men and women could command in the labor market. Our ex-
amination of the “offer” (or “potential”) wage gap follows a long tradition that attempts
to account for missing wage data among those who do not work - a particularly important
problem among women. The offer wage is what a person would be paid if they did work,
but people only work if their offer wage exceeds their reservation utility from non-work.
Presumably, discriminatory treatment against women lowers their offer wages compared to
those of men, which also lowers their relative likelihood of working.
   We measure the gender difference in offer wages in a state as the median difference in
selection-corrected wages between men and women. Our selection correction is based on
a simple imputation procedure whereby non-fulltime employed women and men in the top


                                                 35
              Table 7: Mean Male vs. Mean Female Sexism and Women’s Outcomes

                                                         Log Wage Gaps,            Selection-
                                                          conditional on         Corrected Log      Share of     Average Female
                                       LFP Gap (Female - working (Female-          Wage Gaps        Females       Age at First
                                            Male)             Male)              (Female-Male)    Nevermarried       Child
                                               (1)                (2)                    (3)           (4)            (5)
      Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence
      Male average                           -0.011*             -0.004               -0.030***       -0.010         -0.093
                                             [0.006]            [0.006]                [0.010]       [0.011]        [0.091]
      Female average                          -0.007             -0.001                 -0.004      -0.032**        -0.204*
                                             [0.006]            [0.006]                [0.010]       [0.012]        [0.107]


                                                                                                  Census/ACS 1980-2012, Age 20
      Sample                                            CPS 1977-2017, Age 25 to 64                           to 40
      Individual level controls in first-stage regression:
      Education, Age dummies                      X                 X                    X             X               X

      R-squared                                 44                 44                     44            44             44
      Observations                            0.298              0.017                  0.254         0.456          0.345
Notes: The table reports coefficients (standard errors) from OLS regressions of residual state-level female-male
employment and wage gaps on various measures of sexist beliefs. The residual female-male employment and
wage gaps are estimated using the sample of white age 25 to 64 from the 1977-2017 May/ORG CPS data and
control for the number of years of schooling, age dummies, gender-specific year effects and state fixed effects.
The non-labor market outcomes are estimated using the sample of white females age 20 to 40 from the 1980
to 2000 Census and 2010-2012 ACS (3-year aggregate) and control for the number of years of schooling, age
dummies and year fixed effects. Sexist beliefs are normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation
1 across the 44 states with available information to construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS. Robust
standard errors weighted by the inverse of the variance of the outcome reported in parentheses. ***significant
at 1%, **5%, *1%.




                                                                    36
quartile of the gender-specific education distribution are assigned wages above the median
and women and men in the bottom quartile of the gender-specific education distribution are
assigned wages below the median. Our procedure follows the approach of Brown (1984),
Neal (2004) and Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008).20 Using these selection-corrected wages,
we estimate median regressions, controlling for education, age fixed effects, marital status,
gender specific year effects, state effects and state×female effects. The coefficients on the
state×gender dummies measure the median offer wage gaps in a state.
       The results in column (3) of Table 7 show that when related simultaneously to mean
sexism among men and women living there, the selection-corrected wage gap in a state loads
exclusively on the mean male sexism and exhibits no statistically significant relationship with
average residential female sexism. This difference is not a matter of statistical imprecision;
the estimated effect for male sexism is more than five times as large as that for residential
female sexism.
       Columns (4) and (5) show results for the two non-labor market outcomes. In a striking
reversal of the participation and wage results, we find that both the likelihood of ever having
married and the age of first child bearing are associated exclusively with mean sexism among
women in the market, but not at all with mean sexism among men. Again, these effects
are not the result of one parameter being estimated with particularly large standard errors.
Rather, the two point estimates are of very different sizes, with the estimated effect for
mean female sexism being roughly three times as big as the insignificant associations for
male sexism.
  20
     The advantage of this imputation approach is that it only requires us to make assumptions on the
position of the imputed wage observations relative to the median (i.e. whether the unobserved offer wage is
above or below the median). As noted in Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008), this procedure does not require
assumptions on the actual level of missing wages, nor does it require us to identify an instrument that
satisfies the exclusion restriction as required in the valid implementation of the Heckman two-stage sample
selection correction model. Note also that this selection correction procedure does not impute wages for
women with missing wages in the middle two quartiles on the education distribution under the assumption
that one cannot, with reasonable confidence, predict whether the wages these women could command in
the market would be above or below the median. Our results are robust to alternative selection-correction
imputations such as imputing wages for women and men in the top and bottom ten percent of the education
distribution. These results available upon request.



                                                    37
6.2    Percentile Tests

The results in Table 7 are consistent with the interpretation that the effect of residential
sexism on labor market outcomes is chiefly due to discrimination from sexist men, while
residential sexism’s effect on non-labor outcomes reflects the influence of internalized sexist
norms from other women. We use perhaps the main implication of Becker (1957) to further
probe the validity of this conclusion.
   Becker’s model of prejudice- or taste-based discrimination implies that if there were gen-
der discrimination in the labor market based on men’s sexist beliefs, market forces would
sort women away from interactions with the most sexist men. Women’s equilibrium out-
comes would be determined by the sexism of the most sexist men with whom they were
forced to interact after this sorting - the “marginal discriminator”. Since women constitute
roughly half of the population, this cost-minimizing sorting should result in the marginal
discriminator having sexism somewhere close to the middle of the male sexism distribution
and not far away from the median, such as around the 10th or 90th percentiles. Further, if
gender discrimination is due to men’s sexism, labor market gaps should not be systematically
related to any moment of the female residential sexism distribution.
   We estimate a series of regressions relating labor market outcomes in a state to the 10th,
median and 90th percentiles of the distributions of male and female sexism in the state. Table
8 shows the results. Column (1) shows that when regressed on all three percentiles of male
sexism simultaneously, the labor force participation gap is strongly statistically related to
the median, but not either the 10th or 90th percentiles. By contrast, column (2) shows that
when regressed only on percentiles of female residential sexism, a state’s participation gap
does not vary in a statistically significant way with any part of the female sexism distribution
in the state, although the point estimate for the median is bigger than those for the other two
percentiles. The regression in column (3) includes the three percentiles for both female and
male sexism. In this full regression, the participation gap is related only with median male
sexism - the point estimate for which is twice as large at that for the statistically insignificant


                                                38
Table 8: Relationship Between Alternative Percentiles of Sexist Beliefs and Women’s Labor
Market Outcomes

                              Labor Force Participation Gap (Female -   Selection-Corrected Log Wage Gaps
                                               Male)                              (Female-Male)
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
    Male Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
    10th Percentile                -0.000                   0.001         -0.002                    0.000
                                  [0.008]                  [0.007]       [0.009]                  [0.011]
    Median                       -0.017**                  -0.014*      -0.030**                 -0.028**
                                  [0.007]                  [0.007]       [0.013]                  [0.014]
    90th Percentile                0.001                    0.001         -0.004                   -0.005
                                  [0.006]                  [0.007]       [0.011]                  [0.011]

    Female Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
    10th Percentile                             -0.005      -0.003                    -0.010       -0.007
                                               [0.008]     [0.011]                   [0.013]      [0.014]
    Median                                      -0.011      -0.007                    -0.007        0.005
                                               [0.009]     [0.013]                   [0.018]      [0.017]
    90th Percentile                             -0.000      0.004                     -0.013       -0.002
                                               [0.005]     [0.006]                   [0.010]      [0.011]

    R-squared                      44            44             44        44          44           44
    Observations                 0.275         0.243          0.330      0.267       0.143        0.270
    Note: The data are from the 1977 to 2017 MORG/May CPS. Sample is restricted to whites age
    25 to 64. Sexist beliefs are normalized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation 1 across the
    44 states with available information to construct the index of sexist beliefs in the GSS (excluding
    DC). Robust standard errors weighted by the inverse of the variance of the outcome reported in
    parentheses. ***significant at 1%, **5%, *1%.




                                                         39
Table 9: Relationship Between Alternative Percentiles of Sexist Beliefs and Women’s Non-
Labor Market Outcomes


                                Share of Females Nevermarried (Age 20   Average Female Age at First Birth (Age
                                                to 40)                               20 to 40)
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
     Male Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
     10th Percentile                -0.016                   0.002         -0.088                      0.037
                                   [0.010]                  [0.012]       [0.084]                    [0.088]
     Median                         -0.009                   0.008         -0.128                     -0.007
                                   [0.014]                  [0.013]       [0.097]                    [0.101]
     90th Percentile                -0.016                   -0.024        -0.073                     -0.133
                                   [0.014]                  [0.015]       [0.098]                    [0.107]

     Female Sexist Beliefs in State of Residence:
     10th Percentile                             -0.015    -0.027**                     -0.144       -0.199*
                                                [0.012]     [0.012]                    [0.107]       [0.115]
     Median                                      -0.011      0.005                      -0.011        0.084
                                                [0.013]     [0.016]                    [0.120]       [0.125]
     90th Percentile                           -0.021**    -0.021**                   -0.182**      -0.181**
                                                [0.009]     [0.010]                    [0.072]       [0.082]

     R-squared                      44           44              44        44            44           44
     Observations                 0.356        0.449           0.516      0.284         0.358        0.407
    Note: The data are from the 1980, 1990, 2000 US Census and 2012 ACS (3-year aggregate). Sample
    is restricted to white women age 20 to 40. Sexist beliefs are normalized to have a mean of 0 and
    standard deviation 1 across the 44 states with available information to construct the index of sexist
    beliefs in the GSS (excluding DC). Robust standard errors weighted by the inverse of the variance
    of the outcome reported in parentheses. ***significant at 1%, **5%, *1%.




                                                          40
estimate for median female.
   The next three columns in the table show how the offer wage gap in a state is related to
the different percentiles of male and female sexism. These results mirror the participation
findings and are, in fact, slightly stronger. The selection-corrected wage gap in a state does
not systematically vary with any percentile of female sexism. However, the wage gap is
related in a strong and a highly statistically significant way only with the median of the
male residential sexism. The point estimate for the male sexism is more than ten times
larger than the estimated association for any other percentile point in the table.
   While taste-based discrimination models make sharp predictions about the relative im-
portance of different quantiles of the relevant sexism for labor market outcomes, there is
no such prediction from accounts describing the operation of norms. If they are strongly
affected by norms, non-labor market outcomes could thus vary systematically with any part
or parts of female sexism distribution and be consistent with norms influencing outcomes.
   Table 9 shows the results of the same percentile exercise for the two non-labor market
outcomes that we do for wage and employment gaps in Table 8. The difference between the
two sets of outcomes is striking. All of the specifications in Table 9 find that neither the
likelihood that women in the state married by age 40 nor the average age at which they have
their first child is related in a statistically significant fashion with any percentile of male
sexism. Both outcomes are, however, strongly related to female sexism - although in neither
case is the association with the median. Instead, as best illustrated in the specifications
in columns (3) and (6), which include all the percentiles of both male and female sexism,
the two outcomes are significantly related to the top (90th percentile) and bottom (10th
percentile) of the distribution of female sexism but not with the median.
   That women’s non-labor market outcomes are not related to median female residential
sexism but are related to the tails of that distribution is perfectly consistent with norms
accounting for sexism’s effect on these outcomes. As noted, existing accounts about social
norms make no sharp theoretical prediction about which percentiles of underlying beliefs are


                                              41
particularly important for the operation of these effects. The results in Table 9 show that
state-level outcomes do not always, for some mechanical reason, load most strongly on to
median sexism in a horse-race with other percentiles. This raises confidence that the finding
in Table 8 concerning the male median and labor market outcomes truly captures the effect
of marginal discriminator as predicted by theory.


6.3       Robustness

Before concluding this section, we present some results intended to assess the sensitivity of
the results in Tables 8 and Table 9 to two features of our estimation.
       The first of these features is the set of percentiles we use to measure different points
in the distributions of sexism. The tests we conduct are based on the predictions of a
Becker model of discrimination that, since women represent roughly half the labor market,
the sorting mechanism that determines equilibrium outcomes in the presence of taste-based
discrimination should cause the marginal discriminator to be drawn from center of the sexism
distribution rather than the tails. There being no rule about precisely which percentiles
represent the “middle” versus the “tails” of the distributions, our main results settle upon
the 10th, 90th and the median as natural candidates. Plus, these are the percentile points
examined by Charles and Guryan (2008) in their work showing that black-white wage gaps
are related, as a taste-based model would predict given blacks’ small share of the overall
population, only with the left-tail of the distribution of racial animus.21 Yet, there are two
reasons to suppose that the marginal discriminator should have sexism slightly less than
the 50th percentile. For one thing, whereas women now constitute half of the labor force,
over the entire period we study, the labor force was roughly 40% female. Further, Becker’s
model argues that because of the cost savings that non-discriminating firms enjoy, they
  21
    Using measures of racial prejudice from the GSS and computed in a very similar fashion to our sexism
measures, Charles and Guryan (2008) find that black-white wage gaps are related to the 10th percentile and
not to the median and 90th percentile of white prejudice precisely as the prejudice model predicts for racial
minorities. That the data appear to be consistent with the very different predictions about which quantile
points in the relevant distribution are marginal and infra-marginal in the case of race and gender suggests
that prejudice both racial and gender are important determinants of relative wages.

                                                     42
   Figure 6: R-Squared Statistics from Bivariate Regressions of Each Outcome on Separate
   Quantiles of Male and Female Residential Sexism
             Figure 5: R-squared of Bivariate Regressions of Each Outcome and Quantiles of the Male and Female Sexism Index




          Note:
Notes: Each         Each
            circle or  crosscircle   or R-squared
                            reports the   cross reports     the R-squared
                                                    from a bivariate             from
                                                                     regression of      a bivariate
                                                                                   the outcome  indicatedregression
                                                                                                          in the title ofof the
                                                                                                                          each    outcome
                                                                                                                               graph          indi-
                                                                                                                                     on the 10th, 20th, …,
          cated
90th percentile    in male
                of the the title
                            (circle)oforeach
                                         femalegraph    on thedistribution
                                                (cross) sexism   10th, 20th,
                                                                           within..., 90th
                                                                                   each state.percentile of the male (circle) or female
          (cross) residential sexism distribution within each state.



   should grow slightly larger than their discriminating counterparts, with the result that they
   should account for a disproportionate share of hiring of persons from the disadvantaged
   group (women in our case).
         To examine whether our results hinge in an important way on the percentile points we
   have chosen to examine, we conduct a robustness exercise in which we estimate a series
   of simple bivariate regressions relating each outcomes to different percentiles of male and
   female sexism, ranging from the 10th to the 90th percentile. Figure 6 plots the R-squares
   from each of these eighteen pairwise associations. The figure shows the point in male and
   female residential sexism distributions where the association with the particular outcome
   is strongest. Two things stand out clearly in the figure. One is that for the labor market


                                                                             43
Figure 7: Sensitity of Regression Estimates to Omitting Observations from Different Indi-
vidual States: Coefficient on Male and Female Sexism from 43 Regressions
  Figure 6. Sensitivity of Regressions to Omitting Each State -- Coefficient estimates on Male or Female Sexism for 43 Separate Regressions




    Note: The data for the labor market outcomes are from the 1977 to 2017 MORG/May CPS while
    the data for the non-labor market outcomes are from the 1980, 1990, 2000 US Census and 2012 ACS
    (3-year aggregate). Sample is restricted to whites age 25 to 64 for labor market outcomes and white
    women age 20 to 40 for non-labor market outcomes. Data on Sexism are from the General Social
    Survey. The standardized female and male sexism indices have mean 0 and standard deviation 1
    in the cross-state sample (44 states).



outcomes the pairwise associations for males yield the highest R-squared, whereas for the
non-labor market outcomes associations R-squared statistics are highest with percentiles
of female sexism. The other noteworthy pattern in the figure is which percentiles show
the biggest R-squared. For labor market outcomes, the association is highest somewhere
between the 40th and median of male sexism. In sharp contrast, for neither non-labor market
outcomes is the association maximized for median female sexism. It is worth emphasizing
that for these results no special restrictions or specifications have been imposed on the data.
We therefore find it reassuring that these associational findings are so strongly consistent
with our main results.

                                                                    44
    The other robustness exercise we conduct is motivated by the fact that state-level vari-
ation plays an important role in our analysis. We are therefore naturally concerned that a
small set of states - or even one particular state - might drive our main results. To assess
how important an issue this is, we estimate the main regressions in Tables 8 and 9 many
times, each time dropping observations from a particular state from the estimation sam-
ple. We then plot histograms of points estimates forthcoming from this series of “leave-out”
regressions. Since there are 44 states in our sample, we run 43 regressions for each out-
come. Having already shown the men’s sexism drives labor market outcomes, the baseline
regressions for labor market results only includes the three percentiles of male sexism. For
non-labor market outcomes, the baseline regression is only estimated on the three different
percentiles of female sexism.
    Figure 7 presents the histograms of point estimates across the various regressions. The
three colors in the figure represent point estimates for the three different percentiles from the
series of regressions. The figure shows that for the labor market outcomes, the point estimates
for median male sexism from the series of regressions are clustered around a negative value.
The point estimates for the other two percentile of male sexism all cluster around 0 across
all of the regressions. The results for the non-labor market outcomes are very different.
For these outcomes, the histograms show that point estimates for median female sexism are
clustered around 0, while those for the other two percentiles both cluster around negative
values. These results provide strong graphical evidence that the main results we show above
are not driven by any particular state, but instead represent something fundamental about
the economy overall.



7     Conclusion

This paper studies how prevailing sexist beliefs about women’s abilities and appropriate roles
affect American women’s socioeconomic outcomes. Studying adults who live in one state but



                                               45
who were born in another, and using fixed effects and instrumental variables methods, we
show that sexism in a woman’s state of birth and in her current state of residence both lower
her wages and likelihood of labor force participation, and lead her to marry and bear her first
child sooner. We argue that sexism where she was born, which we call background sexism,
affects a woman’s outcomes even after she is an adult living in another market through the
influence of norms that she internalized during her formative years.
   Our findings concerning background sexism extend the growing body of evidence con-
cerning how important that exposure to others beliefs about the role that they should play
in society or within the family can affect women over their entire lives by potentially altering
their own preferences. Whereas previous work has demonstrated the importance of norms
on some outcomes for persons who have immigrated to the U.S. from different cultural back-
grounds, or examined observed differences across countries, we show that similar forces affect
women born and raised in the U.S.
   We present various pieces of evidence which, collectively, suggest the sexism where a
woman lives (residential sexism) affects her non-labor market outcomes through the influence
of prevailing sexist beliefs of other women where she lives. By contrast, residential sexism’s
effects on her labor market outcomes seem to operate chiefly through the mechanism of
market discrimination by sexist men. These results extend the massive existing literature
on discrimination. “Taste-based” models - along with models of statistical discrimination
one of the two main classes of theoretical accounts of market discrimination - posit that
discriminatory actions in the market are undertaken by persons holding negative or aversive
sentiments towards the disadvantaged group in question. Our finding that quantiles of
sexism in a market are associated with worse labor market outcomes for women in the very
specific way that a model of gender discrimination arising from underlying sexist sentiments
would predict, provides sound evidence that prejudice-based discrimination, undergirded by
prevailing sexist beliefs may be an important driver of women’s outcomes in the U.S.




                                              46
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Matthew O. Jackson, “Social Norms and the Enforcement of
 Laws,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2017, 15 (2), 245–295.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, August 2000, 115 (3), 715–753.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “On the Origins of Gender
 Roles: Women and the Plough,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2013, 128 (2),
 469–527.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney, “Trends in U.S.
 Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008,
 90, 300–323.

Bailey, Martha, Melanie Guldi, and Brad J. Hershbein, “Is There a Case for a ‘Sec-
 ond Demographic Transition?’ Three Distinctive Features of the post-1960 U.S. Fertility
 Decline,” in Carola Frydman Leah P. Boustan and Robert A. Margo, eds., Human Capital
 in History: The American Record, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2014,
 pp. 273–312.

Beaudry, Paul and Ethan Lewis, “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials Reflect Differences
 in Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence from 1980-2000,” American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (2), 178–194.

Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, The University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American
 Economic Review, August 2006, 96 (5), 1652–1678.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan, “Gender Identity and Rela-
 tive Income Within Households,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 571–614.

Black, Dan A., Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell J. Taylor, “Why Do So Few Women
  Work in New York and So Many in Minneapolis? Labor Supply of Married women Across
  U.S. Cities,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 79.

Black, Sandy E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener, “Technological Change and the Skill
  Content of Women’s Work,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010, 92 (1), 187–194.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence Kahn, “The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s:
  Slowing Convergence,” Industrial Relations and Labor Relations Review, 2006, 60 (1),
  45–66.

   and , “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 2017, 55 (3), 789–865.
  , Lawrence M. Kahn, and Kerry L. Papps, “Gender, Source Country Characteristics,
  and Labor Market Assimilation Among Immigrants,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2011, 93 (1), 43–58.
Boustan, Leah P., “Was Postwar Suburbanization White Flight? Evidence from the Black
 Migration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 417–443.
  , Price V. Fishback, and Shawn Kantor, “The Effect of Internal Migration on Local
  Labor Markets: American Cities During the Great Depression,” Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 28 (4), 719–746.
Brown, Charles, “Black-White Earnings Ratios since the Civil Rights Act of 1964: The
 Importance of Labor Market Dropouts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1984,
 99 (1), 33–44.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, “Acting Wife: Mar-
 riage Market Incentives and Labor Market Investments,” American Economic Review, Nov
 2017, 107 (11), 3288–3319.
Burt, Keith B. and Jacqueline Scott, “Parent and Adolescent Gender Role Attitudes
 in 1990s in Great Britain,” Sex Roles, 2002, 46, 239–45.
Card, David, “Immigration Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
 of Higher immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 2001, 19 (1), 22–64.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan, “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical
 Assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political Economy,
 2008, 116 (5), 773–809.
   and Ming-Ching Luoh, “Gender Differences in Completed Schooling,” Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (3), 559–577.
Cortes, Patricia, “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on United States Prices: Evi-
 dence from CPI Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (3), 381–422.
  and Jose Tesseda, “Low-Skilled Immigration and the Labor Supply of Highly Skilled
  Women,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (3), 88–123.
Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudi Olivetti, “Mother and Sons: Prefer-
  ence Development and Female Labour Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2004, 119, 1249–1299.
   and , “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146–177.
Flabbi, Luca, “Prejudice and Gender Differentials in the U.S. Labor Market in the Last
  Twenty Years,” Journal of Econometrics, 2010, 156, 190–200.
Fortin, Nicole, “Gender Role Attitudes and Women?s Labour Market Outcomes Across
  OECD Countries,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 2005, 21, 416–438.
  , “Gender Role Attitudes and Women’s Labor Market Participation: Opting-Out, AIDS,
  and the Persistent Appeal of Housewifery,” Technical Report 2010.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives
 and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110,
 730–770.

  ,    , and Ilyana Kuziemko, “The Homecoming of American College Women: The
  Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20
  (4), 133.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Sheshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu, “Engines of Lib-
 eration,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72, 109–133.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai., Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “The
 Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth,” Working Paper 18693, National Bureau
 of Economic Research January 2013.

Isen, Adam and Betsey Stevenson, “Women’s Education and Family Behavior: Trends
  in Marriage, Divorce and Fertility,” in “Topics in Demography and the Economy National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.,” National Bureau of Economics Research, 2008.

Kiecolt, K. Jill and Alan C. Acock, “The Long-Term Effects of Family Structure on
 Gender-Role Attitudes,” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 1988, 50, 709–17.

Munshi, Kaivan, “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor
 Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 549–599.

Neal, Derek, “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap Among Women is Too Small,” Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (2), S1–S28.

Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo, “Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A
 Cross-Country Analysis of Gender Gaps,” Journal of Labor Economics, oct 2008, Vol. 26,
 No. 4, 621–654.

Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri, “Openness and Income: The Role of Trade and
 Migration,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (2), 231–251.

Smith, Adam, The Theory Of Moral Sentiments, A. Millar, 1759.

Weinburg, Bruce, “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers,” Industrial and
 Labor Relations Review, 2000, 53 (1), 290–308.
Data Appendix
A. Construction of Hourly Wages using the CPS Data
We use data from the May CPS for 1977 to 1978 and the CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups (MORG) for 1979 to 2017. The main analysis sample includes whites between the
ages of 25 to 64. Following the procedure used by Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), hourly
wages are defined as the log of reported hourly earnings for those paid by the hour and the
log of usual weekly earnings divided by hours worked last week for non-hourly workers. The
wage sample excludes those who are self-employed. Top-coded earnings are multiplied by
1.5. Hourly earnings that fall below $1.675/hour in 1982 dollars are dropped, as are hourly
wages exceeding 1/35th the top-coded value of weekly earnings. All the earnings measures
are deflated to 2009$ using the price deflator for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)
from the BEA. We exclude allocated earnings observation in all years, except where allocation
flags are not available (Jan 1994 to Aug 1995). Between 1989 and 1993, nonflagged allocated
observations are identified and dropped by using the unedited earnings values provided in
the source data.

B. Construction of Hourly Wages using the Census/ACS
We use the Census IPUMS 5% data for the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census and the 2012 (2010-
2012) three-year aggregate data from the ACS. The sample includes whites between the ages
of 25 to 64 who are not living in group quarters (i.e. non-military and non-institutionalized).
Hourly wages are calculated as total annual wage and salary income divided by the product
of weeks worked and usual hours worked in the previous year. The wage sample excludes
the self-employed. Following Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), we drop the bottom 1% of
hourly earners and multiply hourly wages of top-coded earners by 1.5. The maximum hourly
wage is limited to 1.5 times the maximum annual income amount divided by 1,750 (35 hours
per week for 50 hours per year). The earnings measures are deflated to 2000$ using the price
deflator for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the BEA.

C. Coding of Education in the CPS and Census/ACS Samples
We follow steps outlined in Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008) to create a comparable measure
of the number of years of schooling across years in the CPS. In 1992, the CPS changed the
education question. Figures from Park (1994) are used to assign years of completed education
to each worked based on gender, race, and highest degree held. For the Census and ACS
samples, we impute the number of years of education based on the variable indicating the
individual’s highest year of school or degree completed (educd ).
Table A1: Convergence in Mean State Level Labor and Non-Labor Market Outcomes Over
Time

                                         Unconditional                            Residualized

                                                State FE and Year                          State FE and Year
                               State FE only           FE              State FE only              FE
                                     (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)

                                                        Female-Male LFP Gap
       R-squared                  0.185               0.952             0.194                    0.944

                                               Female-Male Wage Gap Among Workers
       R-squared                  0.129              0.949            0.166                      0.929

       No. of Obs (44 states
       by 7 time periods)          352                   352                352                  352

                                               Female Share Nevermarried (Age 20 to 40)
       R-squared                  0.287               0.985               0.067                  0.997

                                                Female Age at First Birth (Age 20 to 40)
       R-squared                  0.410               0.959                 0.248                0.976

       No. of Obs (44 states
       by 4 time periods)          176                   176                176                  176
   Note: Regressions use data from several years of Current Population Surveys (CPS) for labor
   market outcomes and from several years of Census/ACS fro non-labor market outcomes. See text
   for details.
           Table A2: GSS Questions Used to to Construct Sexism Index

             Do you approve or disapprove of a married woman earning money in business or industry if
FEWORK
             she has a husband capable of supporting her?
             Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Women should take care of running their home
FEHOME
             and leave running the country up to men.
             If your party nominated a woman for president, would you vote for her if she were qualified
FEPRES
             for the job?
             Tell me if you agree or disagree with this statement: Most men are better suited emotionally
FEPOL
             for politics than are most women.
             A working mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a
FECHILD
             mother who does not work.

FEPRESCH     A preschool child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works.

FEHELP       It is more important for a wife to help her husband's career than to have one herself.

             It is much better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever outside the home and the
FEFAM
             women takes care of the home and family.

             Years where all questions overlap: (1977, 1985, 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994,
             1996, 1998)
          Table A3: Convergence Over Time in Average State-Level Sexism

                                                            State FE and
                                            State FE only      Year FE
                                                 (1)             (2)
                                                   Overall Sexism
                       R-squared                0.498           0.869

                                                Average Male Sexism
                       R-squared                0.535          0.794

                                               Average Female Sexism
                       R-squared                0.473          0.870

                       No. of Obs (44
                       states by 3 time
                       periods)                   107             107
                       Includes:
                       State Fixed Effects        yes              yes
                       Year Fixed Effects          no              yes
Note: The three time periods are (1) 1977 to 1988 (2) 1989 to 1993 (3) 1994 to 1998. The number
of observations do not add up to 44*3 = 132 due to missing observations in some states in some
time periods. We restrict the analysis to state*time period cells with at least 15 male and female
respondents.
           Table A4: Estimates of Background Sexism, Controlling on Individual X’s

                                    Labor Force           Log Wages, conditional on
                                   Participation                  working                 Never Married        Age at First Birth
                                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)
                                                     All Migrants                                Female Migrants Only
Sexist Beliefs in State of Birth:
Overall*Female dummy            -0.007***   -0.008***        -0.003      -0.011***
                                [0.002]      [0.002]        [0.003]       [0.002]
Overall                       -0.009***       0.001          -0.008        0.002      -0.021***   -0.012***   -0.196*** -0.115***
                                [0.003]      [0.001]        [0.006]       [0.003]      [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.045]   [0.021]

Controls:
Average NAEP Reading
and Math Scores in State of
Birth                                          X                            X                         X                      X
Female*Year FE                    X            X              X             X                         X                      X
State of Residence FE             X            X              X             X            X            X           X          X
Year FE                           X            X              X             X            X            X           X          X
Region of Birth FE                X            X              X             X            X            X           X          X

Outcomes residualized of:
Education, Age dummies                         X                            X                         X                      X

Observations                    15,103       14,083         15,063        14,055        7,522       7,016       7,453      6,962
R-squared                        0.928        0.938          0.927         0.931        0.801       0.839       0.769      0.587
    Note: Regressions use data from several years of Current Population Surveys (CPS) for labor
    market outcomes and from several years of Census/ACS for non-labor market outcomes. See
    text for details. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) use residual outcomes estimated from individual-
    level regressions that include controls for the number of years of education and age fixed effects.
    These columns also control for average reading and math scores for males and females in each
    state of birth. The test score data is from the NAEP Long Term Trend (NAEP-LTT), which was
    administered to a random sample of 9, 13, and 17 year olds in various years between 1971 and
    2004. The number of observations in these columns are slightly smaller than that in the baseline
    specification as math scores are missing for two states (New Hampshire and Vermont).
