NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KEEP IT SIMPLE: A FIELD EXPERIMENT ON INFORMATION SHARING IN
SOCIAL NETWORKS
Cátia Batista
Marcel Fafchamps
Pedro C. Vicente
Working Paper 24908
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24908

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

We benefited from comments from Yves Zenou, Sanjeev Goyal, Francis Bloch, Markus
Goldstein, and participants to the Monash University Conference on Social Networks 2018. We
wish to thank Stefan Leeffers, Timoteo Simone, and the NOVAFRICA office in Mozambique for
excellent research assistance. We are particularly grateful to Carteira Movel/Mkesh for
institutional support. We wish to acknowledge financial support from the International Growth
Centre. IRB approval was secured with Universidade Nova de Lisboa. None of the authors has
financial or institutional affiliation with Carteira Movel/Mkesh. All errors are our responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Cátia Batista, Marcel Fafchamps, and Pedro C. Vicente. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Keep It Simple: A Field Experiment on Information Sharing in Social Networks
Cátia Batista, Marcel Fafchamps, and Pedro C. Vicente
NBER Working Paper No. 24908
August 2018
JEL No. D64,D83,O33
ABSTRACT
SMS information campaigns are increasingly used for policy. To investigate their effectiveness,
we conduct a lab-in-the-field experiment to study information sharing through mobile phone
messages. Subjects are rural households in Mozambique who have access to mobile money. In
the base treatment, subjects receive an SMS containing information on how to redeem a voucher.
They can share this information with other exogeneously assigned subjects. We find that few
participants redeem the voucher. They nonetheless share it with others and many share
information they do not use themselves. Information is shared more when communication is
anonymous and we find no evidence of homophily in information sharing. We introduce
treatments to vary the cost of sending a message, shame those who do not send the voucher to
others, or allow subjects to appropriate the value of information. All decrease information
sharing. To encourage information sharing, the best is to keep it simple.
Cátia Batista
Nova School of Business and Economics
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Campus de Carcavelos
Rua da Holanda, 1
2775-405 Carcavelos
Portugal
catia.batista@novasbe.pt
Marcel Fafchamps
Freeman Spogli Institute
Stanford University
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fafchamp@stanford.edu

Pedro C. Vicente
Nova School of Business and Economics
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Campus de Carcavelos
Rua da Holanda, 1
2775-405 Carcavelos
Portugal
pedro.vicente@novasbe.pt

The sharing of valuable information is at the heart of many important economic processes:
the di¤usion of new technology (e.g., Ryan and Gross, 1943 ; Griliches, 1957 ; Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995 ; Bandiera and Rasul, 2006 ; Beaman ,Ben Yishay, Magruder, and Mobaraq, 2015 ;
Carter, Laajaj, and Yang, 2016 ); the adoption of new consumer products (e.g., Fafchamps,
Soderbom and vanden Boogaart, 2017 ); credit reference services (e.g., Kandori, 1992 ; Greif,
1993 ); information about market opportunities (e.g., Granovetter, 1974 ; Fafchamps and Minten,
2012 ); and the referral of workers and trainees (e.g., Beaman and Magruder, 2012 ; Fafchamps,
Islam, Malek, and Pakrashi, 2017 ). Information sharing is also essential to social learning, i.e.,
the process by which crowds form inference by aggregating dispersed information (e.g., Golub
and Jackson, 2010 ).
Two assumptions are implicit in much of this work. First, it is assumed that people are not
willing to share information when doing so brings no immediate or delayed bene…t. In e¤ect,
even when the information itself is non-rival, sharing typically imposes a cost on the sender.
Secondly, the recipient must put some trust in the information provided even though, in many
cases, the quality of the information cannot be veri…ed, or can only be veri…ed at a cost. These
two phenomena introduce friction: some valuable information is not shared, and some of the
shared information is not believed.
Epidemiological models of di¤usion on networks (e.g., see the excellent reviews by VegaRedondo, 2007, and Jackson, 2010 ) have demonstrated that small changes in the probability that
a message is successfully transferred between two nodes can have dramatic e¤ects on the spread of
information. For instance, in Poisson random networks with n nodes, a giant component emerges
when the link probability p rises above

1
n

and it grows in size until p reaches

log(n)
n ,

at which

point the network becomes fully connected. This means that if p represents the probability with
which information is successfully transferred between two arbitrary nodes in a large network,
when p <

1
n

only a vanishingly small proportion of nodes will be informed, while if p >

log(n)
n ,

all nodes will be informed. It follows that small frictions in information sharing can have large
consequences on information spread and thus on e¢ ciency.
Given this, it is somewhat surprising that little empirical research has sought to ascertain
the extent to which individuals successfully share valuable information with each other. We
know very little about whether recipients actually read or believe the messages they receive,
and whether they forward these messages to others. The purpose of this paper is to investigate
this formally using an original …eld experiment implemented through text messages on mobile
phones.
In our base game, selected volunteers receive an SMS voucher that they can redeem for mobile
money. The voucher SMS is intended to represent a generic piece of valuable information. By
taking valuable information to be on how to receive a monetary transfer, we eschew the possibility
that a piece of information may have a di¤erent value for di¤erent subjects. Having received the
SMS, subjects can make the same voucher opportunity available to up to four other subjects
who, in turn, can redeem it for cash and pass it on to others. This information transfer process
goes on for several rounds. We focus our attention on whether people redeem the voucher and
2

whether they pass it on to others. This experimental design mimics, in a stylized fashion, the
process by which people share information with others by passing on or re-posting messages that
they have received. From redeeming behavior we measure the extent to which messages are read
and believed. From sending behavior we measure the willingness to share valuable information.
We study a network of rural individuals (heads of households or their spouses) in Mozambique. This network links individuals that were not connected before our study. Importantly,
links are randomly selected, making this network an exogenous one. All communication is conducted through text messages that transit through the experimenter’s switchboard. These features severely limit the possibility of unobserved communication outside the experiment. Since
the vouchers that can be shared and redeemed are for mobile money, we had to ensure familiarity
with this form of money: we recruit all the participants among individuals who were previously
introduced to mobile money services, used the services, and have mobile money accounts on
their mobile phones.
We …nd that a surprisingly small proportion of recipients redeem the voucher: 26 percent in
the base game, and even fewer in most other treatments. This is a surprising result given that
redeeming the voucher is a low cost, high return action. This suggests that many subjects either
ignore the messages they receive, or do not trust them. At the same time, we …nd that subjects
often share the voucher message with others, even when they do not redeem it themselves. In
other words, some people incur a cost to share information that they do not themselves believe.
This type of behavior is more consistent with a warm glow motivation (e.g., Andreoni, 1990 )
than with pure altruism.1 As a result of limited sharing, information about the redeemable
voucher fails to spread –i.e., p is below 1=n.
To investigate factors that a¤ect the circulation of valuable information among subjects,
we introduce treatments that a¤ect the way that information is shared. More precisely, we
vary: the extent of anonymity in both redeeming and sending decisions; the costs of sending
vouchers; and the inclusion of alternatives to sending vouchers. We also implement versions
of the dictator, ultimatum, and reverse dictator games adapted to our design. At the same
time, we undertake this testing in a real-world setting relevant for development policy: that of a
widespread communication platform, i.e., phone-based written communication, and of a recently
introduced money transfer technology, i.e., mobile money.
We …nd that disclosing key characteristics of the sender or recipient reduce information
sharing: both redeeming and sending fall. This pattern reveals higher levels of trust when
subjects are uninformed about the speci…c characteristics of the sender or recipient. We do not
observe an e¤ect of varying the cost of sending the voucher, but information sharing falls once
any explicit monetary cost is introduced. The peer characteristics visible to decision-makers do
not impact either redeeming or sending vouchers. We …nd no evidence that the possibility of
shaming increases information sharing. In one treatment, we introduce the ability to circulate
erroneous information. We …nd little take-up, suggesting that most subjects do not purposefully
1

By de…nition an altruist cares about the utility of others, not just about the action of giving. An altruist who
believes that paying to redeem the voucher is not bene…cial would presumably not want to share it with others.

3

set out to harm others by sending false information. We …nd no evidence that allowing senders
to extract or solicit payment increases information circulation.
This paper contributes to the literature in several ways. First it complements a theoretical
literature on di¤usion that takes information transfer in human populations as a given (e.g.,
Kandori, 1992 ; Greif, 1993 ; Bloch, Genicot, and Ray 2008 ; Jackson, Rodriguez-Barraquer, and
Tan, 2012 ). Our results cast some doubts on the implementability of strategic mechanisms that
rely on the near perfect sharing of non-rival information. Second, our work generalizes earlier
…ndings by Mobius, Phan, and Szeidl (2015) who examine how people share and aggregate
information that helps them win movie tickets. Like us, they …nd that di¤usion is highly
imperfect: signals travel only up to two network steps. It is however unclear how general their
…ndings are, due to the strategic complexity of their design and the fact that information is
partially rival.2 Our results con…rm that information di¤usion is far from perfect even in the
absence of such considerations.
Our …ndings have far-reaching policy implications. Mobile telephony has revolutionized the
way many activities are conducted. This is particularly true in parts of the developing world
– such as sub-Saharan Africa – where the penetration of mobile phones massively increased
in recent decades. A growing number of policy interventions employ mobile phone messages
to pursue a development objective. Some of these messages nudge recipients into taking a
particular action – e.g., saving reminders (Karlan, McConnell, Mullainathan, and Zinman,
2016 ; Blumenstock, Callen, and Ghani, 2016 ; Abebe, Tekle, and Mano, 2016 ), debt repayment
(Karlan, Morten, and Zinman, 2012 ; Afzal, d’Adda, Fafchamps, Quinn, and Said, 2018 ), or
preventive health (Obermayer , Riley, Asif, and Jean-Mary, 2004 ; Patrick , Raab, Adams,
Dillon, Zabinski, Rock, Griswold, and Norman, 2009 ; Raifman, Lanthorn, Rokicki, and Fink,
2014 ). Other interventions have taken the form of information and awareness campaigns. Recent
examples include information about: agricultural prices (Fafchamps and Minten, 2016 ); water
quality (Okyere, Pangaribowo, Asante, and von Braun 2017 ); and the electoral process (Aker,
Collier, and Vicente, 2017 ).3
Such interventions have the potential of reaching beyond the immediate recipient of the
message. Many policy interventions have long sought to increase their impact by relying on
di¤usion among peers. A number of recent studies have tested whether such interventions
di¤use along social networks (e.g., Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Du‡o, and Jackson, 2013, 2016 ;
Fafchamps and Vicente, 2013 ; Fafchamps, Vaz, and Vicente, 2017 ; Comola and Prina, 2017 ).
IT can potentially make di¤usion among peers much easier because messages (e.g., SMS, email,
tweet, Facebook post) can easily be re-posted or forwarded to others. Its potential is further
strengthened by the introduction of mobile money, as illustrated in our experiment.
While most development actors recognize the potential for running inexpensive nudging or
information campaigns through IT, we know little about whether recipients actually read or
believe the messages they receive, and whether they forward these messages to others. This
2
3

There is a limited number of movie tickets, allocated to the …rst …fty winners only.
Mobile phones have also been used to conduct surveys (e.g., Garlick, Orkin, and Quinn, 2016 ).

4

paper …lls this lacuna while suggesting ways of increasing the e¤ectiveness of such interventions
and encouraging the circulation of valuable information to others.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe our experimental design, including
network structure, base game, treatments, game sequence, sampling and randomization, and
testing strategy. Implementation details are presented in section 3 while descriptive results and
regression analysis of redeeming and sending behavior are discussed in Section 4. Concluding
remarks are given in the …nal section.

1. Experimental design
The treatment to which subjects are exposed –i.e., receiving by SMS valuable information that
can be shared with others –is similar to many policy interventions in developing countries. The
purpose of our experimental design is to test two main assertions: people believe truthful and
valuable information received from a stranger; and people are willing to share information that
is potentially valuable to strangers. Like in Centola (2010), we randomly assign subjects to a
set of strangers with whom they can share valuable information. They cannot share it with
anybody else. The purpose of this design feature is to eliminate possible confounding e¤ects due
to di¤erences in social networks across individuals.
We investigate a number of secondary hypotheses. First, we vary the amount of information
that people have on recipients and senders. We hypothesize that people may be more willing to
share valuable information with people with whom they can identify. Second, we vary the cost of
sending the vouchers to others and the set of alternative actions. Speci…cally, we allow senders
to pass information they know to be untrue. If information sharing is motivated primarily by
altruism, we would not expect the sharing of untrue messages. But if senders have invidious or
rival preferences –or are mischievous –we would observe the circulation of erroneous messages.
Third, it has often been noted that sharing valuable information with others generates a sense
of gratefulness, and triggers a desire for the recipient to reciprocate. To capture these ideas in
a stylized manner, we introduce treatments that allow the sender to impose, solicit, or receive a
payment. We hypothesize that information sharing improves when it is incentivized.
In the remainder of this section we present the experimental design in detail. We …rst
describe the network structure used throughout the game. We then discuss the base game
and the di¤erent treatments. The game sequencing is presented next, followed by the testing
strategy.
1.1. Network
For the purpose of this study we construct a simple network of 192 individuals with access to
mobile money. This network is composed by 12 groups of 16 individuals, which we call squares.
Note that, in our design, we make sure that individuals in the same square are initially unrelated
to each other, and that individuals in di¤erent squares are not connected in our constructed
network.
5

As illustrated in Table 1, a square is a 4

4 grid of 16 subjects Irp where r denotes the round

and p denotes the position in the round. We build information sharing links between rows of
the same square as follows: each element in row 1, i.e., subjects I11 to I14 , is connected with
each element of row 2, I21 to I24 ; each element in row 2 is also connected with each element of
row 3, I31 to I34 ; and each element in row 3 is connected with each element of row 4, I41 to I44 .
All contacts between participants take place through text messages mediated by the experimenter, i.e., subjects pass information to each other by using text messages relayed by our
switchboard from one subject to another. Subjects are never told the identity or phone number
of the person with whom they are sharing information. All the messages received by participants
come from the switchboard and are written in Portuguese – see the Appendix for the full list
of messages used in the experiment, together with their English translation. For each message
sent, an experimental subject incurs a cost of 1-2 Meticais charged by the phone operator.4 In
compensation for this –and their participation time –each subject receives a participation fee
of 70 Meticais paid in mobile money at the end of the experiment. In the year of the experiment
1 USD was approximately equivalent to 35 Meticais.
All games and treatments are implemented at the level of the square – which thus plays
the same role as a session in a lab experiment. Each round takes approximately 24 hours, i.e.,
subjects in a round have 24 hours to redeem the voucher and to share it with up to four others.
This basic structure applies to each game, with some di¤erences across treatments described
below. We start by describing the base game in more detail at the level of a square, before
turning to the di¤erent treatments, each implemented on di¤erent squares.
1.2. Base game
The base game (game 0) starts with the seeding round, i.e., round 1. In this round, after an
introductory message by the experimenter, each individual in the …rst row of the square – i.e.,
I11 to I14 – receives an SMS from the experimenter asking whether they want to receive 35
Meticais – i.e., approximately 1 USD – on their mobile money account. To receive the money,
the subject has to send a message back with the word ‘yes’.
Each round 1 subject then receives messages asking if he/she wants us to give the same
voucher to round 2 participants. Subjects receive four such messages, one for each of the four
round 2 participants. To instruct us to send the voucher to this other person, the subject has
to reply with an SMS containing the word ‘yes’. Since each of the four senders in round 1 can
send the voucher to each of the receivers in round 2, subjects in round 2 can receive up to four
vouchers. Those who do not receive any voucher SMS from round 1 participants are dropped
from the game. The remaining …rst receive an introductory message from the experimenter
before receiving the voucher SMS itself. In round 2 this SMS is worded slightly di¤erently: it
explicitly states that the voucher is sent at the request of another participant in the experiment.
4
Virtually all subjects in our experiment use pay-as-you-go. Phone operators run occasional promotions of the
form ‘Earn X free SMS if you top up your account by Y Meticais’.

6

Since there are four round 1 subjects who could have sent the voucher, a round 2 subject can
receive it up to four times 35 Meticais. To receive the money, the subject has to reply to each
of these messages with the word ‘yes’. After this, round 2 subjects receive messages asking if
they want us to give the same voucher to round 3 participants. As in round 1, they receive four
such messages, one for each round 3 participant, and they have to reply ‘yes’by SMS. Based on
these responses, a list is drawn of those round 3 subjects who are to receive the voucher SMS.
Round 3 follows the same structure as round 2. Round 4 starts in the same way: subjects I41
to I44 receive the voucher SMS for each of the round 3 subjects who has instructed us to do so.
But since this is the last round, they are not asked about sending the voucher to other players.
Each request by the experimenter, i.e., on receiving the voucher or sending it, had to be
answered within 24 hours to be considered admissible. Messages that are received after the
deadline are ignored.5 This is to ensure that each square follows a similar sequencing –similar
to what happens in a lab experiment. Using four separate phone numbers –one for each of the
four receiving and four sending decisions –makes it possible to identify the sender and intended
recipient of each of the messages we receive on our switchboard. Payo¤s are all paid on the
mobile money account of each subject at the end of the game.
There are two variants of the base game: anonymous and informed. In the anonymous
variant, no information is provided to either sender or receiver: all the sender knows is that
another participant to the study will receive a voucher SMS similar to the one the sender
received; similarly, all that the receiver knows is that another study participant has instructed
us to send him/her a voucher SMS.
In the informed variant, the sender is told some of the characteristics of the receiver –namely,
their gender, age, schooling, and income category. The receiver is given analogous information
about the sender. Gender is implied by the …rst name of the sender or receiver (which is spelled
out in the message); age is given in years; education is given in years of completed schooling
(up to 12th grade) or the type of post-secondary education; and income is given as one of seven
possible categories of monthly income. In contrast, in the anonymous variant, individuals in the
next round are referred as ‘Person p’with p = 1; :::; 4.
1.3. Treatments
There are two groups of three games in addition to the base game, forming six treatments in
total. The …rst group of three (games 1/2/3) is similar to the base game but varies the price
and the default selection for the voucher sending decision. The games in the second group of
three (games 4/5/6) are adaptations of the dictator, ultimatum, and reverse dictator games to
our setting. These treatments introduce the possibility of transfers between sender and receiver
in exchange for the voucher. We now provide the details of each of these six games. Each of
them is played on a square, just like the base game.
5
Very few attempts were made to redeem after the 24 hours window expires. At the time of the study, it was
extremely unlikely to lose phone service for more than an hour in Mozambique.

7

Game 1 (variable cost of sending) varies the price of sending the voucher to another subject.
This price can take four values: 0 (as in the base game), 5, 10, or 15 Meticais. This price is paid
per message and comes on top of the actual cost of sending an SMS. Each subject faces each of
the four di¤erent prices, one for each of the subjects in the subsequent round, in a randomized
order. Strictly positive prices are deducted to game payo¤s sent to subjects’ mobile money
accounts at the end of the game. In all other respects, this game is the same as the base game.
By varying the price of sending the voucher, we can infer how much people are willing to pay
for sending valuable information to others.
Game 2 (shaming and …xed cost of sending) presents subjects with a di¤erent default option
when sending vouchers to others. In the base game and in game 1, if the subject does not respond
to the sending SMS, the experimenter does nothing – i.e., no voucher is sent to the potential
recipient. In contrast, in game 2 the default is that the experimenter sends a message to the
recipient explicitly informing that the sender was given an opportunity to send the voucher but
sent no valuable information. In this game, the cost of sending is set equal to 5 Meticais – in
addition to the phone operator’s cost of the SMS. The rest is as in the base game. The purpose
of this treatment is to increase the psychological cost of not sending the voucher to others. Put
more bluntly, it shames the sender for failing to send the voucher. This cost could be particularly
relevant in the informed variant of the game.
Game 3 (erroneous code message and …xed cost of sending) adds a second default option
to game 2 when subjects are asked about the sending of vouchers. As in games 0 and 1, if
the sender does not reply, no message is sent to the recipient. If the sender responds ‘yes’, the
voucher SMS is sent to the recipient and a …xed price of 5 is deducted from the sender’s payo¤
(like in game 2). The sender can also respond ‘no’, in which case, the receiver gets an SMS
containing an erroneous code that cannot be redeemed for money.6 The rest is as in the base
game. The purpose of this treatment is to disentangle an explicit decision not to share – e.g.,
motivated by rival or invidious preferences –from simple inaction, as in game 2: if not sending
the voucher manifests a desire to hurt someone, sending an erroneous message would ful…ll this
desire even better –albeit, here, at the small cost of sending an SMS.
The purpose of games 4/5/6 is to introduce a market element in the sharing of information.
The idea is that the sender of valuable information may either appropriate the information
for their own bene…t or extract a compensation from the recipient. This is captured in three
stylized ways. The three games are based on the dictator, ultimatum, and reverse dictator
games, respectively. The details are as follows.
Game 4 (dictator) adapts a standard dictator game to our setting. In this game, a subject is
asked to share a 35 Meticais voucher between themselves and one other subject in the subsequent
row of the square. Each row 1 subject does this four times, once for each subject in row 2. In
other words, each subject in row 1 receives 35 Meticais four times, and each time the subject
can share that amount with one di¤erent subject from row 2. These decisions are then combined
6

To avoid deceiving the subject, this is made clear in the message sent to the recipient – see Appendix for
details.

8

to calculate the total payo¤ of the sender. If the sender does not respond to one of the four
messages, this is treated as equivalent to sending nothing, in which case the sender keeps the 35
Meticais. This is di¤erent from a standard dictator game where there is no default option and
the subject is forced to pick a division of the pie. If the subject does not respond to any of the
four messages, he/she receives 35

4 = 140 Meticais.

The exact same decision structure is repeated in round 2: the experiment sends 35 Meticais
four times to each round 2 subject, and each time the round 2 subject can share part of it with
a round 3 subject. The same is again repeated in round 3. Subjects in row 4 do not decide
anything; they just receive what row 3 subjects choose to send them. As in the base game,
subjects in rounds 2 to 4 do not receive any message if nothing is sent to them by previous
participants. The idea behind this aspect of the design is to investigate how far information
di¤uses in the network.
In this treatment, the sender is given the opportunity to appropriate the entire value of each
voucher. The purpose of this is to determine the extent to which subjects are willing to share
something valuable instead of appropriating it. If the subject does nothing, this is treated as not
sharing. Furthermore, if the sender does nothing, the recipient is not informed that the sender
had an opportunity to share. These di¤erences with the standard dictator game are introduced
into our design to capture the fact that, in practice, sharing information requires a deliberate
action – doing nothing is the default – and if someone does not share valuable information,
potential recipients typically do not learn of it.
Game 5 (ultimatum) adapts an ultimatum game to our framework. It is similar to game 4:
each subject in rounds 1 to 3 is asked four times to share 35 Meticais between themselves and
one subject in the next row. The di¤erence is that, in this treatment, the designated receiver
can refuse the share sent by the sender. If the receiver refuses what the sender o¤ered, both
sender and receiver get nothing of the 35 Meticais. Each receiver has to make this decision
each time he/she receives an o¤er to share 35 Meticais. If the sender does not make any o¤er
to a particular recipient – i.e., does nothing – this is treated as a rejection by the sender, and
both subjects receive nothing. This introduces an important di¤erence with game 4, but this
is unavoidable: in order for the receiver to have an opportunity to reject an o¤er, an o¤er has
to be made. If the receiver does not agree to an o¤er – or does nothing – this is treated as
a rejection by the receiver, and both subjects also receive nothing. This treatment mimics a
market for information in which the seller sets a take-it-or-leave-it price.
Game 6 (reverse dictator) is similar to game 4 except that it is the receiver who decides how
much to send back to the sender. Round 1 is exactly the same as in the base game: subjects
choose whether to redeem the voucher and whether to send vouchers to each row 2 subjects.
Subjects in round 4 only decide how much to send back. Subjects in rounds 2 and 3 decide
both how much to send back to the sender from the previous row (…rst) and whether to send
a voucher to the receiver in the subsequent row (second). Unlike in the base game, subjects do
not have to respond ‘yes’ to the voucher SMS in order to receive it – they are only asked to
determine how much they wish to send back. If a subject does not respond, he/she is assumed
9

to send back nothing – which is the mirror image to the sender’s decision in game 4: doing
nothing is equivalent to appropriating the whole voucher. As in the base game, a subject in
rows 2 to 4 only participates to the game if at least one subject from the previous row decided
to send him/her a voucher. Note that game 6 is not strictly equivalent to a reverse dictator
in the sense that the receiver knows that the voucher was sent by the sender. This important
distinction may create a reciprocity e¤ect that mimics the ‘pay-what-you-want’market model
as practiced by certain websites.
1.4. Game sequence
In our experiment, each square –or group of 16 subjects –plays four di¤erent games sequentially.
The …rst game is always the base game (game 0). The other three games are either games 1/2/3
or games 4/5/6. We implement these two sets of games on the same subjects so we can achieve
identi…cation within subjects. The 12 squares are divided equally into two sets of 6: those playing
games 1/2/3 and those playing games 4/5/6. Each set of six is further divided into two groups
of three: one always play anonymous games; the other always plays informed games. Within
each group of three squares, the order of the games is varied systematically. To summarize, the
assignment structure of games to squares is as follows in Table 2, where Gi stands for game i
and A=I stands for Anonymous/Informed.
1.5. Testing strategy
We divide our analysis between the decision to receive mobile money from others, and the
decision to send mobile money to others. In each case, we test for di¤erences between the
di¤erent games, whether sender and receiver were fully anonymous, and whether sending and
receiving vary systematically with subject characteristics.
In addition to reporting average choices for each game, we also report results from a regression
analysis. For receiving or redeeming vouchers, we use the following core speci…cation:
Rijrt =

+

1
1 Gijrt

+

2
2 Gijrt

+

3
3 Gijrt

+ Ii +

r

+ "ijrt

(1.1)

where the dependent variable Rijrt is a binary variable taking value 1 in case subject i redeemed
a voucher opportunity sent by subject j in round r and period t. Regressors are as follows: Gkijrt
is a game k dummy; Ii is a dummy equal to 1 in the informed (or non-anonymous) variant;
and

r

is a vector of round and period dummies, included to control for the possibility that

experimental fatigue or loss of attention a¤ects our …ndings.
We focus our attention on games 0/1/2/3 in regression (1.1) since redeeming decisions are
either absent or of minor importance in games 4/5/6. We also estimate a speci…cation that adds
prior redeeming (in earlier periods) to see whether a positive experience with redeeming in an
earlier period spurs more con…dence in voucher messages.
To test for homophily we estimate a model that includes absolute di¤erences jXi
10

Xj j

in individual characteristics X between subject i and the subject j from whom i received the
voucher.7 We only use the four characteristics Xi that are revealed to i about j –and vice versa.
Since pairwise characteristics are only revealed to subjects in the non-anonymous treatment,
jXi

Xj j is interacted with the non-anonymous treatment dummy Ii . When estimating this

regression we also include characteristics Xi and absolute di¤erences jXi
controls.8

The estimated regression is thus of the form:
Rijrt =

+

1
1 Gijrt

+ jXi

+

2
2 Gijrt

+

3
3 Gijrt

Xj jIi + Xi + jXi

Xj j as additional

+ Ii

Xj j +

r

+ "ijrt

(1.2)

Homophily implies

< 0 – i.e., the more dissimilar i and j are, the less i is willing to redeem

j.9

When estimating regression (1.2), we only include redeeming decisions that

a voucher from

apply to SMS vouchers received from another subject –i.e., we drop observations from round 1
subjects who receive the voucher from the experimenter.
For sending, the baseline speci…cation for games 1/2/3 takes the following form:
Sijrt =

+

1
1 Gijrt

+

2
2 Gijrt

+

3
3 Gijrt

+ Cijt + Ii +

r

+ "ijrt

(1.3)

where the dependent variable Sijrt is a dummy equal to 1 in case subject i sends a voucher
opportunity to subject j in round r and period t. Variable Cijt is the cost of sending the
voucher to another subject which, in games 0/1/2/3, varies exogenously by subject pair ij. We
also estimate a speci…cation that includes the redeeming decision as additional control, and a
speci…cation that adds jXi

Xj j, and controls Xi , to test for homophily in sending decisions.

For the decision to send or send back money in games 4/5/6, we use a similar speci…cation

of the form:
Sijrt =

+

5
5 Gijrt

+

6
6 Gijrt

+

6b
6b Gijrt

+ Ii +

r

+ "ijrt

(1.4)

where the game dummy G superscript 6 refers to the decision to send in game 6 while 6b refers
to the decision to send back in the same game. The speci…cation is similar to (1.3), except that
we do not include the cost of sending since it is constant. We also estimate a speci…cation that
adds jXi

Xj j and controls Xi , again to test for homophily. The amount sent is examined in

a separate regression. In most speci…cations, we estimate linear probability models and report
robust standard errors.
7

To facilitate interpretation, when Xi is a dichotomous variable – e.g., gender – we replace the absolute
di¤erence with a dummy equal to one if i and j have the same gender, and 0 otherwise.
8
For instance, jXi Xj j may be systematically larger when Xi is large.
9
When the regressor is a dummy equal to 1 if i and j share a characteristic –e.g., gender –the interpretation
is reversed.

11

2. Implementation
We implemented the design as a lab-in-the-…eld experiment in Mozambique in May to July, 2015.
Participants are recruited among the heads of households and their spouses who took part in a
study on the introduction of mobile money in rural Mozambique (Batista and Vicente, 2017 ).
The original sample was constructed using a representative sample of rural enumeration areas
with mobile phone coverage in the provinces of Maputo Province North, Gaza, and Inhambane.
Within each of the 102 enumeration areas sampled for that study, an average of 11 households
per enumeration area was selected through a random walk process – i.e., by walking from the
center of the enumeration area in di¤erent direction and inviting each n-th house along the way
to participate in the study. The original sample was selected in 2012 and was followed as a
panel until 2015, with several survey rounds (the last of which in mid-2014). In half of the
sample, i.e., in 51 enumeration areas, mobile money was introduced through the recruitment of
a local agent and the organization of various dissemination activities at the enumeration area
level. Within these locations, a random sub-sample was targeted for individual dissemination
of mobile money. By design, participants to the experiment are more knowledgeable than the
average Mozambican about mobile phone communication and mobile money services.
In this paper we focus on individually-treated individuals of the original sample. This ensures
that all participants had previously been introduced to mobile money, had used the service, and
had a mobile money account on their mobile phone at the time of the experiment. Most of
the 192 individuals in our study were recruited by phone or SMS. Some were recruited through
face-to-face contact. Informed consent was obtained at the time of recruitment. Subjects were
then reminded of the experiment by SMS just before starting game 0. We should point out
that the mobile phone operator sends marketing SMS’s to individual subscribers on a regular
basis. While this increases the possibility that our messages are misconstrued as spam, it also
raises the external validity of our …ndings, since any information campaign using SMS services
in Africa is bound to encounter the same problem.
The division of the 192 participants into 12 squares follows a random procedure that ensured
that no two subjects from the same enumeration area are allocated to the same square. This
is done to avoid the possibility of direct communication between subjects. The last survey
round held in mid-2014 is the source of information for individual characteristics employed in
the non-anonymous variant.
Funding for the research was provided by the International Growth Center. The experiment was implemented in collaboration with Carteira Móvel/Mkesh and the Novafrica o¢ ce in
Mozambique. All messages were sent and relayed by research assistants recruited for the project.

12

3. Empirical analysis
3.1. Descriptive statistics and balance
Key characteristics of the sample are presented in Table 3. Approximately 59 percent of participants are female, and the average participant is 40 years of age. The average number of
years of education is 6 (if equal or below 12), with most subjects having no higher education (96
percent). Average monthly income is 3,445 Meticais, which is approximately equal to 98 USD
per month.
The rest of Table 3 tests for balance across experimental treatments. We begin by comparing
each pair of squares in terms of demographic characteristics. Across the 330 di¤erences we tested
(66 pairwise tests

5 variables), we …nd a total of 19 that are statistically signi…cant at the 10

percent level –well below what would be expected to occur by chance (10 percent).
We also report the test of joint signi…cance of square dummies to check for systematic
di¤erences between squares. In addition, we compare the two halves of our sample, namely
those playing games 1/2/3 and those playing games 4/5/6. Within each of the two halves of
the sample, balance across games is achieved by experimental design – see Table 2. We also
compare subjects in non-anonymous and anonymous treatment squares. All these tests fail to
reject the null hypothesis of no di¤erence for each of the observable characteristics considered.
Randomization thus appears to have achieved balance on key individual characteristics across
squares and treatment blocks.
3.2. Average behavior
We report in Tables 4 and 5 the average behavior of the subjects in the base game and each of
the six treatments. Note that some actions are not relevant in some treatments, e.g., receiving
is automatic in game 4, and sending back is only a possible action in game 6.
We …rst examine what happens in the base game. We observe that the number of redeeming
observations is lower than 192, the sample size. This is because, despite the fact that several (up
to four) vouchers could be potentially redeemed in rounds 2-4, many subjects in late rounds never
receive any voucher. The number of sending observations is higher than the number of redeeming
observations because each subject who receives a voucher in rounds 1-3 is automatically given
the option to send it to four other subjects.
We …nd that the probability of redeeming the voucher is 26 percent, while the probability of
sending the voucher to any of the four players in the next row is 24 percent. This indicates that
a large proportion of participants do not accept what is essentially a ‘free lunch’: indeed, by
sending a ‘yes’SMS at a cost of 1-2 Meticais, they would have received 35 Meticais. The voucher
redemption rate appears particularly low given the facts that we secured explicit agreement
from all participants for participating in the experiment, and that we took care to remind each
participant individually shortly before the base game that messages would follow containing
opportunities to earn money.

13

In contrast, the propensity to send appears relatively high, given the costs of sending messages and the absence of material bene…t for the sender. One possible interpretation is that
sending follows a ‘warm glow’motivation: subjects seem keen to share with others a valuable
opportunity, even if they themselves do not value it highly. Some evidence to this e¤ect comes
from observing that, among the players given the opportunity to both redeem and send vouchers, 11 percent send at least one voucher but do not redeem themselves. Together they represent
33 percent of the subjects who send any voucher.
Turning to the di¤erence between the non-anonymous and anonymous versions of the base
game, we see higher redeeming and sending for the anonymous version. These …ndings will be
shown to be statistically signi…cant when we employ regression analysis in the next subsection.
For redeeming, we also note a slightly higher rate in round 1 (redeeming a voucher received from
us) compared to rounds 2-4 (redeeming a voucher received from another subject).
Columns 2-4 of Table 4 present average redeeming and sending decisions in games 1-3. Note
that, as explained earlier, the order of the three games varies randomly across squares, i.e., they
are not necessarily played in the order in which they appear in the table. We observe a dramatic
drop in both redeeming and sending behavior in all three games relative to the base game. The
voucher redemption rate falls by between 27 (game 3) to 49 (game 1) percent, even though the
cost of redemption is the same. Possibly because the cost of sending is higher, sending falls too,
by between 41 (game 1) to 74 (game 3) percent. But contrary to expectations, sending is most
common in game 1, for which the cost of sending is, on average, highest. The propensity to
send is lower in game 2 than in game 1 –suggesting that changing the default to an erroneous
message did not create a psychological pressure to give. This is reminiscent of situations (e.g.,
DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier, 2012 ) in which individuals give because they perceive a
moral pressure to do so but feel exonerated if a device (in our case, a default message of an
erroneous voucher) takes an action for them. In game 3 subjects could either pay 5 Meticais
to send an SMS voucher to the receiver, send an erroneous voucher message, or do nothing. In
practice, we only observe two cases of subjects sending an erroneous voucher message, making
this game similar to game 1, with a slightly lower cost of sending on average. We nonetheless
observe a further decrease in the sending probability, which now falls to 6 percent. One possible
explanation is that the introduction of an irrelevant but sel…sh alternative prompts subjects to
act sel…shly. We note that, like for the base game, anonymous versions of games 1-3 tend to
yield higher redeeming and sending rates than their non-anonymous counterparts.
In games 4 to 6 the primary emphasis is on sending decisions. To recall, in games 4 and 5,
senders decide an amount to be sent. In game 6 they decide whether to send the voucher or not.
In game 4 receivers do nothing. In game 5, receivers can either accept or reject take-it-or-leave-it
o¤ers. In game 6, receivers decide whether to redeem a voucher from the experimenter in round
1and then whether and much to send back of the voucher to the sender. We report on all these
choices in Table 5.
In game 4 the sender appropriates the full value of the voucher by doing nothing. We see that
introducing this possibility leads to a fall in the propensity to send something to the receiver:
14

from 24 percent in the base game to 15 percent in game 4. These di¤erences are statistically
signi…cant. They suggest that when senders cannot appropriate the voucher, they are willing
to spend some of their own money to bene…t someone else, and when they can appropriate the
voucher, many prefer doing so to sending anything. We also note that, even when they send
something, subjects only give around 27 percent of the value of the voucher on average. Across
all subjects and decisions, senders retain more than 96 percent of the voucher value.
In game 5, sending something introduces a risk: the receiver may refuse the o¤er –something
that occurs in 43 percent of the cases. We observe an 18-percent probability of sending money
to the receiver, lower than in game 0 and only slightly higher than game 4. This is a priori
surprising because, in game 5, the sender receives nothing if no o¤er is made. This suggests
reluctance to make an o¤er that can be rejected by the receiver –and indeed o¤ers are rejected
a large fraction of the time. We also note that the amount sent does not increase relative to
game 4.
In game 6, the sender can only elect to send or not the entire value of the voucher to the
receiver, as in game 0. We …nd that the probability of sending in this case is identical to
game 0. This suggests that the prospect of receiving something back from the receiver does
not incentivize senders to send more. In 12 percent of the cases, the receiver elects to send
something back, i.e., at a rate that is broadly similar to what senders do in game 4. But when
they do, they send back a much higher proportion of the voucher value – typically almost all
of it, suggesting, among these subjects, a reciprocity motive. Senders in round 1 are also given
the choice to redeem or not the voucher sent by the experimenter. 38 percent of subjects do
so. Finally we note that, as in Table 4, anonymous versions of the games 4 to 6 cause higher
sending rates.
3.3. Redeeming the voucher
To fully assess the determinants of redeeming vouchers in games 0/1/2/3, we regress the redeeming decisions on treatment variables as speci…ed in the section on testing strategy. The
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the subject sends a ‘yes’ SMS in response to a
voucher o¤er, and 0 otherwise. The results are shown in Table 6. Column (1) reports the results
from regression model (1.1).10 In column (2) we add a dummy variable with value 1 if the
subject redeemed a voucher in a previous game: subjects who trust the SMS enough to redeem
it in one game should also be more likely to trust it in a subsequent game. Column (3) reports
estimates for model (1.2) that test for homophily. In addition to regression coe¢ cients, at the
bottom of Table 6 we report test statistics of the null hypothesis that there is no di¤erence
between pairs of treatments.
Regression analysis con…rms that the probability of redeeming decreases between the base
game and the other three games, although, for game 3, this is only signi…cant in column (2).
10

The non-anonymous dummy, for the analysis of redeeming, always takes value 1 (non-anonymous) for round
1 since subjects knew that vouchers originate from the experimenter at that point.

15

Pairwise comparisons reported at the bottom of Table 6 nonetheless indicate that we cannot
reject the hypothesis that redeeming is equally likely under games 1, 2 and 3. The reduction
in redeeming is large relative to the counterfactual probability of redeeming in game 0: the
probability of redeeming drops by 18 to 30 percentage points in games 1 and 2, and by 21
percentage points in game 3.
As already observed in Table 4, we …nd a large reduction in redeeming associated with the
non-anonymous variant: around 20 percentage points when considering the main speci…cations
in columns (1) and (2). This con…rms that subjects are more likely to redeem a voucher that
comes from an anonymous source. We also observe more redeeming in round 1, that is, when the
voucher originates from the experimenter, than when the voucher comes from another subject.
This further con…rms that messages are more trusted when they come from a more anonymous
source, which is a priori counter-intuitive. We do not …nd systematic period e¤ects.
Since game payo¤s are deposited on subjects’mobile money account at the end of each game
period, subjects who redeem in a given period receive the voucher money at the end of that
period. This should make them more con…dent of receiving the voucher money in subsequent
periods. We therefore expect redeeming behavior to be persistent. This is indeed what we …nd:
there is a strong positive correlation between redeeming now and redeeming in a previous period.
We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that captures di¤erences in trusting behavior across
subjects.
When adding pairwise regressors (column 3), point estimates suggest that subjects are more
likely to redeem a voucher received from a person of the same gender and education level.
But none of these e¤ects is statistically signi…cant.11 From this we conclude that there is no
conclusive evidence of homophily in redeeming decisions. Perhaps this is not too surprising
given that there is on average less trust in the non-anonymous version of the game. From the
estimated coe¢ cients of individual characteristics Xi , we also note that older subjects redeem
less and richer participants redeem more. This could be because individuals who are younger
and richer are more familiar with mobile phones and more willing to risk 1-2 Meticais for the
prospect of receiving 35 Meticais.
3.4. Sending the voucher
We report in Table 7 a similar analysis for the decision to send the voucher to another participant
in games 0/1/2/3. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the subject sends an SMS
instructing the experimenter to send a voucher SMS to another subject. To recall, there are
four such decisions per voucher recipient, one for each of four possible recipients in the next row
of Table 1. We include as regressor the cost of sending the SMS which, to recall, varies between
0/5/10/15 Meticais across subject pairs ij in game 1. This cost is a constant at 5 Meticais in
11
Similar results (not shown here) are obtained if we estimate an individual …xed e¤ect model that compares
redeeming behavior across di¤erent senders for the same receiver. Because the number of subjects who receive
multiple SMS vouchers is relatively small, however, the number of observations is small and statistical power is
limited.

16

games 2 and 3, and 0 in the base game. Column (1) reports coe¢ cient estimates for speci…cation
(1.3). In column (2) we add two redeeming dummies –one for the previous period, as in Table
6 ; and one for the current period, just before the decisions to send. The purpose of this addition
is to test whether subjects are more likely to send a voucher that they themselves redeem –
as would be the case if sharing is done primarily by those who trust the message enough to
redeem it. Column (3) includes jXi
for homophily in sending choices.

Xj jIi and related controls as additional regressors to test

As noted when discussing Table 4, we observe a strong reduction in the sending probability
between game 0 and the other three games. These di¤erences are all statistically signi…cant
at the 1 percent level and large in magnitude, ranging between 9 and 26 percentage points,
depending on the speci…cation. Given that sending is more costly in games 1/2/3 than in game
0, these …ndings suggest that sharing information is cost sensitive. However, the cost of sending a
message, which varies randomly in game 1, has no signi…cant e¤ect on the probability of sending
a voucher, casting some doubt on the hypothesis that cost di¤erences is the only cause for the
di¤erence between game 0 and games 1/2/3. As in Table 6, we …nd less sending in rounds 2 and
especially 3, possibly indicating a reluctance to forward messages received from other subjects
instead of from the experimenter.
The results further indicate that sending the voucher is less likely in games 2 and 3 than
in game 1. In game 2, when the sender chooses not to send the voucher, the recipient receives
a message saying that the sender had the option to send something but did not. This can be
seen as an attempt to shame the sender for not sending valuable information, in the hope of
increasing information sharing. This attempt appears to back…re: if anything this treatment
reduces sharing. The di¤erence between games 1 and 2 is not, however, statistically signi…cant
(see bottom of Table 7 ). We do, however, …nd that sending the voucher is signi…cantly less
likely in game 3 than in game 1. To recall, game 3 is when the sender has the opportunity
to alert the recipient that the sender chose not to share the voucher. While this almost never
happens, senders may anticipate that information is less likely be trusted (even though there is
not evidence of this in Table 6 ) and decide not to incur the cost of sending it. Alternatively, they
may …nd the choices confusing and, perhaps, distasteful, and opt not to participate. Whatever
the reason, this treatment reduces information sharing.
In column (2) we see that individuals who have redeemed a voucher in the past or current
period are more likely to send it. The estimated coe¢ cient is largest for those who redeem in
the current period. Since subjects only …nd out whether the promised transfer materialized on
their account at the end of the period, this correlation cannot be driven by having received the
voucher. Rather, it suggests either that those who redeem are more attentive to the experiment,
or that those who trust our message more are more likely to both redeem it and share it.
We again …nd that sending is less likely in the non-anonymous variant. The e¤ect is large: an
8 percentage point reduction in information sharing in column (1), compared to an anonymous
probability of sharing of 30 percent in game 0. This suggests that participants are more willing
to share information in an anonymous setting. Because redeeming is also lower in the non17

anonymous treatment, controlling for past and current redeeming behavior in column (2) absorbs
the e¤ect of the non-anonymous dummy.
To investigate the role of anonymity further, we reestimate speci…cation (1.3) with additional
regressors to test for homophily. If the reluctance to share information comes from the sender
realizing that the prospective recipient is di¤erent from him/her, the non-anonymous treatment
e¤ect should vanish for subject pairs who have similar characteristics. This is not really what
we …nd: di¤erences or similarities between sender and receiver are never statistically signi…cant
although, as in Table 6, point estimates for same gender and same education are large in magnitude. If the reduction in information sharing is not due to a reluctance to share with dissimilar
individuals, then it might be due to the sender’s reluctance to have his/her characteristics revealed to the recipient –i.e., the fear of being recognized. This may be particularly problematic
if senders are unsure of the value of the message. Whatever the reason, subjects seem more
willing to share valuable information with complete strangers.
Finally, we note that sending is more common among younger, better educated, richer participants – again consistent with these subjects being more familiar with the mobile phone
technology, and being less concerned about the cost of sending a message to bene…t others.
3.5. Transfers
We now turn to games 4/5/6. We …rst estimate a model on the decision to transfer any amount,
i.e., employing as a dependent variable a dummy taking value 1 if the sender sends a positive
amount to the recipient, and 0 otherwise. Results are show in Table 8. Column (1) follows
speci…cation (1.4); column (2) adds pairwise characteristics to test for homophily. Note that
game 6 has two sending decisions, once for the sender and once for the receiver.
From Table 5, we already know that sending is in general less frequent in games 4/5/6 than
in game 0. This by itself suggests that information sharing is reduced when participants can
get compensated for transferring valuable information. The only exception is game 6, when it
comes to the action of the sender, where the likelihood of sending money to another participant
is higher. By comparing point estimates for games 4 and 6, we see that the di¤erence between
them is large in magnitude: 15 to 16 percentage points. This makes sense: of the four sending
actions taken in games 4/5/6, sending by the sender in game 6 is the one that is most similar
to sending in game 0. The fact that propensities to send are similar in both cases indicates
that giving the sender an opportunity to receive something in return does not, by itself, increase
willingness to send. In contrast, in game 4, not sending anything lets the sender appropriate
the full value of the voucher. This probably explains the di¤erence between the two games.
Game 5 is similar to game 6 regarding senders’ decisions: not sending anything means
forfeiting the voucher. We should thus observe a similar propensity to send in both game 5 and
game 6. This is not what we observe: the frequency of sending in game 5 is similar to game 4
where the sender appropriates the voucher by not sending anything, and lower than in game 6
(sender’s decision). This suggests that subjects prefer sending the information and letting the

18

recipient decide whether to send something back, rather than making a take-it-or-leave it o¤er
to the recipient and risking rejection (43 percent of o¤ers are rejected in game 5). It follows that
the fear of rejection serves as a disincentive to share.
We also observe that the probability of sending back in game 6 is not statistically di¤erent
from sending in game 4: sender and receiver are equally likely to appropriate everything. This
arises even though, in game 6, the recipient knows that the sender is aware that the recipient
could send something back while, in game 4, the potential recipient is not aware that the sender
could have sent anything. This suggests the absence of a reciprocity motive, at least in terms
of sending anything at all. More about this below. We also note that, in both game 4 (sender)
and game 6 (receiver) the probability of sending is much lower than what is typically observed
in a dictator game, where the modal amount shared is often around 50 percent. This di¤erence
may be due to the fact that, in both cases, appropriating everything can be achieved by picking
the default option, which is doing nothing. This exonerates subjects from the moral pressure
that is present in a standard dictator or reverse dictator game, where there is no default option.
Column (1) also shows that there is 6 percentage points more sending in the anonymous
treatment. Turning to column (2), we again …nd no statistical evidence to support homophily
in sending behavior – although the point estimate on same gender is large: 11 percentage
points. These results are similar to those we reported in Table 7. Taken together, this evidence
con…rm subjects’ reluctance to share information in the non-anonymous setting. Regarding
other coe¢ cient estimates (not reported in the table to save space), we again …nd negative
round e¤ects –sharing is lower in rounds 3 and 4 –but no signi…cant di¤erences across periods
–suggesting the absence of subject learning or fatigue in these games. We also …nd that subjects
who are male, young, educated, and poorer are more likely to send something.
Table 8 focuses on the e¤ect of treatment on the extensive margin –the likelihood of sending
something. We complement these results by showing in Table 9 the e¤ect of treatment on the
intensive margin. To this e¤ect, we present a regression of the amount sent (conditional on
sending) as a function of treatments. Given the small number of non-missing observations, we
only include game dummies as regressors. The results show that, conditional on giving, the
amount given is by far larger for subjects who send something back in game 6, suggestive of a
reciprocity motive among the 12 percent of subjects who choose to send something back.
3.6. Robustness
Before concluding, we investigate the robustness of our …ndings to the possibility that some
subjects simply ignore all the messages originating from the experiment –in spite of the fact that:
all the subjects are familiar with the research team, having participated in an earlier randomized
controlled trial by the same researchers; we selected subjects who are already familiar with text
messages and mobile money; and we secured explicit informed consent from all the subjects
shortly before the experiment began.
We …rst note that 31 percent of the subjects assigned to rounds 2-3-4 were never sent any

19

voucher by subjects in earlier rounds. As a result, they never had the opportunity to redeem or
send vouchers to other subjects. These subjects have already been omitted from the analysis.
Of the remaining participants, 55 percent never actively participated in the experiment either
by accepting a voucher or by sending a message to another subject. Our concern is that these
subjects may have failed to participate for reasons beyond their control – e.g., they lost access
to the phone number that was used to contact them. We wish to ensure that our …ndings –e.g.,
low redeeming of vouchers –are not mechanically driven by their non-activity.
To this e¤ect, we repeat the analysis of Tables 6-8 using only subjects who responded to at
least one of our messages. We focus on the main speci…cations of the previous tables, i.e., with
a full list of controls, and with previous redeeming behavior when considering games 0/1/2/3.
We omit the homophily speci…cations since they were never signi…cant. Results are shown in
Table 10 for games 0/1/2/3 and in Table 11 for games 4/5/6. Not surprisingly, the estimated
magnitude of treatment e¤ects is larger –given that inactive subjects are omitted. But otherwise
the …ndings are qualitatively similar to those reported in Tables 6, 7 and 8. In particular, results
regarding the role of anonymity and previous redeeming are unchanged.
There are some small di¤erences, however. We now …nd that sending back in game 6 is
signi…cantly more likely than in game 4 (see Table 11 ), consistent with reciprocity on the part
of receivers in that game. We also …nd that sending in game 2 is signi…cantly lower than in
game 1 (see Table 10 ) and that high income subjects are less likely to send information to others
across all treatments.

4. Concluding remarks
In this paper we followed a sample of rural Mozambicans with access to mobile money services.
We investigated: (i) their willingness to believe valuable information they receive, and (ii) their
willingness to share this valuable information with others. To this e¤ect, we formed an exogenous
network between subjects and tested a number of experimental settings implemented through
SMS messages containing vouchers redeemable for mobile money.
We …nd that subjects have a relatively low propensity to redeem the voucher, but a comparatively high propensity to send it to others. People thus appear rather skeptical about the value
of the message they receive, but this does not stop them from incurring a small cost to share it
with others. Many subjects indeed share information that they do not use themselves, a behavior that can be interpreted as consistent with a warm glow motive. We nonetheless observe that
both redeeming and sending are higher among subjects who previously redeemed the voucher,
suggesting that they are more likely to share information if they …nd it trustworthy. Contrary
to expectations, anonymity increases both receiving and sending, and there is no evidence of
homophily in sharing. Why this is the case is unclear. One possibility is that senders are unsure
of the value of the message, and may worry others may think poorly of them for passing it on.
In terms of behavioral variation between treatments, we …nd that the sharing of information
falls when we introduce a cost of sharing – although we do not …nd that subjects respond to
20

small variations in price. We …nd no evidence that shaming helps information transfer: sharing
falls when we reveal that senders send nothing, and subjects do not like to reveal that they sent
nothing. We also observe less sharing in treatments that allow subjects to appropriate the value
of the shared information –irrespective of the bargaining system put in place.
While these …ndings are informative, our study nonetheless su¤ers from some limitations.
First, we expected that subjects would trust the voucher more, and thus that there would be
more information sharing. This would have generated more usable observations among rounds
2, 3 and 4 subjects, and would have increased statistical power. Second, the SMS format
imposes limitations on the information we can reasonably include in a message. This may have
negatively a¤ected the non-anonymous treatment if subjects get confused by long messages. This
interpretation is di¢ cult to distinguish from our preferred one, which assumes full understanding.
In terms of policy, this research reveals the di¢ culty of using mobile phone messages to
di¤use valuable information in a developing country: even when participants have been sensitized
beforehand and a substantial amount of money is at stake, many individuals fail to make use
of the valuable information they receive. Our take-home lessons for policy-makers are: you can
reach a lot of people cheaply via SMS; but do not think of it as a perfect substitute for other
forms of information dissemination. When using SMS communication, think twice about doing
it in a personal manner, do not attempt to shame participants into sharing with others, and do
not try to reward information sharing. Instead, keep it simple.

5. References
Abebe, Girum, Biruk Tekle, and Yukichi Mano (2018), "Changing Saving and Investment Behavior: the Impact of Financial Literacy Training and Reminders on Micro-businesses," Journal
of African Economies, 1-25 doi: 10.1093/jae/ejy007.
Afzal, Uzma, Giovanna d’Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, Simon Quinn, and Farah Said (2018),
"Two Sides of the Same Rupee? Comparing Demand for Microcredit and Microsaving in a
Framed Field Experiment in Rural Pakistan," Economic Journal, doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12512.
Aker, Jenny C., Paul Collier, and Pedro Vicente (2017), "Is Information Power? Using
Mobile Phones and Free Newspapers During an Election in Mozambique", Review of Economics
and Statistics, 99(2): 185-200.
Andreoni, James (1990), "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
Warm-Glow Giving," Economic Journal, 100(401): 464-77.
Bandiera, Oriana, and Imran Rasul (2006), "Social Networks and Technology Adoption in
Northern Mozambique," Economic Journal, 116(514): 869-902.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Du‡o, and Matthew O. Jackson (2013),
"The Di¤usion of Micro…nance," Science, 341(6144).
Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Du‡o, and Matthew O. Jackson (2016),
"Gossip: Identifying Central Individuals in a Social Network," MIT, mimeograph.

21

Batista, Cátia, and Pedro C. Vicente (2017), "Introducing Mobile Money in Rural Mozambique: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Universidade Nova de Lisboa, mimeograph.
Beaman, Lori, and Jeremy Magruder (2012), "Who Gets the Job Referral? Evidence from
a Social Networks Experiment," American Economic Review, 102(7): 3574-93.
Beaman, Lori, Ariel BenYishay, Jeremy Magruder, and A. Mush…q Mobarak (2015), "Can
Network Theory-based Targeting Increase Technology Adoption?", University of California Berkeley, mimeograph.
Bloch, Francis, Garance Genicot, and Debraj Ray (2008), "Informal Insurance in Social
Networks," Journal of Economic Theory, 143: 36–58.
Blumenstock, Joshua, Michael Callen, and Tarek Ghani (2016), "Mobile-izing Savings with
Automatic Contributions: Experimental Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency and the Default
E¤ect in Afghanistan," University of California Berkeley, mimeograph.
Carter, Michael R., Rachid Laajaj, and Dean Yang (2016), "Subsidies, Savings and Sustainable Technology Adoption: Field Experimental Evidence from Mozambique," University of
Michigan, mimeograph.
Centola, Damon (2010), "The Spread of Behavior in an Online Social Network Experiment,"
Science, 329(5996): 1194-97.
Comola, Margherita, and Silvia Prina (2017), "Treatment E¤ect Accounting for Network
Changes: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention," Case Western Reserve University, mimeograph.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier (2012), "Testing for Altruism and
Social Pressure in Charitable Giving," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 1-56.
Fafchamps, Marcel, Asad Islam, Abdul Malek, and Debayan Pakrashi (2017), "Can Referral
Improve Targeting? Evidence from a Vocational Training Experiment," CEPR DP No. 12070
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Bart Minten (2012), "Impact of SMS-Based Agricultural Information on Indian Farmers," World Bank Economic Review, 26(3): 383-414.
Fafchamps, Marcel, Mans Soderbom, and Monique vanden Boogaart (2016), "Adoption with
Social Learning and Network Externalities," NBER WP No. 22282.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Pedro C. Vicente (2013), "Political Violence and Social Networks:
Experimental Evidence from a Nigerian Election." Journal of Development Economics, 101:
27-48.
Fafchamps, Marcel, Ana Vaz, and Pedro C. Vicente (2017), "Voting and Peer E¤ects: Experimental Evidence from Mozambique," Economic Development and Cultural Change, forthcoming
Foster, Andrew, and Mark Rosenzweig (1995), "Learning by Doing and Learning from Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture," Journal of Political Economy, 103(6):
1176-209.
Golub, Benjamin, and Matthew O. Jackson (2010), "Naïve Learning in Social Networks and
the Wisdom of Crowds," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(1): 112-49.
Vega-Redondo, Fernando (2007), Complex Social Networks, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
22

Garlick, Robert, Kate Orkin, and Simon Quinn (2016), "Call Me Maybe: Experimental
Evidence on Using Mobile Phones to Survey African Microenterprises," University of Oxford,
mimeograph.
Granovetter, Mark (1974), Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago
Greif, Avner (1993), "Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: the
Maghribi Traders’Coalition," American Economic Review, 83(3): 525-48.
Griliches, Zvi (1957), "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
Change," Econometrica, 25(4): 501-22.
Jackson, Matthew O. (2010), Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Jackson, Matthew O., Tomas Rodriguez-Barraquer, and Xu Tan (2012), "Social Capital
and Social Quilts: Network Patterns of Favor Exchange," American Economic Review, 102(5):
1857-97.
Kandori, Michihiro (1992), "Social Norms and Community Enforcement," Review of Economic Studies, 59(1): 63-80.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman (2016),
"Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving," Management Science, 62(12):
3393-411.
Karlan, Dean, Melanie Morten, and Jonathan Zinman (2012), "A Personal Touch: Text
Messaging for Loan Repayment," NBER, WP No. 17952.
Mobius, Markus, Tuan Phan, and Adam Szeidl (2015), "Treasure Hunt: Social Learning in
the Field," NBER, Working Paper No. 21014.
Obermayer, Jami L., William T. Riley, Ofer Asif, and Jersino Jean-Mary (2004), "College
Smoking-cessation Using Cell Phone Text Messaging," Journal of American College Health,
53(2): 71-8.
Okyere, Charles Yaw, Evita Pangaribowo, Felix Asante, and Joachim von Braun (2017),
"The Impacts of Household Water Quality Testing and Information on Safe Water Behaviors:
Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana," ZEF, DP on Development Policy No. 234.
Patrick, Kevin, Fred Raab, Marc Adams, Lindsay Dillon, Marion Zabinski, Cheryl Rock,
William Griswold, and Gregory Norman (2009), "A Text Message-based Intervention for Weight
Loss: Randomized Controlled Trial," Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11(1): e1.
Raifman, Julia RG, Heather E. Lanthorn, Slawa Rokicki, and Günther Fink (2014), "The
Impact of Text Message Reminders on Adherence to Antimalarial Treatment in Northern Ghana:
a Randomized Trial," PloS ONE 9, 10: e109032.
Ryan, Bryce and Neal C. Gross (1943), "The Di¤usion of Hybrid Seed Corn in Two Iowa
Communities," Rural Sociology, 8: 15-24.

23

Round 1 I11 I12 I13 I14
Round 2 I21 I22 I23 I24
Round 3 I31 I32 I33 I34
Round 4 I41 I42 I43 I44
Table 1. A square

Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4
Square 1

G0

A

G1

A

G2

A

G3

A

Square 2

G0

I

G1

I

G2

I

G3

I

Square 3

G0

A

G3

A

G1

A

G2

A

Square 4

G0

I

G3

I

G1

I

G2

I

Square 5

G0

A

G2

A

G3

A

G1

A

Square 6

G0

I

G2

I

G3

I

G1

I

Square 7

G0

A

G4

A

G5

A

G6

A

Square 8

G0

I

G4

I

G5

I

G6

I

Square 9

G0

A

G6

A

G4

A

G5

A

Square 10

G0

I

G6

I

G4

I

G5

I

Square 11

G0

A

G5

A

G6

A

G4

A

Square 12

G0

I

G5

I

G6

I

G4

I

Table 2. Game sequencing

24

Table 3: Sample characteristics and balance
Age
in years

Years of 0-12
education

Post-secondary
education

Income in '000
Meticais/month

58.9%

39.963
(1.003)

6.175
(0.235)

4.2%

3.445
(0.420)

2/66

2/66

7/66

8/66

0/66

p-value
p-value

0.762
0.662

0.818
0.632

0.195
0.813

0.126
0.481

0.934
0.417

p-value

0.189

0.358

0.126

0.481

0.963

Female
Sample characteristics:
Sample mean
Sample standard error
Balance across squares:
Proportion of pairwise comparisons between
squares that are significant at the 10% level
Joint F-test of balance across all squares
Joint F-test that games 1-2-3 = games 4-5-6
Joint F-test of balance across the nonanonymous and anonymous treatments

Note: Pairwise comparison tests are obtained by regressing the variable of interest on a square dummy, using only two squares at a time, and counting how many
times the dummy is significant. There are 66 (i.e., N(N-1)/2) possible pairs of 12 squares. Using a 10 percent significance level, there should on average be 10
percent significant dummies (i.e., 6.6) if the null of perfect balance across all squares is true. Balance across all squares is tested by regressing the characteristic
of interest on square dummies and performing a joint F-test of all dummies. Balance between games 1-2-3 and games 4-5-6 is tested by regressing the
characteristic of interest on a games 4-5-6 dummy. Balance across the anonymous and non-anonymous treatment is tested by regressing the characteristic of
interest on the non-anonymous dummy. P-values from these tests are reported in the Table. Robust standard errors estimated.

Table 4: Choices made by subjects in games 0/1/2/3
Game 0:
base game

Game 1: variable
cost of sending

Game 3:
Game 2: shaming
erroneous
and fixed cost of
message and fixed
sending
cost of sending

Redeeming the voucher:
All subjects
25.9%
13.3%
15.8%
18.8%
Round 1 only (1)
27.1%
12.5%
12.5%
16.7%
Rounds 2-4 (2)
25.3%
14.3%
21.4%
25.0%
Non-anonymous
21.7%
10.7%
12.5%
14.3%
Anonymous
33.3%
17.6%
21.4%
50.0%
Number of observations
143
45
38
32
Sending the voucher:
All subjects
24.2%
14.3%
10.1%
6.3%
Non-anonymous
21.7%
7.0%
0.0%
6.3%
Anonymous
26.8%
18.9%
14.7%
6.3%
Number of observations
392
147
139
128
Note: Redeeming the voucher means responding with a 'yes' SMS to our switchboard. Sending the voucher
means responding with a 'yes' SMS to an SMS invitation to share information about the voucher with another
randomly selected subject. In game 3, the zero value includes both alternatives to sending. Only two subjects
sent the erroneous voucher. (1) In round 1 the voucher SMS is sent at the initiative of the experimenter. (2) In
rounds 2-4 the voucher SMS is sent at the request of a subject.

Table 5: Choices made by subjects in games 0/4/5/6
Game 0:
base game

Game 4:
dictator game

Game 5:
ultimatum game

Game 6:
reverse dictator

Sending the voucher:
Sender sent
Sender sent
Sender sent
Sender sent
Receiver sent back
All subjects
24.2%
14.8%
17.9%
24.2%
11.8%
Non-anonymous treatment
21.7%
10.9%
15.9%
19.4%
9.5%
Anonymous treatment
26.8%
18.3%
20.8%
28.8%
13.3%
Share sent
3.9%
4.3%
11.6%
Share sent conditional on sending
26.5%
23.9%
98.6%
Number of observations
392
115
117
219
51
Redeeming/accepting the voucher:
Receiver redeemed
Receiver accepted
Sender redeemed
All subjects
25.9%
57.1%
37.5%
Round 1 only (1)
27.1%
n.a.
37.5%
Rounds 2-4 (2)
25.3%
57.1%
n.a.
Number of observations
143
7
24
Note: In game 4, senders can send up to 35 Meticais to receivers. 'Sender sent' is the proportion of senders sending positive amounts. The 'share sent'
is the average amount sent divided by 35, the value of the voucher. Receiving is automatic in this game. Game 5 is analogous, except that receivers
decide whether to accept offers sent by senders. 'Receiver accepted' is the proportion of accepted take-it-or-leave-it offers. In game 6, senders in
round 1 have the choice of redeeming the voucher sent by the experimenter by responding with a 'yes' SMS to our switchboard. 'Sender redeemed'
shows the proportion of senders doing so. In this game senders can send vouchers to receivers like in the base game: 'sender sent' is the proportion of
vouchers sent. Receiving after round 1 is automatic. Receivers can then send back to senders up to the full amount of the voucher received (35
Meticais). 'Receiver sent back' is the proportion of receivers sending back positive amounts. The 'share sent' is the average amount sent back divided
by 35, the value of the voucher. (1) In round 1 the voucher SMS is sent at the initiative of the experimenter. (2) In rounds 2-4 the voucher SMS is sent
at the request of another subject.

Table 6: The decision to redeem the voucher in games 0/1/2/3
(1)
Treatment variables (game 0 is omitted category):
Game 1 dummy (variable cost)

(2)

-0.304***
(0.064)
Game 2 dummy (shaming and fixed cost of sending)
-0.302***
(0.076)
Game 3 dummy (erroneous message and fixed cost of sending)
-0.213**
(0.094)
Non-anonymous treatment dummy
-0.196***
(0.072)
Dummy=1 if subject redeemed a voucher in a previous period
0.346***
(0.090)
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics times non-anonymous treatment dummy:
Same gender

-0.182**
(0.073)
-0.181**
(0.084)
-0.116
(0.096)
-0.208***
(0.071)

-0.134
(0.182)
-0.119
(0.215)
0.023
(0.200)
-0.369*
(0.214)

yes
yes
no
no
0.467***
(0.094)
0.017
258

0.179
(0.158)
0.082
(0.152)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.009
(0.012)
yes
yes
yes
yes
0.668**
(0.308)
0.028
117

Same post-secondary education dummy
Absolute difference in age
Absolute difference in income (in '000 Meticais/month)
Round dummies
Period dummies
Individual characteristics:
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics (uninteracted):
Intercept

(3)

yes
yes
yes
no
0.646***
(0.128)
0.153
244

Adjusted R-squared
Number of observations
Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 2 (β2 )
p-value
0.992
0.984
0.885
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 3 (β3 )
p-value
0.444
0.250
0.258
Test that game 2 (β2 ) = game 3 (β3 )
p-value
0.467
0.248
0.317
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variable is a binary variable defined as 1 if, when given the chance,
the subject sends an SMS accepting the voucher. In column 3 we only include observations from rounds 2-3-4
since, in round 1, all SMS originate from the experimenters and thus differences in individual characteristics are
not defined; we also include as controls the pairwise differences in individual characteristics uninteracted with
the non-anonymous dummy. Individual characteristics include a female dummy, age, a post-secondary education
dummy, and income in Meticais/month. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 7: The decision to send the voucher in games 0/1/2/3
(1)
Treatment variables (game 0 is omitted category):
Game 1 dummy (variable cost)

(2)

-0.089**
(0.042)
Game 2 dummy (shaming and fixed cost of sending)
-0.135***
(0.037)
Game 3 dummy (erroneous message and fixed cost of sending)
-0.187***
(0.039)
Non-anonymous treatment dummy
0.023
(0.022)
Additional cost sending the voucher
0.001
(0.004)
Dummy=1 if subject redeemed a voucher in the current period
0.466***
(0.041)
Dummy=1 if subject redeemed a voucher in a previous period
0.141***
(0.041)
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics times non-anonymous treatment dummy:
Same gender

-0.118**
(0.056)
-0.174***
(0.045)
-0.195***
(0.045)
-0.075***
(0.026)
-0.001
(0.005)

-0.195**
(0.086)
-0.189***
(0.045)
-0.262***
(0.080)
-0.116*
(0.062)
0.000
(0.005)

yes
yes
no
no
0.299***
(0.032)
0.042
806

0.044
(0.051)
0.052
(0.051)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.004)
yes
yes
yes
yes
0.489***
(0.082)
0.128
731

Same post-secondary education dummy
Absolute difference in age
Absolute difference in income (in '000 Meticais/month)
Round dummies
Period dummies
Individual characteristics
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics (uninteracted):
Intercept

(3)

yes
yes
yes
no
0.324***
(0.044)
0.389
770

R-squared
Number of observations
Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 2 (β2 )
p-value
0.156
0.138
0.109
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 3 (β3 )
p-value
0.042
0.004
0.047
Test that game 2 (β2 ) = game 3 (β3 )
p-value
0.505
0.047
0.642
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variable is a binary variable defined as 1 if, when given the chance,
the subject sends an SMS giving the voucher to another subject. In game 3, sending the false message (only 2
observations) is assimilated to not sending the voucher. The additional cost of sending the voucher is 0 in game 0,
5 Meticais in games 2 and 3, and varying between 0/5/10/15 Meticais in game 1. There is no sending in round 4.
In column 3, we also include as controls the pairwise differences in individual characteristics uninteracted with
the non-anonymous dummy. Individual characteristics include a female dummy, age, a post-secondary education
dummy, and income in Meticais/month. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 8: The decision to send something in games 4/5/6
(1)
Treatment variables (game 4 is omitted category):
Game 5 dummy (ultimatum)

(2)

0.053
0.048
(0.051)
(0.051)
Game 6 dummy (reverse dictator -- sender)
0.149***
0.161***
(0.047)
(0.049)
Game 6 dummy (reverse dictator -- receiver)
0.066
0.073
(0.068)
(0.068)
Non-anonymous treatment dummy
-0.063*
0.009
(0.035)
(0.068)
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics times non-anonymous treatment dummy:
Same gender dummy
0.109
(0.080)
Absolute difference in age
0.001
(0.003)
Absolute difference in income (in '000 Meticais/month)
-0.013
(0.009)
Round dummies
yes
yes
Period dummies
yes
yes
Individual characteristics:
no
yes
Pairwise differences in individual characteristics (uninteracted):
no
yes
Intercept
0.204***
0.437***
(0.046)
(0.115)
R-squared
0.040
0.103
Number of observations
502
465
Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 5 (β5 ) = game 6 -- sender (β6 )
p-value
0.057
0.032
Test that game 5 (β5 ) = game 6 -- receiver (β6b )
p-value
0.849
0.645
Test that game 6 sender (β6 ) = game 6 receiver (β6b )
p-value
0.158
0.188
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variable is a binary variable defined as 1 if, when given
the chance, the subject sends an SMS sharing the voucher with another subject. In column 2 we also
include as controls the pairwise differences in individual characteristics uninteracted with the nonanonymous dummy. The absolute difference in education level is omitted due to multicollinearity.
Individual characteristics include a female dummy, age, a post-secondary education dummy, and
income in Meticais/month. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 9: Amount sent in games 4/5/6, conditional on sending
(1)
Treatment variables (game 4 is omitted category):
Game 5 dummy (ultimatum)
Game 6 dummy (reverse dictator -- receiver)
Intercept
R-squared
Number of observations

-0.911
(3.488)
25.214***
(3.115)
9.286***
(3.091)
0.646
17

Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 5 (β5 ) = game 6 -- receiver (β6b ) p-value
0.000
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variable is the amount sent to
another subject in Meticais, conditional on an amount being sent. This decision
is only relevant in game 4 (sender), game 5 (sender), and game 6 (receiver).
Due to the small number of observations, other regressors are not included.
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 10: The decisions to redeem and send in games 0/1/2/3 without inactive subjects

Treatment variables (game 0 is omitted category):
Game 1 dummy (variable cost)
Game 2 dummy (shaming and fixed cost of sending)
Game 3 dummy (erroneous message and fixed cost of sending)
Non-anonymous treatment dummy

Redeem
(1)

Send
(2)

-0.605***
(0.198)
-0.586***
(0.182)
-0.384
(0.248)
-0.383***
(0.144)

0.268*
(0.157)
yes
yes
yes
1.206***
(0.241)
0.121
107

-0.328***
(0.107)
-0.447***
(0.086)
-0.525***
(0.083)
0.043
(0.056)
0.003
(0.009)
0.331***
(0.050)
0.310***
(0.066)
yes
yes
yes
0.686***
(0.100)
0.314
337

0.899
0.206
0.192

0.078
0.010
0.179

Additional cost sending the voucher
Dummy=1 if subject redeemed a voucher in the current period
Dummy=1 if subject redeemed a voucher in a previous period
Round dummies:
Period dummies:
Individual characteristics:
Intercept
R-squared
Number of observations
Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 2 (β2 )
Test that game 1 (β1 ) = game 3 (β3 )
Test that game 2 (β2 ) = game 3 (β3 )

p-value
p-value
p-value

Note: All regressions are OLS. In redeem the voucher, the dependent variable is a binary variable defined
as 1 if, when given the chance, the subject sends an SMS accepting the voucher. In send the voucher, the
dependent variable is a binary variable defined as 1 if, when given the chance, the subject sends an SMS
giving the voucher to another subject. In game 3, sending the false message (only 2 observations) is
assimilated to not sending the voucher. The additional cost of sending the voucher is 0 in game 0, 5
Meticais in games 2 and 3, and varying between 0/5/10/15 Meticais in game 1. Individual characteristics
include gender, age, a post-secondary education dummy, and monthly income. Robust standard errors
reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 11: The decision to send airtime in games 4-5-6 without inactive subjects
send any
amount
Treatment variables (game 4 is omitted category):
Game 5 dummy (ultimatum)
Game 6 dummy (reverse dictator -- sender)
Game 6 dummy (reverse dictator -- receiver)
Non-anonymous treatment dummy
Round dummies:
Period dummies:
Individual characteristics:
Intercept
R-squared
Number of observations

0.073
(0.081)
0.346***
(0.076)
0.262**
(0.132)
-0.027
(0.068)
yes
yes
yes
0.258*
(0.141)
0.116
245

Joint coefficient tests:
Test that game 5 (β5 ) = game 6 -- sender (β6 )
p-value
0.001
Test that game 5 (β5 ) = game 6 -- receiver (β6b )
p-value
0.176
Test that game 6 sender (β6 ) = game 6 receiver (β6b )
p-value
0.481
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variable is a binary variable defined as 1 if, when
given the chance, the subject sends an SMS sharing the voucher with another subject. Individual
characteristics include gender, age, a post-secondary education dummy, and monthly income.
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.

Appendix

Table A1: Introductory messages
Version

Language

Msg d project mKesh NOVAFRICA. Enviaremos
sms em breve. Respond pra ganhar bonus mKesh.
Original
Portuguese Respond a cada numero que lhe enviar SMS. Duvidas
Anonymous
ligue ou SMS-821783387
and nonMessage from project mKesh NOVAFRICA. We
anonymous
will soon send SMS. Answer to earn bonus mKesh.
English
translation Answer to each number sending SMS. Any doubts
call or send SMS to 821783387.

Introductory messages
All subjects/days
NOVAFRICA. Nossas SMS NAO SAO ENVIADAS
por 823131. SAO ENVIADAS por varios
NUMEROS NORMAIS. Respond a cada numero. So
custa SMS ou 2 meticais quando nao tem SMS

Senhor(a) fez parte do estudo mKesh. Daremos
oportunidade de ganhar dinheiro em mKesh. No fim
tera um bonus por participar de 70Mts. Responder
custa 1sms ou 2Mts

NOVAFRICA. Our SMS ARE NOT SENT through
823131. They ARE SENT through several
REGULAR NUMBERS. Answer to each of those
numbers. It only costs SMS or 2 Meticais when you
do not have SMS.

You took part in the mKesh study. We will give you
the opportunity to earn money in mKesh. In the end
you will have a bonus of 70 Meticais for
participating. Responding costs 1 SMS or 2
Meticais.

Table A2: Messages in the base game
Version

Anonymous

Language

Redeeming messages

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.
Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.

Nonanonymous

You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
need to respond to each one of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

You can earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account.
English
For that purpose, you need to respond to this
translation
message with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Ate quatro pessoas deram-t possibilidade d ganhar
35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Pra aceitar deve
Original
Anonymous
Portuguese responder cada mensagem seguinte com a palavra
SIM nas proximas 24h

Nonanonymous

Sending messages
day 1
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Responda
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas SIM se quiser.
proximas 24h
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM
proximas 24h
se quiser.

days 2 and 3
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Responda
se quiser.
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas SIM se quiser.
proximas 24h

Ate quatro pessoas deram-t possibilidade d ganhar
35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Pra aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder cada mensagem seguinte com a palavra
SIM nas proximas 24h

Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser.

Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa 1? S/nome e [e.g.,
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser.
proximas 24h

Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [14]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. Respond YES if you want. [These are up
to 4 messages, one for each person.]

You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
need to respond to each one of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

day 4
Ate quatro pessoas deram-t possibilidade d ganhar
35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Pra aceitar deve
Original
Anonymous
Portuguese responder cada mensagem seguinte com a palavra
SIM nas proximas 24h
Ate quatro pessoas deram-t possibilidade d ganhar
35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Pra aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder cada mensagem seguinte com a palavra
SIM nas proximas 24h
Nonanonymous

Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
has [level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
want. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]

Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM
se quiser.
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [14]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. Respond YES if you want. [These are up
to 4 messages, one for each person.]

Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
has [level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
want. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]

Table A3: Messages in game 1
Version

Language

Anonymous

Original
Portuguese

Original
Portuguese

Nonanonymous
English
translation

Anonymous

Original
Portuguese

Redeeming messages

Sending messages
day 1
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas responda SIM. O custo sera [0/5/10/15]Mts em
conta mKesh.
nas proximas 24h.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
comissao.
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
responda SIM. O custo sera [0/5/10/15]Mts em
nas proximas 24h.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
comissao.
conta mKesh.
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
You can earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account.
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
has [level of education], and has [income band in
For that purpose, you need to respond to this
need to respond to each one of the following
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
message with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
want. The cost will be [0/5/10/15] Meticais in the
You may also have to pay a fee.
mKesh account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
person, with random price between the four levels.]
days 2 and 3
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas responda SIM. O custo sera [0/5/10/15]Mts em
responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com se quiser.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
conta mKesh.
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
comissao.
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
comissao.

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser.
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
Nonanonymous

Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [14]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. Respond YES if you want. [These are up
to 4 messages, one for each person.]

You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
need to respond to each one of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
You may also have to pay a fee.

day 4
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Anonymous
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
Nonanonymous

Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM
se quiser.
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [14]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. Respond YES if you want. [These are up
to 4 messages, one for each person.]

Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
responda SIM. O custo sera [0/5/10/15]Mts em
conta mKesh.
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
has [level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
want. The cost will be [0/5/10/15] Meticais in the
mKesh account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
person, with random price between the four levels.]

Table A4: Messages in game 2
Version

Anonymous

Language

Redeeming messages

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.
Nonanonymous
You can earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account.
English
For that purpose, you need to respond to this
translation
message with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Anonymous
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Nonanonymous
Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Anonymous

Sending messages
day 1
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. Em
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
alternativa enviaremos um codigo errado a pessoa.
comissao.
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. Em
comissao.
alternativa enviaremos um codigo errado a pessoa.
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
has [level of education], and has [income band in
need to respond to each one of the following
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
want. The cost will be 5 Meticais in the mKesh
You may also have to pay a fee.
account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
person.]
days 2 and 3
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
se quiser. [OR] A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. Em
errado. o que nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
alternativa enviaremos um codigo errado a pessoa.
comissao.
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser. [OR] 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo errado. o que uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. Em
tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [661comissao.
alternativa enviaremos um codigo errado a pessoa.
1320]Mts/mes.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [1Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
4]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
has [level of education], and has [income band in
in income. Respond YES if you want. [OR] Person [1need to respond to each one of the following
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
4] sent you a wrong code, which does not let you win
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
want. The cost will be 5 Meticais in the mKesh
35 Meticais. His/her name is [first name of recipient
You may also have to pay a fee.
account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has
person.]
[level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income.
day 4

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
se quiser. [OR] A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
errado. o que nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts.
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser. [OR]
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo errado. o que
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE].
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [6611320]Mts/mes.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [1Non4]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
anonymous
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
Up to four different people gave you the opportunity education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
in income. Respond YES if you want. [OR] Person [1translation accept you need to respond to each of the following 4] sent you a wrong code, which does not let you win
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
35 Meticais. His/her name is [first name of recipient
in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has
[level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income.

Table A5: Messages in game 3
Version

Anonymous

Language

Redeeming messages

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.

Nonanonymous
You can earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account.
English
For that purpose, you need to respond to this
translation
message with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Anonymous

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Nonanonymous
Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Anonymous

Sending messages
day 1
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. 2
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
altern/as: enviarmos codigo errado -resp/a NAO.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
enviarmos nada -nao resp/a.
comissao.
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. 2
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
altern/as: enviarmos codigo errado -resp/a NAO.
comissao.
enviarmos nada -nao resp/a.
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
has [level of education], and has [income band in
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
need to respond to each one of the following
want. The cost will be 5 Meticais in the mKesh
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
account. 2 alternatives: we send a wrong code You may also have to pay a fee.
respond NO; we do not send anything - do not
respond. [These are 4 messages, one for each
person.]
days 2 and 3
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Se quiser
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. 2
se quiser. [OR] A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
altern/as: enviarmos codigo errado -resp/a NAO.
errado. o que nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts.
proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
enviarmos nada -nao resp/a.
comissao.
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser. [OR] 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser
A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo errado. o que uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas
resp/a SIM. O custo sera 5Mts em mKesh. 2
nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. proximas 24h. Pode tambem ter de pagar uma
altern/as: enviarmos codigo errado -resp/a NAO.
comissao.
tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [661enviarmos nada -nao resp/a.
1320]Mts/mes.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [1Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
4]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
has [level of education], and has [income band in
in income. Respond YES if you want. [OR] Person [1- winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
4] sent you a wrong code, which does not let you win need to respond to each one of the following
want. The cost will be 5 Meticais in the mKesh
35 Meticais. His/her name is [first name of recipient messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
account. 2 alternatives: we send a wrong code You may also have to pay a fee.
in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has
respond NO; we do not send anything - do not
[level of education], and has [income band in
respond. [These are 4 messages, one for each
Meticais]/month in income. [These are up to 4
person.]
messages, one for each person.]
day 4

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa [1-4]? Responda SIM
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
se quiser. [OR] A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
errado. o que nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts.
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.

Quer receber 35Mts da pessoa 3? S/nome e [e.g.,
JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe a possibilidade de
[661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM se quiser. [OR]
ganhar 35 Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para aceitar deve
Original
A pessoa [1-4] enviou-lhe um codigo errado. o que
Portuguese responder a cada uma das seguintes mensagens com
nao lhe deixa ganhar 35 Mts. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE].
a palavra SIM nas proximas 24h.
tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [6611320]Mts/mes.
Do you want to receive 35 Meticais from person [14]? His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
Nonletters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
anonymous
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
Up to four different people gave you the opportunity
in income. Respond YES if you want. [OR] Person [1to earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. To
English
4] sent you a wrong code, which does not let you win
translation accept you need to respond to each of the following
35 Meticais. His/her name is [first name of recipient
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has
[level of education], and has [income band in
Meticais]/month in income. [These are up to 4
messages, one for each person.]

Table A6: Messages in game 4 (dictator)
Version

Language

Anonymous

Original
Portuguese

Redeeming messages

Original
Portuguese
Nonanonymous

Anonymous

English
translation

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe algum dinheiro para
Original
Recebeu [up to 35]Mts da pessoa [1-4].
Portuguese a sua conta mKesh.

Sending messages
day 1
Ganhou 35Mts em mKesh. Deste valor pode dar ate 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]. Resp/a valor que quer dar
p/este n/o em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.
Ganhou 35Mts em mKesh. Deste valor pode dar ate 35Mts a pessoa 1. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g.,
30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Resp/a valor que quer dar p/este n/o em
24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.
You have earned 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. From this value you can give up to 35 Meticais to
person [1-4]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. Respond with the value you want to give to this phone number in the next 24 hours. The
difference to the 35 Meticais will be in your mKesh account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
person.]
days 2 and 3
Ganhou 35Mts em mKesh. Deste valor pode dar ate 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]. Resp/a valor que quer dar
p/este n/o em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.

Recebeu [up to 35]Mts da pessoa [1-4]. S/nome e
Ganhou 35Mts em mKesh. Deste valor pode dar ate 35Mts a pessoa 1. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g.,
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe algum dinheiro para
Original
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Resp/a valor que quer dar p/este n/o em
Portuguese a sua conta mKesh.
de [661-1320]Mts/mes.
24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.
You have received [up to 35] Meticais from person
NonYou have earned 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. From this value you can give up to 35 Meticais to
[1-4]. His/her name is [first name of recipient in
anonymous
person [1-4]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
Up to four different people sent you some money to capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level
English
in income. Respond with the value you want to give to this phone number in the next 24 hours. The
of education], and has [income band in
translation your mKesh account.
difference to the 35 Meticais will be in your mKesh account. [These are 4 messages, one for each
Meticais]/month in income. [These are up to 4
person.]
messages, one for each person.]
day 4
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe algum dinheiro para
Original
Recebeu [up to 35]Mts da pessoa [1-4].
Anonymous
Portuguese a sua conta mKesh.
Recebeu [up to 35]Mts da pessoa [1-4]. S/nome e
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe algum dinheiro para
Original
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os
Portuguese a sua conta mKesh.
de [661-1320]Mts/mes.
You have received [up to 35] Meticais from person
Non[1-4]. His/her name is [first name of recipient in
anonymous
Up to four different people sent you some money to capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level
English
of education], and has [income band in
translation your mKesh account.
Meticais]/month in income. [These are up to 4
messages, one for each person.]

Table A7: Messages in game 5 (ultimatum)
Version

Language

Anonymous

Original
Portuguese

Redeeming messages

Sending messages
day 1
Pode ganhar com outra pessoa 35Mts em mKesh. Proponha q/tos Mts de 35 devem ir p/pessoa 1: se ela
aceitar. ambos recebem prop/a. senao nada. Resp/a n/o de 0-35 em 24h.
Pode ganhar com outra pessoa 35Mts em mKesh. Proponha q/tos Mts de 35 devem ir p/pessoa 1: se ela
aceitar. ambos recebem prop/a. senao nada. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Resp/a n/o de 0-35 em 24h.

Original
Portuguese
Nonanonymous

You can earn 35 Meticais in mKesh together with another person. Propose how many Meticais out of 35
should de given to person [1-4]: if he/she accepts, you both earn the amounts you propose; if he/she does
not accept, nobody earns any money. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of education], and has [income
band in Meticais]/month in income. Respond with the value between 0 and 35 Meticais in the next 24
hours. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]
days 2 and 3

English
translation

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe propostas de
divisao de 35Mts em conta mKesh. Para cada
Original
proposta/pessoa: se aceitar. ambos recebem os
Anonymous
Portuguese
valores da proposta. se nao aceitar. ninguem recebe
nada.
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe propostas de
divisao de 35Mts em conta mKesh. Para cada
Original
proposta/pessoa: se aceitar. ambos recebem os
Portuguese
valores da proposta. se nao aceitar. ninguem recebe
nada.
Nonanonymous
English
translation

Anonymous

Original
Portuguese

Original
Portuguese

Nonanonymous
English
translation

A pessoa [1-4] propoe dar-lhe [up to 35]Mts e ficar
com o resto (de 35Mts). Se quiser aceitar esta
proposta responda SIM.

Pode ganhar com outra pessoa 35Mts em mKesh. Proponha q/tos Mts de 35 devem ir p/pessoa 1: se ela
aceitar. ambos recebem prop/a. senao nada. Resp/a n/o de 0-35 em 24h.

A pessoa [1-4] propoe dar-lhe [up to 35]Mts e ficar
com o resto (de 35Mts). S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem Pode ganhar com outra pessoa 35Mts em mKesh. Proponha q/tos Mts de 35 devem ir p/pessoa 1: se ela
aceitar. ambos recebem prop/a. senao nada. S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
[e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [661rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Resp/a n/o de 0-35 em 24h.
1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser aceitar esta proposta
responda SIM.
Person [1-4] proposes to give you [up to 35]
Meticais and keep the remainder (out of 35
Up to four different people sent you proposals to
You can earn 35 Meticais in mKesh together with another person. Propose how many Meticais out of 35
Meticais). His/her name is [first name of recipient in
divide 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. For each
should de given to person [1-4]: if he/she accepts, you both earn the amounts you propose; if he/she does
capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level
proposal/person: if you accept, both you and that
not accept, nobody earns any money. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of education], and has [income
of education], and has [income band in
person receive the values in the proposal; if you do
band in Meticais]/month in income. Respond with the value between 0 and 35 Meticais in the next 24
Meticais]/month in income. If you want to accept
not accept, nobody earns any money.
hours. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]
this proposal, respond YES. [These are up to 4
messages, one for each person.]
day 4
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe propostas de
A pessoa [1-4] propoe dar-lhe [up to 35]Mts e ficar
divisao de 35Mts em conta mKesh. Para cada
com o resto (de 35Mts). Se quiser aceitar esta
proposta/pessoa: se aceitar. ambos recebem os
valores da proposta. se nao aceitar. ninguem recebe proposta responda SIM.
nada.
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe propostas de
A pessoa [1-4] propoe dar-lhe [up to 35]Mts e ficar
divisao de 35Mts em conta mKesh. Para cada
com o resto (de 35Mts). S/nome e [e.g., JOSE]. tem
proposta/pessoa: se aceitar. ambos recebem os
[e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os de [661valores da proposta. se nao aceitar. ninguem recebe 1320]Mts/mes. Se quiser aceitar esta proposta
nada.
responda SIM.
Person [1-4] proposes to give you [up to 35]
Meticais and keep the remainder (out of 35
Up to four different people sent you proposals to
Meticais). His/her name is [first name of recipient in
divide 35 Meticais in your mKesh account. For each
capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level
proposal/person: if you accept, both you and that
of education], and has [income band in
person receive the values in the proposal; if you do
Meticais]/month in income. If you want to accept
not accept, nobody earns any money.
this proposal, respond YES. [These are up to 4
messages, one for each person.]

Table A8: Messages in game 6 (reverse dictator)
Version

Anonymous

Language

Redeeming messages

Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.
Pode ganhar 35Mts na sua conta mKesh. Para isso
Original
deve responder a esta mensagem com a palavra SIM
Portuguese
nas proximas 24h.

Nonanonymous

Anonymous

You can earn 35 Meticais in your mKesh account.
English
For that purpose, you need to respond to this
translation
message with the word YES in the next 24 hours.

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe 35 Mts (cada uma)
Original
para a sua conta mKesh. Pode recompensar cada uma
Portuguese
delas de volta.
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe 35 Mts (cada uma)
Original
para a sua conta mKesh. Pode recompensar cada uma
Portuguese
delas de volta.

Nonanonymous
Up to four different people sent you 35 Meticais in
English
your mKesh account. You can compensate each one
translation
of them back for that.

Anonymous

Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe 35 Mts (cada uma)
Original
para a sua conta mKesh. Pode recompensar cada uma
Portuguese
delas de volta.
Ate quatro pessoas enviaram-lhe 35 Mts (cada uma)
Original
para a sua conta mKesh. Pode recompensar cada uma
Portuguese
delas de volta.

Nonanonymous
Up to four different people sent you 35 Meticais in
English
your mKesh account. You can compensate each one
translation
of them back for that.

Sending messages
day 1
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Responda
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas SIM se quiser.
proximas 24h
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM
proximas 24h
se quiser.
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
has [level of education], and has [income band in
need to respond to each one of the following
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
want. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]
days 2 and 3
Recebeu 35Mts em mKesh da pessoa [1-4]. Deste
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35Mts a pessoa [1-4]? Responda
valor pode dar de volta ate 35Mts. Resp/a valor que 35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
quer dar p/este n/o em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas SIM se quiser.
s/ conta mKesh.
proximas 24h
Recebeu 35Mts em mKesh da pessoa [1-4]. S/nome
Pode dar possibilidade de outras 4 pessoas ganhar
Quer dar a ganhar 35 Mts a pessoa [1-4]? S/nome e
e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os
35Mts cada uma. Para isso deve responder a cada
[e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [e.g., 8a cl.]. e tem
de [661-1320]Mts/mes. Deste valor pode dar de
uma das seguintes mensagens com a palavra SIM nas rend/os de [e.g., 661-1320]Mts/mes. Responda SIM
volta ate 35Mts. Resp/a valor que quer dar p/este n/o
proximas 24h
se quiser.
em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.
You have received 35 Meticais from person [1-4].
His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
Do you want to give person [1-4] the opportunity to
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month You can give the opportunity to 4 other people of
earn 35 Meticais? His/her name is [first name of
recipient in capital letters]. He/she is [age] years old,
in income. From this value you can give back up to winning 35 Meticais each. For that purpose, you
has [level of education], and has [income band in
35 Meticais to person [1-4]. Respond with the value need to respond to each one of the following
Meticais]/month in income. Respond YES if you
you want to give to this phone number in the next 24 messages with the word YES in the next 24 hours.
want. [These are 4 messages, one for each person.]
hours. The difference to the 35 Meticais will be in
your mKesh account. [These are up to 4 messages,
one for each person.]
day 4
Recebeu 35Mts em mKesh da pessoa [1-4]. Deste
valor pode dar de volta ate 35Mts. Resp/a valor que
quer dar p/este n/o em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na
s/ conta mKesh.
Recebeu 35Mts em mKesh da pessoa [1-4]. S/nome
e [e.g., JOSE]. tem [e.g., 30]. a [8a cl.]. e tem rend/os
de [661-1320]Mts/mes. Deste valor pode dar de
volta ate 35Mts. Resp/a valor que quer dar p/este n/o
em 24h. A dif/a p/os 35 caira na s/ conta mKesh.
You have received 35 Meticais from person [1-4].
His/her name is [first name of recipient in capital
letters]. He/she is [age] years old, has [level of
education], and has [income band in Meticais]/month
in income. From this value you can give back up to
35 Meticais to person [1-4]. Respond with the value
you want to give to this phone number in the next 24
hours. The difference to the 35 Meticais will be in
your mKesh account. [These are up to 4 messages,
one for each person.]

