                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INEQUALITY AVERSION, POPULISM, AND THE BACKLASH AGAINST GLOBALIZATION

                                             Lubos Pastor
                                            Pietro Veronesi

                                         Working Paper 24900
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2018




 The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions with which they are
 affiliated, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research. For helpful comments, we are grateful to
 our discussants Raquel Fernandez, Eitan Goldman, Hanno Lustig, and Alp Simsek, but also to Luca
 Anderlini, John Cochrane, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Cam Harvey, Andrew Karolyi, Paymon Khorrami,
 Hong Liu, Yao Zeng, conference participants at the 2018 ESSFM, 2019 Spring NBER Asset Pricing
 meeting, 2019 Spring NBER Political Economy meeting, 2019 WFA, 2019 MFA, 2019 MIT-FARFE
 Capital Markets Research Workshop, 2019 Czech and Slovak Economic Associations Meeting, 2019
 PHBS Workshop in Macroeconomics and Finance, 2020 AFA, 2020 Jackson Hole Finance Conference,
 and seminar audiences at Bocconi, Carnegie Mellon, CERGE-EI, Chicago, Colorado, EIEF, Harvard,
 Imperial, LSE, McGill, Stanford, Washington, WU Vienna, Yale, and the National Bank of Slovakia.
 We are grateful to Will Cassidy, Mihir Gandhi, and Blair Vorsatz for outstanding research assistance
 and to the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices
 for research support.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2018 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
Inequality Aversion, Populism, and the Backlash Against Globalization
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 24900
August 2018, Revised May 2020
JEL No. D72,F65,G11,G12,G18,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

Motivated by the recent rise of populism in western democracies, we develop a tractable equilibrium
model in which a populist backlash emerges endogenously in a strong economy. In the model, voters
dislike inequality, especially the high consumption of "elites." Economic growth exacerbates inequality
due to heterogeneity in preferences, which generates heterogeneity in returns on capital. In response
to rising inequality, rich-country voters optimally elect a populist promising to end globalization. Equality
is a luxury good. Countries with more inequality, higher financial development, and trade deficits
are more vulnerable to populism, both in the model and in the data.


Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu

Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu
   “Let us not be naive. Today, globalization is going through a major crisis...”
    Emmanuel Macron, World Economic Forum, Davos, January 2018.

   “The gains from globalization are not evenly distributed.” Milanović (2016, p.10).


1. Introduction

One of the defining trends of the late 2010s is the ongoing rise of populism in the West.
This trend has gone hand in hand with a pushback against globalization, which is perhaps
best exemplified by two momentous 2016 votes: the British vote to leave the European
Union (“Brexit”) and the election of a protectionist, Donald Trump, to the U.S. presidency.
In both cases, rich-country electorates voted to effectively take a step back from the long-
lasting process of global integration. Interestingly, they did it after years of economic growth.
It would be easier to understand voters’ frustration during an economic crisis, but at the
time of these votes, both countries’ unemployment rates were below 5%.

   Why is this pushback against globalization happening? Why is it happening in rich
countries, such as the U.S. and UK? And why is it happening when the countries’ economies
are strong? These are the questions we attempt to address. Some blame the pushback
on reasons outside economics, such as a cultural backlash against the ascent of progressive
values (e.g., Inglehart and Norris, 2016); others blame it on the naivité of voters. We cannot
rule out those mechanisms, but we argue that many aspects of the populist backlash can
also be understood in a simple economic model with rational voters.

   We develop a tractable heterogeneous-agent equilibrium model in which a backlash
against globalization emerges as the optimal response of voters to rising inequality. Income
inequality within rich countries has grown substantially over the past four decades, especially
at the top of the income distribution (e.g., Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez, 2011). In our model,
inequality also grows over time, also especially at the top, fueled by economic growth. In
other words, growth aggravates inequality, which eventually subdues globalization.

   Populism is a political ideology pitching ordinary people, who are viewed as homogeneous
and inherently good, against established “elites,” who are deemed immoral and corrupt.
Anti-elitism enters our model through agents’ preferences. We assume that agents dislike
inequality, which we measure by the variance of consumption shares across agents. Given
our other assumptions, equilibrium consumption develops a right-skewed distribution across
agents. As a result, inequality is driven by the high consumption of the rich rather than the
low consumption of the poor. Therefore, aversion to inequality mostly reflects envy of the
economic elites rather than compassion for those left behind.


                                               1
       Besides being anti-elite, populists tend to oppose globalization. They prioritize national
interests over international cooperation, strong leadership over diplomacy, and protectionism
over free trade. They often advocate anti-global policies such as tariffs and immigration
controls. Prior studies link the rise of populism to exposure to globalization.1 Accordingly,
we define a populist as a politician promising to reverse global integration.2

       In the model, there are two countries, the U.S. and the rest of the world (“RoW”). Both
countries grow trees producing output, which trends upward. At the outset, the countries
are economically integrated, with no barriers to trade. At a given time, both countries
hold elections featuring two candidates. The “mainstream” candidate promises to preserve
globalization whereas the “populist” candidate promises to end it. If either country elects a
populist, a move to autarky takes place. After that, each country consumes the output of
its own tree and there is no cross-border trade. Elections are decided by the median voter.

       Agents trade risky stocks, which represent claims on the output-producing trees, and risk-
less bonds. They have constant-relative-risk-aversion (CRRA) preferences over consumption.
The preference parameter γ, which represents both risk aversion and the inverse of the elas-
ticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), is heterogeneous across agents, both within and
across countries. U.S. agents have lower γ’s than RoW agents, on average.

   We first solve for optimal consumption and portfolio choice under globalization. Higher-γ
agents choose consumption plans that are smoother, both across states and over time. Across
states, stocks are riskier than bonds; therefore, high-γ agents hold mostly bonds, whereas
low-γ agents’ portfolios are heavily invested in stocks. Over time, output trends upward;
therefore, high-γ agents initially borrow to consume more in earlier periods, whereas low-γ
agents initially lend to consume more later. Due to country-level differences in γ, the U.S.
eventually runs a trade deficit with RoW. Due to individual-level differences in γ, inequality
grows over time as lower-γ agents consume a growing share of total output.

       When deciding whether to vote for the populist, U.S. agents face a tradeoff. If elected, the
populist delivers lower consumption but also lower inequality to U.S. agents. Under autarky,
U.S. agents can no longer borrow from RoW to finance their excess consumption. But
their inequality drops, too, because the absence of cross-border trade makes their portfolio
   1
     See, for example, Autor et al. (2017), Colantone and Stanig (2018a, 2018b), and Guiso et al. (2017, 2018).
These studies emphasize worker displacement caused by international trade in goods, which is absent from
our model. We do not invoke these studies to support our mechanism, but rather to illustrate the strong
connection between populism and globalization, which motivates our definition of a populist politician.
   2
     Our definition departs from other theories of populism. For example, Guiso et al. (2017) define as populist
a party that champions short-term protection policies while disregarding their long-term costs. Acemoglu,
Egorov, and Sonin (2013) define populist policies as those to the left of the median voter’s preferences.



                                                       2
positions less disperse. As output grows, the marginal utility of consumption declines, and
U.S. agents are increasingly willing to sacrifice consumption in exchange for more equality.
In that sense, equality is a luxury good. When output grows large enough, the median voter
prefers autarky and the populist wins the U.S. election. In a growing economy, the populist
thus eventually gets elected. Within our stylized model of a democratic society that values
equality, globalization does not survive in the long run.

   Globalization would survive under a social planner. The competitive market solution
differs from the social planner solution due to the negative externality that the elites impose
on others through their high consumption. Inspired by the social planner, we could tax the
consumption of the elites and subsidize the consumption of those left behind. But simpler
and more realistic wealth redistribution policies, which do not get agents to internalize the
consumption externality, fail to save globalization. We analyze a broad class of redistributive
policies that transfer wealth from low-γ agents, who benefit the most from globalization, to
high-γ agents, who benefit the least. We show that these policies are equivalent to assigning
higher initial endowments to high-γ agents. Starting from those modified endowments, the
economy eventually reaches the point at which the populist gets elected. In that sense,
simple wealth redistribution delays the populist’s victory, but only temporarily.

   Our model predicts that support for populism should be stronger in the country with
higher inequality, more financial development, and a lower trade balance. We find evidence
of such relations in the cross-section of developed countries. We measure the support for
populism by the vote share of populist parties in recent elections, as well as by protectionist
attitudes expressed in a survey of OECD households. The model also predicts that populist
voters should have larger γ’s and be more inequality-averse than mainstream voters, on
average. Inequality-averse agents are “anti-elite”; they place a large weight on inequality in
the consumption-inequality tradeoff. Higher-γ agents choose portfolios delivering smoother
consumption plans; as a result, their consumption drops less after a move to autarky.

   The model also makes asset pricing predictions. Upon a move to autarky, risk sharing
becomes local, so the risk associated with U.S. output is borne by U.S. agents only. As
these agents are less risk-averse than RoW agents, the U.S. market price of risk drops when
autarky arrives. The opposite happens for RoW. As a result, the global market share of
U.S. stocks rises in anticipation of the populist’s victory. The model also implies that stock
returns are predictable by the price-dividend ratio. In addition, U.S. bond yields should
be low before the populist’s victory. U.S. bonds are valuable under the threat of autarky
because they deliver future consumption when its marginal utility is high.



                                              3
       Agents in our model dislike inequality. Inequality aversion has its roots in Thurow (1971),
who advocates the inclusion of income distribution in the utility function. According to
Thurow, individuals may like equality because it helps prevent crime and preserve social
stability. Wilkinson and Pickett (2009, 2018) show that less equal societies suffer from
social problems such as illiteracy, crime, and poor health. They argue that inequality causes
status anxiety at all income levels, including the top. In Fehr and Schmidt’s (1999) model,
individuals willingly give up material payoffs to achieve more equality. Alesina and Angeletos
(2005) employ preferences in which agents dislike unfair outcomes. Evidence also shows that
individuals dislike inequality. Morawetz et al. (1977) compare two Israeli communities and
find that individuals in the more egalitarian community report being happier. Alesina, Di
Tella, and MacCulloch (2004) also find that people facing less inequality are happier. Dawes
et al. (2007) find experimental evidence that subjects alter others’ incomes, at a personal
cost, to achieve more equality. Experimental results from dictator and ultimatum games also
point to egalitarian preferences. Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Ramos (2014) review the evidence on
happiness and inequality and conclude that inequality correlates negatively with happiness
in Western societies. Clark and D’Ambrosio (2015) reach similar conclusions.

    Prior literature has emphasized social tensions created by globalization. For example, Ro-
drik (1997) argues that globalization clashes with domestic norms and social arrangements.
Rodrik (2000) argues that due to these tensions, we cannot have all three of democratic
politics, the nation state, and global economic integration. We focus on one tension—
inequality—and formalize the fragility of globalization in an equilibrium model.

       Our modeling of globalization differs from its treatments in labor economics and inter-
national trade. Unlike labor economics, our model features no heterogeneity in skill, but its
predictions are similar in that lower-γ agents benefit from globalization as if they were more
skilled. Unlike international trade, we consider only one consumption good. We assume
away important aspects of globalization to emphasize the role of financial factors, namely
trade in financial assets and risk sharing, which have been unexplored in this context. Given
our focus, explicit modeling of production or heterogeneous goods would be distracting.3
Taking the finance perspective allows us to deliver novel insights into the relations between
globalization, inequality, financial development, global imbalances, and asset prices.

       Financial capital plays an important role in the recent rise of inequality. Piketty, Saez,
and Zucman (2018) argue that top earners derive most of their income from capital rather
   3
     Studies of income inequality that model production explicitly, along with heterogeneous entrepreneurial
skill, include Pástor and Veronesi (2016) and Jones and Kim (2018), among others. Kogan, Papanikolaou, and
Stoffman (2020) build a production-based model in which inequality is caused by technological innovation.



                                                     4
than labor, and that capital income is the key driver of the rise of the top 1% U.S. income
share since 2000. Piketty (2014) contends that a high rate of return on capital causes
inequality to grow. Some of this growth is due to heterogeneity in return on capital across
households. Richer households tend to earn higher returns, in part because they have more
aggressive risk exposures (see Bach, Calvet, and Sodini, 2019, and Fagereng et al., 2020).
Consistent with this evidence, our model implies that richer agents take more risk and, as
a result, earn higher expected returns. This micro-level evidence supports our premise that
heterogeneity in preferences helps explain the recent rise in inequality.

    Heterogeneity in preferences has piqued growing research interest.4 We interpret country-
level differences in γ as differences in financial development. Like Gourinchas, Rey, and
Govillot (2017), we assume U.S. agents are less risk-averse than RoW agents, capturing the
idea that the U.S. is more financially developed than RoW. In their model, as well as ours,
U.S. agents effectively provide insurance to RoW agents.5 Maggiori (2017) microfounds this
asymmetry by relying on cross-country differences in financial development. In his model,
the country whose financial intermediaries are less constrained behaves as if it were less risk-
averse. It also runs a trade deficit, as it does in our model. Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas
(2008) and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rı́os-Rull (2009) also link financial development to
global imbalances. Pástor and Veronesi (2020) consider the political implications of time
variation in γ, whereas we consider the political implications of its cross-sectional variation.

    Our paper is also related to the literature on financial development. A key result in this
large literature is that financial development facilitates economic growth (e.g., Rajan and
Zingales, 1998). In contrast, our model emphasizes the dark side of financial development:
it spurs the growth of inequality, which eventually leads to a populist backlash.



2. Which Countries Are Populist?

We first present cross-country evidence showing that the support for populism is stronger in
countries with larger inequality, more financial development, and lower trade balance. We
focus on a recent cross-section of rich countries because the rise of populism in the West is
a 2010s phenomenon and the variables of interest are highly persistent year to year. This
evidence motivates our theoretical analysis in Section 3.
   4
     See, for example, Dumas (1989), Chan and Kogan (2002), Gomes and Michaelides (2008), Longstaff and
Wang (2012), Chabakauri (2013), Bhamra and Uppal (2014), and Garleanu and Panageas (2015).
   5
     Consistent with this mechanism, Gourinchas et al. provide empirical evidence of wealth transfers from
the U.S. to RoW during recent financial crises. Unlike Gourinchas et al., we allow heterogeneous risk aversion
not only across countries but also within countries, which allows us to analyze within-country inequality.


                                                      5
2.1. Data

We measure the support for populism by the vote share of populist parties in recent elections.
Our set of countries includes the U.S. and all EU countries. For each EU country, we consider
the most recent national parliamentary election as of January 1, 2017. The list of all elections
is in Table 1. If the country’s most recent election took place before the May 2014 European
Parliament (EP) election, we replace the national election with the EP election in the same
country to align the timing of elections as closely as possible across countries.

   We obtain data on election outcomes from the ParlGov database (Döring and Manow,
2011), which contains party-by-party vote shares from parliamentary and EP elections for
all EU member states and most OECD countries. To identify populist parties, we match
the ParlGov data to the 2014 Chapel Hill Survey of Experts (Bakker et al., 2015), which
estimates the positioning of political parties on various ideological and policy issues. The
data cover the views of 337 experts evaluating 268 political parties from all EU countries. We
focus on the three dimensions of populism evaluated in the survey that seem the most closely
related to skepticism toward globalization: (1) position toward nationalism, (2) position on
immigration policy, and (3) the salience of anti-elite rhetoric.6 We thus classify as populist
the parties that experts consider to be nationalist, anti-immigrant, or anti-elite.

    For each of the three dimensions of populism, individual experts rate each party on the
scale of 0 to 10, with larger values indicating a more populist stance.7 We classify a party
as nationalist, anti-immigrant, or anti-elite if its average score across experts is at least six.
For each election and each dimension of populism, we compute the populist vote share by
adding up the vote shares of all populist parties. For example, we compute the nationalist
vote share in the 2016 Irish election by adding up the 2016 vote shares of all Irish parties
classified as nationalist. We report all parties’ average scores in the Appendix.

       The intersection of ParlGov and the Chapel Hill Survey covers the 28 EU member states.
We augment this sample by adding the United States. The 2016 U.S. presidential election
pitted Donald Trump against Hillary Clinton. We classify Trump as populist on all three
   6
      The remaining policy dimensions evaluated in the survey include the party’s position toward ethnic
minorities, environmental issues, corruption, deregulation, state intervention in the economy, wealth redis-
tribution, improving public services vs reducing taxes, regional decentralization, urban vs rural interests,
religion, liberal social lifestyle, civil liberties vs law and order, integration of asylum seekers, and peacekeep-
ing. None of these are strongly related to globalization. Probably the closest is the position toward ethnic
minorities because their members often arrive from abroad. We view the position toward ethnic minorities
as a fourth dimension of populism and report the results in the Online Appendix, located on our websites.
In the remainder of the paper, we refer to the Online Appendix simply as the “Appendix.”
    7
      See the Appendix for more detail on the scoring for each of the three dimensions. The number of experts
scoring each party in the 2014 survey ranges from 3 to 22, averaging 11.6.


                                                        6
dimensions and Clinton on none. We thus assess the U.S. populist share as equal to Trump’s
share of the popular vote, 46.1%, in all three dimensions.8

       We measure inequality by the Gini coefficient of disposable income after taxes and trans-
fers, obtained from the OECD, and by the top 10% income share, from the World Bank.
Data on financial development and trade balance also come from the World Bank. Financial
development is the ratio of the country’s stock market capitalization to GDP, in percent.9
Trade balance is net trade in goods and services, scaled by GDP. We match the timing of
each variable to the corresponding election, as described in the Appendix.


2.2. Election Evidence

Panels A and B of Figure 1 plot the cross-country relation between inequality and the vote
share of nationalist parties, or “nationalism.” The relation is positive, with the t-statistic of
2.82 for the Gini coefficient and 2.16 for the top 10% income share. A one-standard-deviation
increase in the Gini (top 10% income share) is associated with a 5.8 (4.8) percentage point
increase in the nationalist vote share. In the regression analysis throughout Section 2, we
weight each country by its GDP.10 But the relation is present also on an equal-weighted basis,
especially among large countries. If we restrict the sample to the eight largest countries with
the GDP of Poland or higher, there is a 43% (18%) simple correlation between nationalism
and the Gini (top 10% income share). Across all countries, the correlations are 21% and
13%, respectively. More unequal countries exhibit more nationalism.

   Panel C of Figure 1 shows a negative relation between nationalism and trade balance
(t = −2.81). A one-standard-deviation increase in trade balance is associated with a 10.0
percentage point decrease in the nationalist vote share. Panel D shows that financial devel-
opment is positively related to nationalism (t = 2.94). A one-standard-deviation increase in
financial development is associated with a 5.2 percentage point increase in the nationalist
vote share. If we equal-weight all countries, the correlations in both panels are close to zero.
But after eliminating countries with GDP smaller than Poland’s, the simple correlations are
   8
     On the campaign trail, Trump promised to put “America first,” pull the U.S. out of international
agreements, build a wall on the border with Mexico, impose tariffs, restrict immigration, etc. For the
purpose of this exercise, we thus interpret a vote for Trump as a vote to pull back from globalization.
   9
     We also consider three other measures of financial development, all scaled by GDP: private credit, stock
market trading volume, and the sum of stock and bond market capitalizations. The results based on these
measures are similar to those reported here. For details, see the Appendix.
  10
     Our sample includes countries such as Malta, Luxembourg, and Cyprus whose populations are smaller
than one million. Luxembourg’s trade balance is an outlier, exceeding 30% of GDP. We do not want our
results to be driven by small economies. Our model features only two large countries whose interaction
determines the global equilibrium. The model’s predictions are thus better suited to large countries.


                                                     7
strong: −36% in Panel C and 48% in Panel D.

       Figures 2 and 3 show similar results when we replace the vote shares of nationalist parties
by those of anti-immigrant and anti-elite parties, respectively. All three measures of populism
are thus negatively related to trade balance and positively related to both income inequality
and financial development.

       Recall that, for each country, we use either the national election or the May 2014 EP
election, whichever is more recent as of January 1, 2017. For robustness, we also conduct the
analysis in two other ways: by using only national elections, and by using only EP elections.
In both cases, the results are very similar to those reported here (see the Appendix). In
general, the advantage of using EP elections is that they take place at the same time in all
EU countries. The disadvantage is that the voter turnout in EP elections is lower: 43.4%,
compared to 66.1% for the national elections in our sample.

       The presence of the U.S. in our sample significantly contributes to our conclusions. How-
ever, even when we exclude the U.S., the results are qualitatively similar: 11 of the 12 slopes
in Figures 1 through 3 have the same signs and five remain statistically significant. See the
Appendix. Overall, the electoral support for populist parties is stronger in countries with
more inequality, more financial development, and larger trade deficits.


2.3. Survey Evidence

We complement our election analysis with survey evidence on attitudes toward globalization.
We use data from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP; www.issp.org). ISSP’s
cross-country surveys cover most OECD members as well as a few non-members; we use
OECD countries in our analysis. We use the 2013 ISSP segment on national identity. The
survey question that we find the most relevant given our focus is “Country should limit the
import of foreign products.” Individual responses are on the scale of 1 to 5, with higher
values indicating stronger agreement. We average the individual responses within countries
and interpret a higher country-level average score as stronger support for protectionism.
We match these country-level protectionism scores to our 2013 data on inequality, financial
development, and trade balance. See the Appendix for details.11

       Panels A and B of Figure 4 relate inequality to the protectionism score. Cross-country
regressions reveal positive relations between protectionism and both the Gini coefficient
  11
    Mayda and Rodrik (2005) also use the ISSP data to analyze the determinants of attitudes toward trade,
but they do not relate these attitudes to inequality, trade balance, or financial development.


                                                   8
(t = 2.65) and the top 10% income share (t = 3.57). A one-standard-deviation increase in the
Gini (top 10% income share) is associated with an increase of 0.18 (0.23) in the protectionism
score. This result mirrors the election-based results in Section 2.2, but it is less driven by large
countries. Even when the countries are equal-weighted, the correlation between inequality
and protectionism is positive and high, 43% for the Gini and 45% for the top 10% income
share. Citizens of more unequal countries show more support for protectionism.

   Panel C of Figure 4 shows a negative relation between trade balance and the protectionism
score (t = −2.50). A one-standard-deviation increase in trade balance is associated with a
0.21 decrease in protectionism. This result echoes the election-based results, but it is again
less driven by large economies: even the equal-weighted correlation is −45%. Panel D shows
a positive but insignificant relation between financial development and protectionism (t =
1.50). A one-standard-deviation increase in financial development is associated with a 0.12
increase in protectionism. The equal-weighted correlation is close to zero when calculated
across all countries, but it is 42% when calculated across the six largest countries only.

   To summarize, protectionist attitudes are stronger in countries with more inequality,
larger trade deficits, and more financial development. The results from Sections 2.2 and 2.3
motivate our two-country model, which predicts that the support for populism is stronger in
the country (U.S.) with more inequality, more financial development, and a trade deficit. In
reality, the U.S. is indeed more unequal and more financially developed than the rest of the
world, and it has run a trade deficit since the 1980s. While the correlations presented here are
consistent with our model, they are also consistent with other mechanisms. For example,
the association between trade balance and populism could also emerge from models with
international trade and comparative advantage, through worker displacement.



3. Model

There is a continuum of agents with unit mass spread across two countries, the U.S. and
the rest of the world (“RoW”). Agents have preferences over their own consumption as
well as the inequality in their own country. Agent i from country k ∈ {U S, RoW } has a
time-separable utility function with instantaneous utility at time t given by
                                             1−γi            
                                k       −φt  Cit            k
                                                                ∀i ∈ I k ,
                                    
                     Ui Cit , Vt , t = e            − η i Vt                        (1)
                                             1 − γi

where Cit is the agent’s consumption, γi > 1 is his risk aversion as well as the inverse of his
EIS, ηi ≥ 0 is his inequality aversion, I k is the set of agents in country k, and Vtk is inequality

                                                 9
in country k, which we measure by the variance of consumption shares across agents:
                                                        !
                                 k         Cit        k
                               Vt = Var      k
                                               |i ∈ I     ,                                                   (2)
                                           Ct
        k
where C t = EI Cit | i ∈ I k denotes the average value of Cit across all agents in country k.12
                           
                        k
The scaling of Cit by C t in equation (2) ensures that Vtk is invariant to changes in average
consumption so that it measures relative, not absolute, inequality.

       The utility function in equation (1) increases in consumption but decreases in inequality.
The idea that individuals dislike inequality is well established, but the way we model it is
novel. In equilibrium, consumption shares develop a right-skewed distribution across agents.
Therefore, Vtk is driven by the right tail of the distribution, and inequality aversion can largely
be thought of as anti-elitism: agents dislike being left behind the economic elites.13 Agents
effectively derive more disutility from envying the rich than from pitying the poor, similar to
Fehr and Schmidt (1999).14 Importantly, inequality aversion induces an externality: through
their high consumption, elites impose a negative externality on other agents.

       We assume that U.S. agents have lower risk aversion (and higher EIS) than RoW agents.
The technical condition that we need is for the distribution of γi across agents to satisfy

                                             EI [ex/γj | j ∈ I RoW ]
                                   limx→∞                             = 0.                                    (3)
                                              EI [ex/γi | i ∈ I U S ]

The simplest example of an assumption that satisfies this condition is

                                             ∀i, j : i ∈ I U S , j ∈ I RoW
                                                    
                                γi < γj                                          ,                            (4)

so that U.S. agents are uniformly less risk-averse than RoW agents. But the distributions of
γi for the U.S. and RoW can also overlap. For example, condition (3) is satisfied when risk
tolerances ρi = 1/γi are uniformly distributed with the same lower bound for both countries
but a higher upper bound for the U.S. Condition (3) also holds if ρi in both countries is
truncated normal, with the same truncation points and same dispersion for both countries
but a higher U.S. mean—that is the example we use in our numerical illustrations. Our
propositions do not assume (4); they rely only on the weaker assumption in equation (3).
  12
     Throughout the paper, EI [.| i ∈ S] denotes an expected value computed across agents i in the set S.
  13
     We interpret “elites” narrowly as economic elites, or the wealthy. Political scientists often think of elites
more broadly as including also members of the political establishment, academia, military, etc.
  14
     In Fehr and Schmidt’s model, agents dislike inequality whether they are better or worse off than others,
but they dislike it more if they are worse off. In our model, the agent’s relative position in the income
distribution does not appear in the utility function, but given the right skewness of consumption, the vast
majority of agents are far behind the ultra-rich but only a bit ahead of the ultra-poor.


                                                       10
   The assumption that U.S. agents are less risk-averse than RoW agents—the defining
difference between the two countries—is motivated by the literature that explores risk-sharing
motives to analyze global trading imbalances, especially Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2017)
and Maggiori (2017). Following this literature, we view the lower risk aversion of U.S. agents
as a proxy for higher financial development in the U.S. In that sense, we could replace US-
RoW with UK-EU (United Kingdom–European Union), as the financial system is generally
considered to be more developed in the UK than in continental Europe.

   The two countries grow trees which produce continuous streams of perishable output
denoted by DtU S and DtRoW at time t ∈ [0, T ]. Aggregate global output, Dt , is given by

                                     Dt = DtU S + DtRoW .                                   (5)

We assume that δt ≡ log(Dt ) evolves over time by following a simple stochastic process:

                                     dδt = µδ dt + σδ dZt ,                                 (6)

where µδ > 0 and Zt is a Brownian motion. We also assume, for simplicity, that each
country’s share of global output is constant and equal to the country’s population share:

                                          DtU S
                                                =m,                                         (7)
                                          Dt
where m is the fraction of agents living in the U.S. (In Section 5.4, we relax this assumption
by allowing output shares to be stochastic.) Since the two countries’ outputs are perfectly
correlated, δt is the only state variable in this endowment economy.

   Agents trade two types of financial assets: stocks and bonds. Stocks are in positive net
supply. U.S. stocks are claims to U.S. output; RoW stocks are claims to RoW output. Since
the two output streams are perfectly correlated, so are the two stock prices. Bonds, which
are in zero net supply, allow agents to lend to each other in a risk-free manner.

    There are two political regimes: “globalization” and “autarky.” Under globalization, there
are no cross-border barriers, so agents can trade freely across countries. Under autarky, cross-
border trading is not allowed—each country consumes the output of its own tree, U.S. agents
trade only with other U.S. agents, and RoW agents trade only with RoW agents.

   From time 0 until time τ ∈ [0, T ], the countries coexist under globalization. At the given
time τ , both countries hold elections featuring two candidates. The “mainstream” candidate
promises to maintain globalization through time T . The “populist” candidate promises to
end it and move the country to autarky until time T . Each country’s election is decided


                                              11
by that country’s median voter.15 When elected, both candidates deliver on their promises.
If either country elects a populist, the move to autarky occurs immediately—U.S. agents
reclaim the possession of the U.S. tree (producing DtU S ), RoW agents reclaim the RoW tree
(producing DtRoW ), cross-border debts are settled, and cross-border trade stops.

    A country can move to autarky only if it can afford to settle its cross-border liabilities.
It cannot move to autarky if doing so would reduce the other country’s consumption. We
thus rule out expropriation of wealth. This assumption seems plausible given our focus on
the rise of populism in developed countries, in which expropriation is rare.

       The same no-default assumption would rule out autarky in models with standard utility
over consumption. In such models, a country would move to autarky only to increase its own
consumption, which would necessitate a consumption loss for the other country. That is not
true in our model, given the presence of inequality in the utility function. In our model, a
move to autarky by one country increases the consumption in the other country.


3.1. Optimal Consumption

Our assumptions imply that markets are complete because τ is known and the risk associated
with the single shock (dZt ) can be hedged by either of the two stocks (US or RoW). Due to
market completeness, we can write the optimization problem of each agent i ∈ I k as
                                     Z T                    
                                                     k
                                                         
                            max E0        Ui Cit , Vt , t dt                                         (8)
                                   {Cit }       0

for k ∈ {U S, RoW }, subject to the static budget constraint
                                     Z T           
                                            k
                                  E0       πt Cit dt = wi ,                                          (9)
                                            0

where wi is agent i’s initial endowment, E0 [.] is an expectation as of time 0, and πtk is the
state price density for country k, which is determined in equilibrium. We normalize π0k = 1
and δ0 = 0 without loss of generality. Under globalization, the two countries’ markets are
fully integrated, so that πtU S = πtRoW . Under autarky, the markets are segmented, so that
πtU S 6= πtRoW . The Lagrangean for the constrained optimization problem is
                         Z T                        Z T               
                                         k                    k
                                             
                 Li = E0      Ui Cit , Vt , t dt − ξi E0     πt Cit dt − wi ,          (10)
                            0                                    0

  15
    We assume a traditional one-agent-one-vote democracy. We thus abstract from the possibility that some
agents might possess more political power than others, which could potentially deepen inequality. For a
review of studies relating inequality to imperfections of democracy, see Acemoglu et al. (2015).

                                                    12
where ξi is the Langrange multiplier. The maximization is performed state by state, period
by period. The first-order conditions yield agent i’s optimal consumption:
                                                      gtk −log(ξi )
                                            Cit = e        γi
                                                                      ,                                (11)

where gtk is a simple transformation of the state price density:

                                         gtk = −φt − log πtk
                                                                      
                                                                          .                            (12)

Equation (11) shows that agents with higher γi ’s choose smoother consumption paths, both
across states and over time. A high γi dampens the dependence of Cit on gtk , which is both
risky and generally increasing over time, as we explain at the beginning of Section 4.


3.2. Distribution of Initial Endowments

Substituting optimal consumption from equation (11) into the budget constraint in equation
(9), we can express agents’ initial endowments as
                                     log(ξ )
                                                Z T                  
                                   − γ i               −φt+ γ1 −1 gtk
                        wi = e           i   E0      e        i       dt .                             (13)
                                                       0

To solve the model analytically, we make technical assumptions about the distribution of wi
across agents. For any given value of y, we define log(ξei ) = log(ξi ) − y. We then define
                                                    1      
                                           ψi = −      log ξei                                         (14)
                                                    γi

and assume that it is independent of γi .16 Once we draw the values of ψi and γi from their
assumed distributions, we combine them with the chosen value of y to construct ξi , which
then determines the initial endowments wi in equation (13). In Section 5.3, we vary y to
examine how the distribution of initial endowments affects the equilibrium outcomes.

       Heterogeneous-agent models are often amenable only to numerical solutions. We derive
analytical solutions, and many propositions, under three-dimensional heterogeneity (γi , ηi ,
and ψi ) and no assumptions about the functional forms of the distributions of the three
parameters across agents. We only assume that the distribution of γi is bounded, γi ∈
[γL , γH ] with γL > 1, continuously differentiable, and that it has positive dispersion. The
distributions of both ψi and 1/γi must have well-defined moment-generating functions.
  16
    The independence between ψi and γi is ensured by choosing ξ˜i implied by the values of ψi and γi . Given
two independent distributions of ψi and γi , the distribution of ξ˜i follows from log(ξ˜i ) = −ψi γi .



                                                      13
    Our solution technique is similar to that of Chan and Kogan (2002), who analyze a
model with heterogeneous risk aversion and habit preferences. While Chan and Kogan
exploit Pareto optimality to solve for the competitive equilibrium, we obtain the equilibrium
from agents’ first-order conditions. In our setting, the competitive allocation is not Pareto
optimal due to a consumption externality in agents’ preferences.


3.3. Parameter Values

To plot the model’s implications in subsequent figures, we calibrate the distribution of risk
aversion across agents to the empirical distribution estimated by Calvet et al. (2019) for
Swedish households. For both countries, we choose a truncated normal distribution of risk
tolerance, ρi = 1/γi , with the same truncation points that restrict γi to the interval of (2, 10).
We also choose the same standard deviation of ρi , 0.06, for both countries. However, we
choose different means of ρi : 1/5 for the U.S. and 1/6 for RoW, to make RoW agents more
risk-averse, on average, than U.S. agents (condition (3) is satisfied). Table 2 shows that
both distributions of γi match the empirical distribution fairly well. We follow Calvet et al.
(2019) also in using their estimate of the time discount parameter, φ = 0.0157.

    We choose a truncated normal distribution for ηi with the mean of 5 × 10−5 , standard
deviation of 1.5 × 10−5 , and the truncation at zero. The distribution of ψi is normal with
standard deviation of 0.2 and the mean such that EI eψi |i ∈ I = 1. We set y = 1, which
                                                               

results in a near-uniform distribution of initial endowments in equation (13) across agents
with different risk aversions.17 We set the growth rate of output to µδ = 2% to approximately
match the 1.94% average real growth rate of U.S. GDP per capita between 1947 and 2019.
We also set σδ = 4%, m = 0.2, τ = 2 years, and T = τ + 100 years. None of our propositions
rely on any of these parameter values; only Figures 5 through 12 do.

    Global output, δt , follows the process in equation (6). Its drift is positive (µδ > 0),
reflecting the tendency of output to grow over time. It is thus just a matter of time before
δt exceeds any given value with probability close to one. In some of our subsequent results,
we assume “when output is large enough,” by which we mean δt > δ, where δ is a result-
specific threshold. This is an innocuous assumption—we simply restrict our attention to
time periods t for which enough time has passed so that δt > δ.
  17
     We plot this distribution of initial endowments in the Appendix. In addition, Panel A of Figure 11 shows
that the correlation between initial endowment and risk aversion is very close to zero when y = 1.




                                                     14
4. Globalization

We now solve for the equilibrium under globalization. Since πtU S = πtRoW , from equation
(12), we have gtU S = gtRoW . We denote the common value of gtU S and gtRoW by gt . Since
output is perishable, aggregate output equals aggregate consumption in each period:
                                          Z
                                     Dt =      Cit di ,                                         (15)
                                                i∈I

where I is the set of all agents. Substituting for consumption from equation (11), we obtain
                                                                !
                                         EI e(gt −y)/γi | i ∈ I
                                            
                              δt = log                             .                    (16)
                                          EI [e−y/γi | i ∈ I]

The equilibrium value of gt is the unique solution to this equation. We denote this solution
by g(δt ). The basic properties of this function are derived by Veronesi (2018). He shows that
g 0 (δt ) is the inverse of the consumption-weighted average of agents’ risk tolerance, ρi . Since
this value is positive, g(δt ) is increasing in δt . In addition, g 0 (δt ) decreases as δt increases
because in a stronger economy, agents with higher ρi consume relatively more so that their
higher ρi receives a larger weight in the average. Finally, g(δt ) → ∞ as δt → ∞ because the
marginal utility of consumption shrinks to zero when consumption is infinite.

   These properties of g(δt ) shed more light on optimal consumption from equation (11).
That gt depends on δt makes gt risky, which then makes Cit risky, but less so for agents
with higher γi ’s. That g(δt ) is increasing in δt makes Cit increasing in δt , but again less so
for agents with higher γi ’s. Since δt tends to grow over time (equation (6)), high-γi agents
consume more than low-γi agents in early periods, but the opposite is true later on.


4.1. Inequality

From equations (2) and (11), we derive the following proposition. Its proof, along with the
proofs of all of our other formal results, is in the Appendix.

Proposition 1.       When output is large enough, inequality Vtk is uniformly increasing in
output δt , with limδt →∞ Vtk = ∞, for both countries k ∈ {U S, RoW }. Also, Vtk is given by
                              I
                                 2ψ          k
                                                 I  2(g(δ )−y)/γ           k
                                                                               
                            E    e  i
                                      | i ∈ I    E   e     t       i
                                                                     | i ∈ I
                     Vtk = I                                                     −1 .     (17)
                            E [eψi | i ∈ I k ]2 EI [e(g(δt )−y)/γi | i ∈ I k ]2

   Economic growth thus generates rising inequality. This result would be unsurprising if we
were to measure inequality in absolute terms, as the cross-sectional variance of consumption

                                                 15
levels, because those levels, and differences between them, grow with output. However, we
measure inequality in relative terms, as the cross-sectional variance of consumption shares
(equation (2)). The rising relative inequality is an outcome of optimal trading among agents
with heterogeneous preferences. As the economy strengthens, low-γi agents consume a grow-
ing fraction of total output. This can be seen directly from equation (11) because g 0 (δt ) > 0.

      The intuition behind Proposition 1 can be conveyed in two ways because, given the CRRA
specification of preferences in equation (1), γi represents both risk aversion and the inverse
of the EIS.18 High-γi agents are unwilling to substitute consumption both across states and
over time. First, as higher-γi agents are more risk-averse, they choose safer portfolios. The
portfolios of higher-γi agents tilt toward bonds, whereas those of lower-γi agents overweight
stocks. Stocks earn a risk premium over bonds, delivering higher expected returns to lower-γi
agents. Those agents thus consume a growing fraction of output.

      Second, look at γi through the lens of intertemporal substitution. Facing a stream of
output that is expected to grow, high-γi agents have a strong preference to bring some of
the high future consumption to the present. Therefore, high-γi agents borrow initially to
consume more in earlier periods and, consequently, less in later periods when they repay
their debts. In contrast, low-γi agents initially lend to defer their consumption. Over time,
the consumption shares of low-γi agents rise while those of high-γi agents fall. Under both
interpretations, growth spurs inequality by delivering larger benefits to lower-γi agents.

      Inequality is eventuallydriven by the right tail of the consumption distribution. Let
Stk   = Skewness Citk | i ∈ I k denote the skewness of consumption shares across agents.
                   Ct

Corollary 1. When output is large enough, we have Stk > 0, Stk uniformly increasing in δt ,
and limδt →∞ Stk = ∞, for both countries k ∈ {U S, RoW }.

   Both Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 hold after output grows large enough so that the
inequality (skeweness) induced by heterogeneous wealth cumulation overcomes the arbitrary
inequality (skeweness) of initial endowments. Until then, the relation between growth and
inequality (skeweness) is non-monotonic. For example, if higher-γi agents have higher initial
endowments, inequality initially declines with growth while lower-γi agents catch up. Over
time, lower-γi agents gradually displace higher-γi agents from top consumption shares. (For
evidence on displacement in top wealth shares, see Gomez, 2019.) Eventually, growth boosts
inequality as low-γi agents consume a growing share of output.
 18
    A natural way of disentangling the effects of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution is to replace
CRRA by Epstein-Zin preferences in equation (1). Alas, the equilibrium then becomes intractable.




                                                    16
   In our model, globalization per se does not increase inequality; economic growth does.
But globalization contributes to inequality because cross-border risk sharing widens the
dispersion in agents’ exposures to global growth, thereby amplifying the distributional effects
of growth. After output grows large enough, inequality is driven by the high consumption of
the rich (i.e., the low-γi agents), not the low consumption of the poor. Inequality aversion
is thus related more to agents’ dislike of the rich than to their concern for the poor. Figure
5 plots the substance of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 for our calibration.
                                                                                     k
Corollary 2. For output large enough, agent i’s consumption share, Cit /C t , is increasing
in δt if and only if γi < γ k (δt ). Moreover, γ k (δt ) is decreasing in δt , for k ∈ {U S, RoW }.

   Corollary 2 shows that the benefits of growth accrue disproportionately to low-γi agents,
and that the set of disproportionate beneficiaries shrinks as output grows over time.

   That a shrinking fraction of the population benefits disproportionately from growth is
not only a prediction of our model but also a feature of the data. Panel A of Figure 6 shows
that the top 1% income share in the U.S. has risen sharply since the 1970s. Panel B shows
that the ratios of income shares, top 1% to top 10% as well as top 0.1% to top 1%, have
also risen, in a very similar fashion. The two lines plotted in Panel B track each other fairly
closely, revealing the “fractal” nature of top inequality (Gabaix et al., 2016).

   Panels C and D of Figure 6 are the counterparts of Panels A and B for equilibrium
consumption shares generated from our model under the expected output path. The patterns
in Panels C and D are strikingly similar, both to each other and to the patterns in Panels A
and B. Interestingly, our model generates fractal-like dynamics of top inequality similar to
those observed in the data. In contrast, many other models in the inequality literature fail
to generate such dynamics, as explained by Gabaix et al. (2016).

   The levels of empirical quantities in Panels A and B exceed those of model-predicted
variables in Panels C and D. That is not surprising because the former measure income
inequality while the latter measure consumption inequality. In Panels A and B, we plot
income inequality because it is measured more precisely, and is available more easily, than
consumption inequality. In Panels C and D, we plot consumption inequality because that
is what our model makes predictions about. In the data, consumption inequality is lower
than income inequality, but their dynamics are similar (e.g., Aguiar and Bils, 2015). It
is interesting that our economic mechanism, driven by heterogeneous preferences, produces
dynamics of top inequality similar to those in the data.




                                                 17
4.2. Trade Balance

Preference heterogeneity generates an imbalance between the two countries.

Proposition 2.     Under globalization, when output is large enough, the U.S. runs a trade
deficit whereas RoW runs a trade surplus. That is, U.S. agents consume more than their
tree’s output whereas RoW agents consume less:
                                Z
                                          Cit di > DtU S                          (18)
                                  i∈I U S
                               Z
                                          Cit di < DtRoW .                        (19)
                                   i∈I RoW


   To understand this result, first consider the intertemporal smoothing motive. RoW agents
have lower EIS than U.S. agents. Facing upward-trending output, RoW agents initially sell
assets to increase their early consumption, at the cost of lower consumption later on. They
sell assets to U.S. agents, who are more willing to defer their consumption. As U.S. agents
accumulate assets, they earn asset income that raises their future consumption. After enough
time passes, U.S. agents consume more than their tree’s output (equation (18)), whereas the
opposite is true for RoW agents (equation (19)).

   Risk sharing also contributes to Proposition 2. As U.S. agents are less risk-averse, they
insure RoW agents by issuing bonds to them and use the proceeds to establish levered posi-
tions in stocks. The returns earned on those stock positions boost U.S. agents’ consumption.
The opposite is true for RoW agents—their desire for smooth consumption leads them to
adopt conservative portfolios, from which they consume less. Figure 7 plots both countries’
trade deficits. In Section 7.3, we discuss their current account balances.



5. Backlash Against Globalization

At time τ , both countries hold elections that may result in a move from globalization to
autarky. Before analyzing how agents vote, we describe the equilibrium under autarky.


5.1. Autarky

Under autarky, each country consumes its own output, so that for both k ∈ {U S, RoW },
                                         Z
                                    k
                                  Dt =        Cit di .                              (20)
                                             i∈I k


                                              18
Substituting for consumption from equation (11) and rearranging, we obtain an equation
identical to equation (16) but specific to country k. We denote its solution, the equilibrium
value of gtk , by g k (δt ). Similar to g(δt ), the function g k (δt ) is increasing and concave in δt ,
and it diverges as δt → ∞. In addition, when output is large enough,

                                g U S (δt ) < g (δt ) < g RoW (δt ) .                              (21)

Recall from equation (12) that g k (δt ) is a simple modification of the state price density, πtk ,
which can be interpreted as the marginal utility of consumption for the representative agent
in country k. Equation (21) implies that the marginal utility of U.S. agents is higher under
autarky than under globalization, whereas the opposite is true for RoW agents.

   Inequality under autarky obeys equation (17), except that g(δt ) is replaced by g k (δt ).

Proposition 3. For every δt , U.S. inequality is lower under autarky than under globaliza-
tion, whereas the opposite is true for RoW inequality:

                                 VtU S g U S (δt ) < VtU S [g (δt )]
                                                 
                                                                                                   (22)
                              VtRoW g RoW (δt ) > VtRoW [g (δt )] .
                                                 
                                                                                                   (23)


   The intuition is simple. RoW agents desire smooth consumption, both across states and
over time. Under globalization, RoW agents are able to achieve a large degree of consumption
smoothing by trading not only among themselves but also with U.S. agents. As a result,
RoW consumption shares are similar to each other, and RoW inequality is relatively small
under globalization. But when they cannot trade with U.S. agents, RoW agents achieve
less consumption smoothing, resulting in more RoW inequality. The opposite is true for
U.S. agents, who are more willing to substitute consumption across states and time. By
trading with RoW agents, U.S. agents end up with uneven consumption paths, resulting in
large dispersion in their consumption shares. Under autarky, U.S. agents trade only among
themselves, so their consumption paths are less uneven, and U.S. inequality is lower.

   In portfolio terms, under globalization, RoW agents tend to hold large positions in bonds
issued by U.S. agents. Given the similarity of RoW agents’ portfolio holdings, the differences
in their consumption shares are relatively small. In contrast, U.S. agents tend to hold levered
positions in stocks. This leverage amplifies the differences in consumption shares across U.S.
agents. Under autarky, cross-border insurance is absent, resulting in smaller inequality in
the U.S. but larger inequality in RoW. See Figure 5.




                                                  19
5.2. Elections

At time τ ∈ [0, T ], both countries vote for one of two candidates. The mainstream candidate
commits to maintain globalization, whereas the populist commits to a shift to autarky, both
lasting through time T . To determine who agent i ∈ I k votes for, let UiG and UiA denote the
agent’s utilities from globalization and autarky, respectively, at time τ :
                               Z T            1−γi                                
        G                            −φ(s−τ )  Cis       i k
      Ui (δτ ; k, τ, T ) = Eτ       e                 − η Vs ds | mainstream elected (24)
                                 τ             1 − γi
                               Z T            1−γi                             
        A                            −φ(s−τ )  Cis       i k
      Ui (δτ ; k, τ, T ) = Eτ       e                 − η Vs ds | populist elected .   (25)
                                 τ             1 − γi

We assume that the agent votes for the populist candidate if and only if

                             UiA (δτ ; k, τ, T ) > UiG (δτ ; k, τ, T ) .                   (26)

This assumption of sincere voting seems reasonable because, due to their infinitesimal size,
agents cannot affect the election outcome through strategic voting.


5.2.1. Voting by U.S. Agents


When deciding who to vote for, agents assess the effects of a move to autarky on both con-
sumption and inequality. A shift to autarky decreases the consumption of U.S. agents (com-
pare equations (18) and (20)) but also reduces inequality (Proposition 3). This consumption-
inequality tradeoff is at the heart of the voting decision of each U.S. agent.
                                                                           i                  i
Proposition 4. For any U.S. agent i with ηi > 0, there exists δ such that for any δτ > δ ,
the agent votes for the populist candidate.

   If δτ is large enough, the agent prefers autarky because the reduction in inequality more
than outweighs the reduction in consumption. Lower consumption does not bother the agent
much because his marginal utility of consumption is low in a strong economy (when δτ → ∞,
the marginal utility goes to zero). The reduction in inequality matters more because the
                                                      
drop in inequality, VτU S [g (δτ )] − VτU S g U S (δτ ) , is bounded below as δτ → ∞. Therefore,
when δτ is large enough, the gain from a more equal society more than compensates for the
loss of consumption that the agent suffers when moving to autarky.

   Equality can be interpreted as a luxury good in that society demands more of it when it
becomes wealthier. When δτ is higher, agents are more willing to sacrifice consumption in
exchange for more equality. Consistent with this argument, the recent rise in populism ap-

                                                 20
pears predominantly in rich countries. In poor countries, the marginal utility of consumption
is high and agents are less willing to give up consumption for nonpecuniary values.

Corollary 3. For any δτ , any U.S. agent i with ηi = 0 votes for the mainstream candidate.

   This result highlights the importance of inequality aversion for our results. Agents whose
ηi is zero, or small, reject populism to preserve the benefits of globalization. Therefore, for
our following result, we assume that ηi > 0 for more than half of U.S. agents.

   The U.S. election is decided by the U.S. median voter. If the fraction of U.S. agents for
whom the relation (26) holds exceeds one half, the election is won by the populist and the
U.S. moves to autarky. We now present our main result.

Proposition 5. There exists δ such that for any δτ > δ, the populist wins the U.S. election.

   In a sufficiently strong economy, the populist wins the U.S. election because the median
voter values the lower inequality under autarky more than the higher consumption under
                                                                                         i
globalization. The result follows from Proposition 4, in which the threshold δ t varies across
                                  i
agents. The median value of δ t across all U.S. agents is equal to the value of δ in Proposition
5. This value of δ is indicated by the vertical line in Figure 8.

   Proposition 5 highlights the fragility of globalization in this model. Heterogeneity in
preferences leads agents to adopt different exposures to global growth. The largest exposures
are adopted by agents with the lowest γi ’s, who benefit the most from growth. Growth pushes
up inequality under both globalization and autarky, but more so under globalization because
cross-border trading maximizes the dispersion in U.S. agents’ exposures to growth. Given
agents’ preference for equality, in a growing economy, it is just a matter of time before output
grows to a level at which more than half of the agents find it optimal to vote populist.

   Proposition 5 fits the recent populist backlash in the West, which occurred after decades of
prosperity. The only major recession since World War II was associated with the 2008 finan-
cial crisis. The decade following the crisis witnessed significant growth in western economies,
with a few exceptions in southern Europe. As of 2019, the U.S. is in the 11th year of
a macroeconomic expansion, the longest boom on record, and U.S. stock prices have more
than quadrupled since 2008. The fruits of this growth have not been shared equally, resulting
in a steady rise of inequality.19 High inequality triggers a backlash in our model.
  19
     For example, the top 10% income share rose from 34.2% in 1980 to 47.0% in 2014 in the U.S., and from
28.4% in 1979 to 40.0% in 2014 in the UK, according to the World Inequality Database.




                                                   21
5.2.2. Who Votes for the Populist?


We now analyze the cross section of U.S. agents’ voting preferences.

Proposition 6. Agents with higher values of γi and ηi are more likely to vote populist.

   The expression “more likely” should be interpreted as follows. Holding ηi and ψi constant,
there exists a threshold γ such that agent i votes populist if and only if γi > γ. Similarly,
holding γi and ψi constant, there exists a threshold η such that agent i votes populist if and
only if ηi > η. Given the randomness in γi , ηi , and ψi , populist voters tend to exhibit more
aversion to both risk and inequality, as shown in Figure 9.

   The result that high-ηi agents vote populist is straightforward. Recall that a move to
autarky benefits U.S. agents by reducing within-U.S. inequality but hurts them by reducing
their consumption. In this consumption-inequality tradeoff, higher-ηi agents put a larger
weight on inequality, which makes autarky more appealing to them.

   The result that high-γi agents vote populist follows from their optimal choice of smooth
consumption plans. Equation (11) shows that the equilibrium consumption of higher-γi
agents is less sensitive to changes in gtk . As a result, such agents suffer a smaller drop
in consumption when the global value gt changes to the local value gtU S , where gtU S < gt
(equation (21)). Since higher-γi agents are better insured against the adverse consumption
consequences of a shift to autarky, they are more likely to vote populist.

   Lower-γi agents tend to accumulate more wealth than higher-γi agents by time τ . The
negative relation between γi and wealth is not perfect, but it becomes stronger as time
passes and the effect of initial endowments dwindles. Panel C of Figure 9 shows that there
are wealthy voters who vote populist, as well as poor voters who vote mainstream, but on
average, mainstream voters are wealthier. They also consume more than populist voters, on
average, and suffer larger drops in consumption upon a move to autarky (Figure 10).


5.2.3. Voting by RoW Agents


Proposition 7. RoW agents never elect the populist candidate.

   To understand this result, recall that a move to autarky would increase not only RoW’s
inequality (Proposition 3) but also its consumption. Consumption would rise because under
globalization, RoW agents consume less than their tree’s output, whereas under autarky, they
consume all of it (compare equations (19) and (20)). But this increase in RoW consumption

                                              22
would come at the expense of U.S. consumption, and we rule out expropriation.


5.3. Redistribution

According to Proposition 5, U.S. voters eventually end globalization. While globalization is
fragile in a democracy, it would be resilient in a benevolent dictatorship. A social planner
would eschew autarky because of its inefficient consumption smoothing. The social planner’s
problem is intractable, but we know its solution differs from our competitive market solution
due to a consumption externality caused by the presence of inequality in the utility function.
By consuming a lot, the elites raise inequality, imposing a negative externality on others.
The planner can overcome this externality by constraining agents’ consumption plans.

   In the absence of a social planner, could we save globalization by redistributing wealth
across agents? Specifically, if agents were offered a third voting option—a candidate offering
to not only preserve globalization but also redistribute wealth from the rich to the poor—
would they take it over autarky? For many redistributive policies, the answer is no.
                                                                 R
Proposition 8. For any lump-sum tax policy {Ti,t } such that         Ti (δt )di = 0, there exists a
redistribution of the endowments at time 0 that achieves the same consumption plans.

   In other words, any state-contingent lump-sum redistributive tax policy is equivalent to
a redistribution of initial endowments. This claim follows from market completeness. Under
redistribution, agent i’s static budget constraint can be written as
                            Z T                     Z T          
                                   k                        k
                         E0       πt Cit dt = wi + E0      πt Tit dt .                        (27)
                              0                         0

Any redistributive policy {Ti,t (δt )} can
                                       hR thus be iimplemented at time 0 by augmenting  agent
                                         T k                                R
i’s initial endowment with w̃i = E0 0 πt Tit dt . It is easy to verify that w̃i di = 0.

   Proposition 8 is in fact more general than stated. It applies not only to lump-sum taxes
but also to any other redistributive policy that does not affect the equilibrium value of πtk .
One example is a flat income tax. As we show in the Appendix, such a tax affects agents’
optimal portfolios but not their equilibrium consumption or πtk .

   Building on Proposition 8, we ask whether globalization can be saved by redistributing
wealth from low-γi agents, who benefit the most from globalization, to high-γi agents, who
benefit the least. Recall from Section 3.2 that, for tractability, we restrict the distribution




                                              23
of initial endowments wi to those described by equation (13), which can be rewritten as
                                       Z T                          
                                  ψi         −φt+(gtk −y )/γi −gtk
                         wi = e E0          e                      dt .               (28)
                                                 0

We can pick any value of y and any distribution of ψi whose mean is EI eψi |i ∈ I =
                                                                                      

1/EI e−y/γi |i ∈ I . Equation (28) shows that by increasing the value of y, we redistribute
                 

wealth from low-γi agents to high-γi agents. This fact is also apparent from Panel A of
Figure 11: as y increases, so does the correlation between γi and wi . The most relevant type
of redistribution—from the wealthy to the poor—can thus be implemented by varying y.

       Because all of our prior results are independent of y, they hold for any redistribution
captured by different values of y. We formalize this statement in the following corollary.

Corollary 4. Suppose that the mainstream candidate promises to not only preserve glob-
alization but also implement a redistributive policy that is equivalent to a change in y. For
any y, there exists δ such that for any δτ > δ, the populist candidate wins the U.S. election.

       This class of redistributive policies thus cannot prevent the breakdown of globalization.
Panel B of Figure 11 shows that increased redistribution implies a higher value of the thresh-
old δ from Proposition 5. Therefore, increased redistribution makes it less likely that the
populist gets elected at any given time τ . But for any finite redistributive policy y, when
τ is large enough, δτ > δ holds almost surely. In that sense, redistribution can “delay” the
election of the populist but cannot prevent it from happening eventually.

       Corollary 4 is noteworthy because redistribution is often proposed as a remedy for the in-
equality caused by global trade. It is commonly argued that to obtain the first-best solution,
we should preserve globalization and make transfers from the beneficiaries of globalization
to those adversely affected by it.20 This argument has some merit in the context of our
model because redistribution can reduce the probability of the populist getting elected, for
any given τ . But it also has limitations because for any given finite redistributive policy y,
there exists τ large enough that the populist almost surely gets elected. A related point is
made by Musto and Yilmaz (2003), who show in a different setting that agents can trade
away the effects of redistributive policies by trading in complete markets.

   The mainstream candidate could save globalization by levying a Pigouvian tax on con-
sumption, taxing agents based on their contribution to inequality (i.e., taxing those who
consume a lot and subsidizing those who consume little). A progressive consumption tax
  20
    For example, Rodrik (1997, page 73) argues that “If the external risks that buffet national economies
and workers were fully observable, a set of transfers contingent on the realization of the shocks would work
best. But the world is obviously too complicated for first-best solutions...”

                                                     24
with agent-specific rates could address the externality by distorting agents’ first-order condi-
tions. Of course, such a tax would be difficult to implement in practice. Progressive income
taxation could also in principle address the externality. Whereas a flat income tax does not
affect the equilibrium state price density, heterogeneity in the tax rates does, as we show in
the Appendix. The design of optimal tax policies is beyond the scope of this paper.

   To summarize, globalization cannot be saved by offering rich-to-poor redistribution as the
third voting option, unless the redistribution is of a specific form that internalizes the con-
sumption externality. Examples that do not work are lump-sum redistribution, flat income
tax, and redistribution captured by changing y. Examples of policies that might potentially
work are progressive consumption and income taxes with agent-specific rates. In reality,
voters are often offered only two options, such as “Remain” or “Leave” in the case of the
Brexit referendum, and Trump or Clinton in the case of the 2016 U.S. election.

   While redistribution seems like the most natural alternative to autarky, inequality could
in principle also be reduced in other, more dramatic, ways. For example, instead of shutting
down only cross-border trade, agents could shut down all trade. Or they could destroy cap-
ital, which is held mostly by the rich. However, these alternatives would be very costly in
practice. We focus on anti-globalization and redistribution because we view them as more
realistic ways of containing inequality. Our particular emphasis on anti-globalization is mo-
tivated by the fact that its inequality-reducing effects have not been previously studied from
the finance perspective. We establish novel theoretical connections between globalization,
inequality, and preference heterogeneity in the context of capital markets.


5.4. Model Extensions

In the Appendix, we extend the model in five different ways. First, we allow the countries’
output shares to fluctuate over time, departing from equation (7). Second, we let the coun-
tries’ population shares vary over time. Third, we assume that a move to autarky reduces
subsequent output, either by destroying capital or by lowering the long-term growth rate of
output. Fourth, we assume that a shift to autarky makes output more volatile. Finally, we
add to our third extension the assumption that stocks are levered claims on output. In all
five extensions, our main results, including Proposition 5, continue to hold.

    The extensions also yield additional insights. The first extension shows that the populist
victory in the U.S. is more likely after a decline in the U.S. share of global output. When
RoW grows relative to the U.S., U.S. agents have more RoW risk to share, which deepens U.S.


                                              25
inequality. Autarky, in which RoW risk is no longer shared, then becomes more appealing.
In recent decades, the U.S. share of global output indeed shrank, in part due to the fast
growth of China. China grew even during the 2008 crisis, which impoverished the West.

      The second extension shows that immigration from RoW to the U.S. makes the populist
victory in the U.S. more likely. Intuitively, when the mass of U.S. agents increases, autarky
becomes more attractive to U.S. agents because they have more other U.S. agents to trade
with, which allows them to achieve better consumption-smoothing outcomes under autarky.
In reality, though, the role of immigration in the populist backlash is far more complicated.
For example, immigrants affect the wages of locals, but there is no labor market in our model.
To the extent that low-skill immigrants hurt the wages of the poor more than those of the
rich, anti-immigration policies of many populist parties are equalizing and thus consistent
with the spirit of our model.21 However, voters’ attitudes toward immigration are also
associated with non-economic reasons that are outside our model.

      The third extension shows that the prospect of lower output does not discourage agents
from voting populist. A loss of output implies lower consumption but also lower inequality
because it hurts the rich more than the poor. When output is large enough, the median voter
welcomes its reduction because she values the increase in equality more than the decrease in
consumption. This holds even if we remove autarky from the model. When inequality grows
large enough, agents find it optimal to destroy capital to bring inequality down.

      The fourth extension emphasizes another potential cost of autarky: after cross-border
trade stops, agents can no longer diversify country-specific risks. In the presence of such
risks, a shift to autarky would raise the output volatility faced by agents. Motivated by this
fact, we extend our model by allowing σδ in equation (6) to rise at time τ if autarky occurs.
The fifth extension has interesting implications for asset prices, as we discuss in Section 6.1.



6. Asset Prices

The model makes interesting predictions for stock and bond prices. The state price den-
sity under globalization is πt = e−φt−g(δt ) , which follows immediately from equation (12).
Applying Ito’s Lemma, we obtain
                                       dπt
                                           = −r (δt ) dt − σπ (δt ) dZt ,                  (29)
                                       πt
 21
      We are grateful to one of our referees for this insight.



                                                        26
where
                                                                1 0
                             r (δt ) = φ + g 0 (δt ) µδ −         g (δt )2 − g 00 (δt ) σδ2
                                                                                       
                                                                                                                   (30)
                                                                2
                           σπ (δt ) = g 0 (δt ) σδ .                                                               (31)

The dependence of the interest rate, r (δt ), on δt is unclear as the interplay between in-
tertemporal substitution (the term that involves µδ ) and precautionary savings (the term
that involves σδ2 ) is complicated. But the price of risk, σπ (δt ), always decreases with δt
because g 00 (δt ) < 0. When δt is high, the price of risk is small because a large amount of
consumption is attributed to low-γi agents who demand low compensation for risk.

    Under autarky, equations (30) and (31) look identical, except that the common values
g (δt ), r (δt ), and σπ (δt ) are replaced by the country-specific values g k (δt ), rk (δt ), and σπk (δt ).
To help us understand how the price of risk depends on the trading regime, we show that22

                                   (g U S )0 (δt ) < g 0 (δt ) < (g RoW )0 (δt ) .                                 (32)

From equations (31) and (32), we immediately obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 9. The U.S. market price of risk, σπU S , is lower under autarky than under
globalization, for any δt . The opposite is true for RoW.

    Consider the risk associated with the output of the U.S. tree. Under globalization, this
risk is borne by both U.S. and RoW agents, whereas under autarky, it is borne by U.S.
agents only. Since these agents are less risk-averse than RoW agents, they demand lower
compensation for risk. The same arguments, but in reverse, hold for RoW. Proposition 9 is
visualized in Panel A of Figure 12 in the context of our calibration.


6.1. Stock Prices

The market price of country k’s stock is the present value of dividends from country k’s tree:
                                          Z T k         
                                   k            πs k
                                 Pt = Et           D ds .                                (33)
                                             t  πtk s

Proposition 10.           For t < τ , an increase in δt leads to an increase in the global market
share of U.S. stocks, PtU S /(PtU S + PtRoW ).
   22
      While equation (32) appears to hold generally, we can prove the first inequality, (g U S )0 (δt ) < g 0 (δt ), only
in the special case when the distribution of γi satisfies equation (4). Our proofs of the other two inequalities,
(g U S )0 (δt ) < (g RoW )0 (δt ) and g 0 (δt ) < (g RoW )0 (δt ), are fully general (see the Appendix).


                                                          27
   When δt increases, so does the probability of δτ > δ in Proposition 5, which increases the
probability of the populist’s victory. This victory reduces the discount rate for U.S. stocks
but raises it for RoW stocks (Proposition 9). As the market anticipates this outcome, the
global market share of U.S. stocks rises. Panel B of Figure 12 pictures Proposition 10 for
the parameter values in our calibration.

   Increases in δt push up not only the U.S. stock price but also its price-dividend ratio
(P/D). This prediction is generated by time-varying discount rates because the expected
cash flow, µδ , is constant. Good output news lifts P/D by reducing the equity risk premium,
whereas bad news depresses P/D by raising the risk premium. Our model thus implies
predictability of stock returns by P/D, which is well known to be present in the data.

   The result that a move to autarky lifts U.S. stock prices can be reversed in the fifth model
extension described in Section 5.4. In that extension, we modify our model by adding two
assumptions: that a move to autarky reduces the expected growth rate of output, and that
stocks are levered claims on output. The first assumption ensures that a move to autarky
reduces stocks’ expected future cash flows. The second one implies this cash flow effect can
overcome the effects of intertemporal smoothing and risk premia, which pull the other way.
As a result, a move to autarky depresses stock prices. See the Appendix for details.


6.2. Bond Prices

At time t < τ , consider two zero-coupon risk-free bonds maturing at time t0 > τ . The “U.S.
bond” pays one unit of consumption good in the U.S. at time t0 ; the “RoW bond” does the
same in RoW.

Proposition 11. For t < τ , an increase in δt leads to a decrease in the yield of the U.S.
bond but an increase in the yield of the RoW bond.

   An increase in δt makes it more likely that δτ > δ, in which case autarky arrives at time
τ (Proposition 5). Upon a shift to autarky, country k’s state price density jumps from πτ to
                               k
πτk , where πτk /πτ = eg(δτ )−g (δτ ) . Given equation (21), a move to autarky increases state prices
in the U.S. but decreases them in RoW. The reason is that a move to autarky decreases U.S.
agents’ consumption, thereby increasing their marginal utility of consumption. Buying the
U.S. bond allows U.S. agents to postpone consumption until after time τ when its marginal
utility is higher. Since an increase in δt makes autarky more likely, it makes the U.S. bond
more valuable, reducing its yield. The same arguments, in reverse, apply to RoW.



                                                 28
   Panel C of Figure 12 visualizes Proposition 11. When δt is low, markets expect global-
ization to continue beyond time τ , resulting in similar bond yields in both countries. When
δt grows, a move to autarky becomes more likely; the U.S. bond thus becomes more valuable
and the RoW bond less so. When δt grows so much that a shift to autarky is all but certain,
the U.S. bond’s price rises so much that its yield turns negative. This happens because the
U.S. bond guarantees a unit of consumption in a future state in which the marginal utility
of consumption is very high.

   Propositions 10 and 11 describe the behavior of stock and bond prices before time τ . At
time τ , asset prices jump if a move to autarky takes place because the state price density
jumps, from πt to πtk . As noted earlier, autarky increases state prices in the U.S. but decreases
them in RoW; therefore, U.S. stock and bond prices jump down while RoW prices jump up.
These jumps make U.S. agents poorer but RoW agents richer; in that sense, autarky transfers
wealth from the U.S. to RoW. Consequently, the consumption of U.S. agents decreases after
a move to autarky while that of RoW agents increases, as discussed earlier.



7. Discussion

In this section, we discuss additional aspects of the model, including evidence that supports
as well as invalidates the model’s predictions. In Sections 7.1 through 7.4, we examine the
model’s strengths and weaknesses in relation to portfolio holdings, consumption volatility,
global imbalances, and the state of the economy. In Section 7.5, we discuss an alternative
interpretation of the model, which replaces financial contracts by labor contracts.


7.1. Portfolio Holdings and Expected Returns

Agents’ portfolios exhibit heterogeneity both within and across countries. Panel A of Figure
13 shows that richer agents have larger stock positions, due to their lower γi ’s. For the same
reason, U.S. agents have larger stock positions than RoW agents at each wealth percentile.

   Mapping model-implied holdings to the data faces two challenges. First, equity is un-
levered in the model but levered in the data because firms issue debt. Second, our model
omits governments, which issue debt and repay it by levying taxes on agents. Model-implied
holdings must therefore be adjusted for both taxation and firm leverage. In the Appendix,
we explain how we make both adjustments by using tax and leverage data.



                                               29
   Panel B of Figure 13 plots the adjusted stock holdings of U.S. agents, along with U.S.
investors’ actual holdings. The latter holdings, which come from Guiso and Sodini (2013),
represent the average equity investment as a share of financial assets obtained from the 2007
Survey of Consumer Finances. The model-implied pattern in stock holdings looks similar to
the pattern observed in the data. Both patterns indicate that richer households hold larger
shares of their wealth in equity. The levels of stock holdings are also similar, except that the
model is unable to replicate the very low equity holdings among households with the least
amount of wealth. Those low holdings could be due to fixed participation costs, the lack of
financial sophistication, or other elements missing from the model.

   Panel C of Figure 13 plots U.S. agents’ expected returns on wealth against their net worth.
Richer agents earn higher returns as they hold larger fractions of their wealth in stock, as
noted earlier. This pattern resembles those observed in the data by Bach, Calvet, and Sodini
(2019) for Swedish households and Fagereng et al. (2020) for Norwegian households. Bach et
al. attribute this pattern to differences in risk exposures, consistent with our model. While
Panel C matches the data qualitatively, the return gap between rich and poor agents is
smaller than in the data. The model-implied gap between the first and last percentiles of
net worth is just under 1%, whereas Fagereng et al. report a gap between 1% and 2%, and
Bach et al. find a gap of 2% to 6%. The small model-implied gap is a by-product of the
equity premium puzzle, which is a natural consequence of the CRRA preferences.


7.2. Consumption Volatility

Like stock holdings and expected returns, consumption volatility is larger for richer agents, as
we show in the Appendix. A positive cross-agent relation between the level and volatility of
consumption is also observed in the data (Davis and Kahn, 2008). The level of consumption
volatility in the model ranges from 2% to 7%, but it seems larger in the data. For example,
Gorbachev (2011) reports the volatility of food consumption ranging from 9% to 15%. Our
model thus gets the pattern across agents right, but not the level. This deficiency stems from
the model’s simplicity. The model does not include agent-specific income shocks, which surely
contribute to individual consumption volatility in the data.

   A transition to autarky affects agents’ consumption volatilities differentially depending
on their country of residence. To see this, note that equilibrium consumption volatility of
agent i is equal to g 0 (δt )σδ /γi . When the economy moves to autarky, g 0 (δt ) increases for
RoW but decreases for the U.S. (see equation (32)), implying the following result.



                                              30
Corollary 5. When the economy moves to autarky, consumption volatility of U.S. agents
decreases, while that of RoW agents increases.

       Given the similarity between consumption volatility and the price of risk in equation (31),
this result is a corollary of Proposition 9. To quantify it, note that for δt = δ, the price of
risk under globalization is 18.4% (see Panel A of Figure 12). Upon autarky, this price drops
to 16.9% for the U.S. but jumps to 19% for RoW, implying a −8.2% change in consumption
volatility for each U.S. agent and a 3.3% change for each RoW agent.


7.3. Current Account Balance

In Section 4.2, we show that the U.S. runs a trade deficit when output is sufficiently large.
While trade balance is a key component of the current account, this account has also other
components driven by the countries’ asset holdings. Those holdings are asymmetric because
U.S. agents, who have lower γi ’s, optimally choose riskier portfolios than RoW agents.23
Indeed, we prove in the Appendix that the U.S. is a net borrower whereas RoW is a net
lender. For our parameter values, the aggregate portfolio of U.S. agents is about 110% in
stocks and -10% in bonds, whereas the RoW portfolio is 97% in stocks and 3% in bonds (see
the Appendix for a plot). In the data, the U.S. as a whole is indeed net long risky assets
and net short safe assets (e.g., Gourinchas and Rey, 2014), consistent with the model.

       As the returns of U.S. stocks and RoW stocks are the same in the model, the split between
them in agents’ portfolios is indeterminate. We thus assume that U.S. agents own all of the
U.S. stocks plus some RoW stocks, whereas RoW agents own no U.S. stocks.24 The U.S.
current account balance then includes the trade balance plus the return to U.S. agents from
their holdings of RoW stocks, minus bond interest paid by the U.S. to RoW.

       For our parameter values, when output is large enough, the U.S. current account balance
is positive, unlike trade balance (see the Appendix for a plot). The reason is that the U.S.
trade deficit is more than offset by the net return U.S. agents earn on their foreign holdings.
Although they pay interest to RoW agents, U.S. agents earn sufficiently high returns on their
holdings of RoW stocks that the U.S. runs a current account surplus.

   While a negative U.S. trade balance is realistic, a positive current account balance is not.
For example, in 2018, the U.S. trade balance is −3.1% GDP and its current account balance
  23
     The consumption volatility of agent i is g 0 (δt )σδ /γi , as noted earlier. Higher-γi agents thus optimally
choose less volatile consumption paths. To support these paths, higher-γi agents choose safer portfolios.
  24
     The amount invested in RoW stocks by U.S. agents is positive when output is large enough because U.S.
agents’ wealth then exceeds the value of all U.S. stock outstanding, as we prove in the Appendix.


                                                       31
is −2.4% GDP. The model-implied gap between the two balances has the right sign, but its
magnitude is too large. The reason is the model’s failure to match the U.S. net foreign asset
position. This position is negative in the data (i.e., the value of U.S. assets held by RoW
agents exceeds the value of RoW assets held by U.S. agents) but positive in the model when
output is sufficiently large. Due to this discrepancy, U.S. agents earn higher payoffs on their
net foreign asset holdings in the model than they do in the data.


7.4. Populism in Good Times

Our model predicts that a populist backlash is more likely in prosperous times because that
is when inequality is particularly large. This prediction seems to fit the pivotal 2016 votes
in the U.S. and UK, as noted earlier. It also fits the popularity of Bernie Sanders, a self-
described socialist, at the beginning of the 2020 U.S. presidential campaign, which began
during the longest macroeconomic expansion in the U.S. history. However, there are also
many historical examples of populism when the economy was weak. For example, in the
2010s, populism spread in several European countries with slow growth rates, such as Italy
and Spain. Algan et al. (2017) blame the recent rise of populism in Europe on the Great
Recession. Funke, Schularick, and Trebesch (2016) show that far-right populism tends to
rise after financial crises. This evidence does not necessarily contradict our model, for two
reasons. First, crises might elevate aversion to inequality, especially if voters feel, as many
did during the 2008 financial crisis, that elites’ high incomes have been earned unfairly. If
the values of ηi in equation (1) increase as a result of a crisis then our model predicts a post-
crisis pushback. Second, populism is likely to have multiple causes besides inequality. One
obvious cause is voter frustration in a weak economy. It seems natural for voters unhappy
with status quo to vote for candidates promising radical change. In that sense, the emergence
of populism in bad times seems easy to explain. It seems more difficult to explain why voters
might push back in good times, which is what our model aims to accomplish.

   On a related note, our two-country model predicts that a populist gets elected in the richer
country. In reality, populists often get elected also in poor countries, including multiple
examples in Latin America. Our model does not shed light on such events, but it is not
difficult to understand why voters in relatively mismanaged countries may vote for radical
candidates. It seems more challenging to explain why voters sometimes do that in rich and
well-managed countries, and that is what we attempt to do.




                                               32
7.5. Labor Interpretation

We interpret contracts between agents as financial, but an alternative interpretation is that
agents enter into labor contracts in the spirit of Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979). These con-
tracts determine how the stream of output, which follows equation (6), is shared among
agents. An agent’s wage is her share of total output. Each agent chooses a career whose
wage stream delivers the optimal consumption from equation (11). High-γi agents choose
careers that deliver smooth consumption across states and time: they take fixed-wage jobs
and begin working without delay. In contrast, low-γi agents choose careers with variable
income and are willing to defer consumption.25 As time passes, low-γi agents become in-
creasingly wealthy relative to high-γi agents. Under globalization, U.S. agents employ RoW
agents through relatively safe job contracts while retaining risk, whereas under autarky,
cross-border employment is absent. This alternative labor-based interpretation produces
identical consumption choices and political outcomes in equilibrium.

       The labor interpretation offers a way of understanding why the support for populism
is weaker among more educated workers. In models of human capital investment, better-
educated workers are likely to have lower γi ’s, for two reasons. First, interpreting γi as risk
aversion, lower-γi agents are more likely to invest in acquiring higher education because such
an investment is risky.26 Second, interpreting γi as EIS, lower-γi agents are more likely to
acquire higher education because they are more willing to defer their consumption. Recall
from Proposition 6 that lower-γi agents are less likely to vote populist because they suffer
a larger drop in consumption when autarky arrives. This logic implies that better-educated
agents oppose autarky because they have more to lose when globalization ends.



8. Conclusions

We highlight the fragility of globalization in a democratic society that values equality. In our
model, a pushback against globalization arises endogenously as a rational voter response to
growing inequality. Of course, our parsimonious model cannot come close to fully capturing
the complexity of the recent rise of populism in the West. Many forces outside the model,
economic and non-economic, must have also played a role. Abstracting from such forces
  25
      Consistent with the risk interpretation, Schulhofer-Wohl (2011) finds, by using survey data, that less
risk-averse workers tend to hold jobs whose earnings carry more aggregate risk. Similarly, Calvet et al. (2019)
report that Swedish households with lower risk aversion have riskier labor incomes. Both studies interpret
their findings as showing that people share risk by sorting into jobs according to risk preferences.
   26
      A significant fraction of students fail to complete college while carrying student loans (e.g., Athreya and
Eberly, 2018). Shaw (1996) finds a negative relation between education and risk aversion.


                                                       33
allows us to connect several phenomena—a backlash against globalization, rising inequality,
global imbalances, and differences in financial development—through a simple but powerful
economic mechanism. Our frictionless, complete-markets model can serve as a rational
benchmark for contemplating the long-term survival of globalization.

    Countries with high inequality, high financial development, and trade deficits are espe-
cially vulnerable to anti-global backlash, according to the model. The model also predicts
the backlash is more likely when the economy is strong because that is when inequality is
particularly large. The backlash should be led by agents with the strongest anti-elite prefer-
ences (high ηi ) and agents whose consumption suffers the least from a move to autarky (high
γi ). The model’s extensions imply the backlash is more likely in countries facing immigration
and countries growing more slowly than the rest of the world.

   What can policymakers do to save globalization? The model suggests two approaches:
keep inequality in check or reduce voters’ aversion to inequality. A progressive consumption
tax would be particularly effective in the context of our model because it would help inter-
nalize the consumption externality. Such a tax would be difficult to implement in practice,
but it could be approximated by a value-added tax with high rates on luxury goods. Another
way to reduce inequality is by reducing the heterogeneity in preferences across agents. While
innate preferences may be immutable, effective preferences depend also on the amount of
uninsurable background risk that agents face. Policies that improve agents’ ability to insure
against such risk—for example, by providing health insurance to agents who lack it—could
effectively reduce some of the largest risk aversion values in the population. To reduce voters’
aversion to inequality, policymakers could foster a business environment in which voters feel
that high incomes are earned fairly. For example, voters are likely to be more tolerant of
inequality in an environment without corruption or political favouritism.

   Our model is related to two well-known theories of the dynamics of inequality. Kuznets
(1955) suggests that inequality first rises due to industrialization but then falls after indus-
tries attract much of the rural labor force. Piketty (2014) argues that inequality naturally
rises because the rate of return on capital exceeds the rate of economic growth, and it
falls as a result of state intervention or conflict. Unlike Kuznets or Piketty, we have a formal
model. Our model also predicts a rise and fall in inequality, but the mechanism is different—
inequality first rises as a consequence of heterogeneous exposure to global growth, but then
it falls as a result of political decisions that reverse global integration.

   Political decisions can reduce inequality in various ways. Some of the largest historical
reductions in inequality were caused by violent political events such as wars and revolutions


                                                34
(Scheidel, 2017). While Scheidel describes the effects of violence on inequality, our mechanism
can deliver reverse causality in which inequality causes violence. When inequality grows large
enough, inequality-averse agents find it optimal to upset the elites by destroying some of the
endowment, as we show in a model extension. Such destruction reduces inequality because
it hurts the rich more than the poor.27 Our model thus highlights perils beyond a possible
reversal of globalization. The model’s broader message is that when inequality grows large
enough, it becomes unsustainable because agents take political action to reduce it.




  27
    This result is somewhat reminiscent of Ljungqvist and Uhlig (2015), who find that in the Campbell-
Cochrane habit model, government interventions that destroy part of the endowment can improve welfare.
Alesina and Perotti (1996) show empirically that high income inequality causes socio-political instability.
High inequality leads to political instability also in the model of Acemoglu and Robinson (2001). Note that
the first era of globalization ended during World War I (O’Rourke and Williamson, 2001; James, 2001).


                                                    35
        Panel A. Inequality: Gini Coefficient                 Panel B. Inequality: Top 10% Share




              Panel C. Trade Balance                            Panel D. Financial Development




Figure 1. Vote Share of Nationalist Parties. This figure plots the election vote share of the parties we
classify as nationalist, in percent. For each country, we use either the most recent national parliamentary
election as of January 1, 2017 or the same country’s May 2014 European Parliament election, whichever
occurs later. The vote share is plotted against country-level measures of the Gini coefficient of disposable
net income (Panel A), the share of income going to the top 10% of earners (Panel B), trade balance as a
fraction of GDP (Panel C), and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP (Panel D). The circle around
each country’s observation has an area proportional to the country’s GDP. The slope and its t-statistic are
from the GDP-weighted cross-country regression.




                                                 36
        Panel A. Inequality: Gini Coefficient                Panel B. Inequality: Top 10% Share




              Panel C. Trade Balance                           Panel D. Financial Development




Figure 2. Vote Share of Anti-Immigrant Parties. This figure plots the election vote share of the
parties we classify as anti-immigrant, in percent. For each country, we use either the most recent national
parliamentary election as of January 1, 2017 or the same country’s May 2014 European Parliament election,
whichever occurs later. The vote share is plotted against country-level measures of the Gini coefficient of
disposable net income (Panel A), the share of income going to the top 10% of earners (Panel B), trade
balance as a fraction of GDP (Panel C), and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP (Panel D). The
circle around each country’s observation has an area proportional to the country’s GDP. The slope and its
t-statistic are from the GDP-weighted cross-country regression.




                                                 37
        Panel A. Inequality: Gini Coefficient                 Panel B. Inequality: Top 10% Share




               Panel C. Trade Balance                           Panel D. Financial Development




Figure 3. Vote Share of Anti-Elite Parties. This figure plots the election vote share of the parties
we classify as anti-elite, in percent. For each country, we use either the most recent national parliamentary
election as of January 1, 2017 or the same country’s May 2014 European Parliament election, whichever
occurs later. The vote share is plotted against country-level measures of the Gini coefficient of disposable
net income (Panel A), the share of income going to the top 10% of earners (Panel B), trade balance as a
fraction of GDP (Panel C), and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP (Panel D). The circle around
each country’s observation has an area proportional to the country’s GDP. The slope and its t-statistic are
from the GDP-weighted cross-country regression.




                                                  38
        Panel A. Inequality: Gini Coefficient                 Panel B. Inequality: Top 10% Share




              Panel C. Trade Balance                            Panel D. Financial Development




Figure 4. Support for Protectionism. This figure plots the extent to which the country’s respondents
in the 2013 ISSP survey agree with the statement “Country should limit the import of foreign products.”
The survey responses range from 1 to 5, with 5 indicating “agree strongly” and 1 “disagree strongly,” so
that a higher score indicates stronger support for protectionism. The country-level score is the average of
all individual responses in the country. This score is plotted against country-level measures of the Gini
coefficient of disposable net income (Panel A), the share of income going to the top 10% of earners (Panel
B), trade balance as a fraction of GDP (Panel C), and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP (Panel
D). The circle around each country’s observation has an area proportional to the country’s GDP. The slope
and its t-statistic are from the GDP-weighted cross-country regression.




                                                 39
Figure 5. Inequality and Skewness of the Consumption Distribution. This figure plots Vtk and Stk
as a function of δt for k ∈ {U S, RoW }, under globalization (solid line) and autarky (dashed line).




                                              40
               A. Top 1% Income Share: Data                B. Top Income Share Ratios: Data
        0.18                                             0.5
                                                                    Top 0.1% / Top 1%
        0.16                                                        Top 1% / Top 10%
                                                        0.45

        0.14
                                                         0.4

        0.12
                                                        0.35
         0.1
                                                         0.3
        0.08
                                                        0.25
          1962     1977     1991    2004    2016           1962    1977    1991     2004   2016
                           Year                                           Year

               C. Top 1% Cons. Share: Model                D. Top Cons. Share Ratios: Model
        0.08                                            0.25
                                                                    Top 0.1% / Top 1%
                                                                    Top 1% / Top 10%

        0.06
                                                         0.2


        0.04
                                                        0.15

        0.02

                                                         0.1
               0      50      100       150                    0     50       100       150
                           Time                                           Time



Figure 6. Top Shares and Their Ratios: Data vs. Model. Panel A plots the annual time series of
the top 1% income share in the U.S. Panel B plots the time series of top income share ratios, namely top 1%
to top 10% (solid line) and top 0.1% to top 1% (dashed line), in the U.S. Both series are based on income
net of taxes and transfers from the World Inequality Database. Panels C and D plot analogous quantities
for equilibrium consumption shares generated under the expected path from our model (i.e., setting dZt = 0
in equation (6)).




                                                   41
Figure 7. Trade Deficit. This figure plots the trade deficits of the two countries, as a percentage share
of local GDP, against δt .




                                                42
Figure 8. The Populist Vote Share. This figure plots the fraction of U.S. agents voting for the populist
candidate, in percent. The vertical line denotes δ from Proposition 5.




                                               43
Figure 9. Characteristics of Populist and Mainstream Voters. This figure plots the distributions
of γi (Panel A), ηi (Panel B), and wealth at the time of the election (Panel C) across populist voters (solid
line) as well as mainstream voters (dashed line).




                                                  44
Figure 10. The Distribution of Consumption. This figure plots the distribution of consumption at
time τ across populist voters (Panel A) and mainstream voters (Panel B) under two regimes: globalization
(solid line) and autarky (dashed line). The value of δτ is such that one half of U.S. agents favor each regime.




                                                   45
Figure 11. The Effects of Redistribution. This figure plots the correlation between risk aversion γi
and initial endowment wi across U.S. agents (Panel A) and the threshold δ from Proposition 5 (Panel B) for
different values of the redistribution coefficient y.




                                                46
Figure 12. Asset Pricing Implications. This figure plots asset pricing quantities as a function of δt at
time t = τ − 2 years. Panel A plots the market prices of risk, σπU S and σπRoW , under globalization (solid line)
and under autarky (dashed and dash-dot lines, respectively). Panel B plots the global market share of U.S.
stocks, PtU S /(PtU S + PtRoW ). Panel C plots the yields on U.S. and RoW 10-year zero-coupon bonds. The
vertical line in Panels B and C denotes the threshold δ from Proposition 5.




                                                   47
Figure 13. Portfolio Holdings and Expected Returns. Panel A plots model-implied distributions of
the proportion of wealth invested in equity, for both U.S. agents and RoW agents. Panel B plots equity
positions adjusted for leverage and taxes, along with the corresponding positions from the data, both for
U.S. agents. The latter positions correspond to Figure 8 in Guiso and Sodini (2013), except that we plot
percentiles rather than deciles. We thank Paolo Sodini for sharing the percentile data. Panel C plots model-
implied expected portfolio returns. In all three panels, we condition on δt = 1, and all quantities are plotted
as functions of agents’ net worth, expressed in percentiles.




                                                   48
                                               Table 1
                                       Elections in Our Sample

This table reports the dates of the national elections in our sample. For each country, we use its most recent
national election as of January 1, 2017 as long as it occurred in or after May 2014. If the national election
occurred before May 2014, we replace it by the May 2014 European Parliament election in the same country.

                                          National Election         European Parliament
                Country                         Date                Election Used? (Y/N)
                Austria                      2013-09-29                       Y
                Belgium                      2014-05-25                       N
                Bulgaria                     2014-10-05                       N
                Croatia                      2016-09-11                       N
                Cyprus                       2016-05-22                       N
                Czech Republic               2013-10-25                       Y
                Denmark                      2015-06-18                       N
                Estonia                      2015-03-01                       N
                Finland                      2015-04-19                       N
                France                       2012-06-17                       Y
                Germany                      2013-09-22                       Y
                Greece                       2015-09-20                       N
                Hungary                      2014-04-06                       Y
                Ireland                      2016-02-26                       N
                Italy                        2013-02-25                       Y
                Latvia                       2014-10-04                       N
                Lithuania                    2016-10-09                       N
                Luxembourg                   2013-10-20                       Y
                Malta                        2013-03-09                       Y
                Netherlands                  2012-09-12                       Y
                Poland                       2015-10-25                       N
                Portugal                     2015-10-04                       N
                Romania                      2016-12-11                       N
                Slovakia                     2016-03-06                       N
                Slovenia                     2014-07-13                       N
                Spain                        2016-06-26                       N
                Sweden                       2014-09-14                       N
                United Kingdom               2015-05-07                       N
                United States                2016-11-08                       N




                                                     49
                                             Table 2
                                  Distribution of Risk Aversion

This table shows selected percentiles of three distributions of risk aversion across agents. Columns 2 and
3 show the distributions in the model, for the U.S. and RoW, respectively. Column 4 shows the empirical
distribution estimated by Calvet et al. (2019). We thank Paolo Sodini for sharing these percentiles.

                                                    Risk Aversion
                                   Percentile    U.S. RoW Data
                                       1         2.97 3.23      2.80
                                       5         3.34 3.70      3.77
                                      10         3.60 4.01      4.22
                                      25         4.12 4.69      4.70
                                      50         4.92 5.67      5.11
                                      75         6.02 6.98      5.52
                                      90         7.39 8.35      5.96
                                      95         8.28 9.02      6.27
                                      99         9.48 9.77      9.40




                                                   50
                                     REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson, 2015, Democ-
   racy, redistribution, and inequality, In Handbook of Income Distribution 2, 1885–1966.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson, 2001, A theory of political transitions, American
   Economic Review 91, 938–963.
Aguiar, Mark, and Mark Bils, 2015, Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality?,
   American Economic Review 105, 2725–56.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos, 2005, Fairness and redistribution, American
   Economic Review 95, 960–980.
Alesina, Alberto, Rafael Di Tella, and Robert MacCulloch, 2004, Inequality and happiness:
   are Europeans and Americans different? Journal of Public Economics 88, 2009–2042.
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1996, Income distribution, political instability, and
   investment, European Economic Review 40, 1203–1228.
Algan, Yann, Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou, and Evgenia Passari, 2017, The European
   trust crisis and the rise of populism, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 309–400.
Athreya, Kartik, and Janice Eberly, 2018, Risk, the college premium, and aggregate human
   capital investment, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez, 2011, Top incomes in the long
   run of history, Journal of Economic Literature 49, 3–71.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi, 2017, Importing political
   polarization? The electoral consequences of rising trade exposure, Working paper.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, 2019, Rich pickings? Risk, return, and
   skill in household wealth, Working paper.
Bakker, Ryan, Erica Edwards, Liesbet Hooghe, Seth Jolly, Jelle Koedam, Filip Kostelka,
   Gary Marks, Jonathan Polk, Jan Rovny, Gijs Schumacher, Marco Steenbergen, Milada
   Vachudova, and Marko Zilovic, 2015, 1999–2014 Chapel Hill Expert Survey Trend File,
   Version 1.1. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. www.chesdata.eu.
Bhamra, Harjoat S., and Raman Uppal, 2014, Asset prices with heterogeneity in preferences
   and beliefs, Review of Financial Studies 27, 519–580.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, An equilibrium
   model of global imbalances and low interest rates, American Economic Review 98, 358–
   93.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, Francisco J. Gomes, and Paolo Sodini, 2019, The
   cross-section of household preferences, Working paper.
Chabakauri, Georgy, 2013, Dynamic equilibrium with two stocks, heterogeneous investors,
   and portfolio constraints, Review of Financial Studies 26, 3104–3141.


                                            51
Chan, Yeung Lewis, and Leonid Kogan, 2002, Catching up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous
   preferences and the dynamics of asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 110, 1255–
   1285.
Clark, Andrew E., and Conchita D’Ambrosio, 2015, Attitudes to income inequality: experi-
   mental and survey evidence, Handbook of Income Distribution Vol. 2, 1147–1208.
Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig, 2018a, Global competition and Brexit, American Political
   Science Review 112, 201–218.
Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig, 2018b, The trade origins of economic nationalism: Im-
   port competition and voting behavior in Western Europe, American Journal of Political
   Science, forthcoming.
Davis, Steven J., and James A. Kahn, 2008, Interpreting the great moderation: Changes in
   the volatility of economic activity at the macro and micro levels, Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 22, 155–180.
Dawes, Christopher T., James H. Fowler, Tim Johnson, Richard McElreath, and Oleg
  Smirnov, 2007, Egalitarian motives in humans, Nature 446, 794–796.
Döring, Holger and Philip Manow, 2011, Parliament and government composition database
    (ParlGov), Working paper, University of Bremen. www.parlgov.org.
Dumas, Bernard, 1989, Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market, Review of
  Financial Studies 2, 157–188.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2020, Heterogeneity
   and persistence in returns to wealth, Econometrica 88, 115–170.
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M. Schmidt, 1999, A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817–868.
Ferrer-i-Carbonell, Ada, and Xavier Ramos, 2014, Inequality and happiness, Journal of
   Economic Surveys 28, 1016–1027.
Funke, Manuel, Moritz Schularick, and Christoph Trebesch, 2016, Going to extremes: Poli-
   tics after financial crises, 1870-2014, European Economic Review 88, 227–260.
Gabaix, Xavier, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll, 2016, The dy-
  namics of inequality, Econometrica 84, 2071–2111.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Stavros Panageas, 2015, Young, old, conservative, and bold: The im-
   plications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy
   123, 670–685.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides, 2008, Asset pricing with limited risk sharing
  and heterogeneous agents, Review of Financial Studies 21, 415–448.
Gomez, Matthieu, 2019, Displacement and the rise in top wealth inequality, Working paper.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, 2014, External adjustment, global imbalances,
  valuation effects, in Handbook of International Economics 4, 585–645. Elsevier.

                                              52
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, 2017, Exorbitant privilege and
  exorbitant duty, Working paper, 2017.
Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Tommaso Sonno, 2017, Demand and
   supply of populism, Working paper.
Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Tommaso Sonno, 2018, Global crises and
   populism: the role of Eurozone institutions, Working paper.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris, 2016, Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Eco-
   nomic have-nots and cultural backlash, Working paper, University of Michigan.
James, Harold, 2001, The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression, Harvard
   University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jones, Charles I., and Jihee Kim, 2018, A Schumpeterian model of top income inequality,
   Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Jean-Jacques Laffont, 1979, A general equilibrium entrepreneurial
   theory of firm formation based on risk aversion, Journal of Political Economy 87, 719–
   748.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Noah Stoffman, 2020, Left behind: Creative
   destruction, inequality, and the stock market, Journal of Political Economy 128, 855–
   906.
Kuznets, Simon, 1955, Economic growth and income inequality, American Economic Review
  45, 1–28.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Harald Uhlig, 2015, Comment on the Campbell-Cochrane habit model,
   Journal of Political Economy 123, 1201–1213.
Longstaff, Francis A., and Jiang Wang, 2012, Asset pricing and the credit market, Review
   of Financial Studies 25, 3169–3215.
Maggiori, Matteo, 2017, Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve
  currencies, American Economic Review 107, 3038–71.
Mayda, Anna Maria, and Dani Rodrik, 2005, Why are some people (and countries) more
  protectionist than others? European Economic Review 49, 1393–1430.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, 2009, Financial inte-
  gration, financial development, and global imbalances, Journal of Political Economy 117,
  371–416.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Understanding predictability, Journal
  of Political Economy 112, 1–47.
Milanović, Branko, 2016, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization,
   Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Morawetz, David, et al., 1977, Income distribution and self-rated happiness: some empirical
  evidence, Economic Journal 87, 511–522.

                                            53
Musto, David K., and Bilge Yilmaz, 2003, Trading and voting, Journal of Political Economy
  111, 990–1003.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 2001, Globalization and History: The Evo-
   lution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy, MIT Press, 2001.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, Income inequality and asset prices under redis-
    tributive taxation, Journal of Monetary Economics 81, 1–20.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2020, Political cycles and stock returns, Journal of
    Political Economy, forthcoming.
Piketty, Thomas, 2014, Capital in the 21st Century, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, 2018, Distributional national ac-
   counts: methods and estimates for the United States, Quarterly Journal of Economics
   133, 553–609.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American
   Economic Review 88, 559–586.
Rodrik, Dani, 1997, Has Globalization Gone Too Far?, Institute for International Economics,
  Washington, DC.
Rodrik, Dani, 2000, How far will international economic integration go? Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 14, 177–186.
Scheidel, Walter, 2017, The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the
   Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century, Princeton University Press.
Schulhofer-Wohl, Sam, 2011, Heterogeneity and tests of risk sharing, Journal of Political
   Economy 119, 925–958.
Shaw, Kathryn L., 1996, An empirical analysis of risk aversion and income growth, Journal
   of Labor Economics 14, 626–653.
Thurow, Lester C., 1971, The income distribution as a pure public good, Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 85, 327–336.
Veronesi, Pietro, 2018, Heterogeneous households under uncertainty, Working paper.
Wilkinson, Richard, and Kate Pickett, 2009, The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies
   Almost Always Do Better, Penguin, London.
Wilkinson, Richard, and Kate Pickett, 2018, The Inner Level: How More Equal Societies
   Reduce Stress, Restore Sanity and Improve Everyone’s Well-being, Penguin, London.




                                            54
