NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAIRNESS AND FRICTIONS:
THE IMPACT OF UNEQUAL RAISES ON QUIT BEHAVIOR
Arindrajit Dube
Laura Giuliano
Jonathan S. Leonard
Working Paper 24906
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24906

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

We thank Joshua Angrist, Emily Breza, David Card, Christian Dustmann, Ethan Kaplan, Suresh
Naidu, Todd Sørensen and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, UC Irvine, UC Merced, UC
Santa Cruz, LSU, MIT, UMass Amherst, UNR, UVA, and the NBER Summer Institute for
Personnel Economics for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Arindrajit Dube, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan S. Leonard. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fairness and Frictions: The Impact of Unequal Raises on Quit Behavior
Arindrajit Dube, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan S. Leonard
NBER Working Paper No. 24906
August 2018
JEL No. D9,D91,J01,J3,J42,J63
ABSTRACT
We analyze how separations responded to arbitrary differences in own and peer wages at a large
U.S. retailer. Regression-discontinuity estimates imply large causal effects of own wages on
separations, and on quits in particular. However, this own-wage response could reflect
comparisons either to market wages or to peer wages. Estimates using peer-wage discontinuities
show large peer-wage effects and imply the own-wage separation response mostly reflects peer
comparisons. The peer effect is driven by comparisons with higher-paid peers—suggesting
concerns about fairness. Separations appear fairly insensitive when raises are similar across peers
—suggesting search frictions and monopsony are relevant in this low-wage sector.

Arindrajit Dube
Department of Economics
University of Massachusetts
Crotty Hall
412 N. Pleasant Street
Amherst, MA 01002
and NBER
adube@econs.umass.edu

Jonathan S. Leonard
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
leonard@haas.berkeley.edu

Laura Giuliano
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
lgiulian@ucsc.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24906

1

Introduction

When making decisions about job mobility, do workers mainly compare their pay with
the outside market? Or do they also make comparisons with the pay of co-workers
in their own firm? If workers are very sensitive to wage diﬀerences across firms as in
the standard competitive labor-market model, then employers have little scope to set
wages. But even if a firm’s wage-setting is not fully constrained by market competition,
employers could still be constrained by employee concerns about relative pay within
the firm. Such internal constraints could lead to wage compression or to measures
that inhibit comparisons across coworkers–such as pay secrecy and outsourcing of jobs.
Estimates of how employee turnover responds to external and internal wage comparisons
are therefore central to understanding the wage-setting behavior and other employment
practices of firms. Yet the endogeneity of wages in natural employment settings has
made causal evidence hard to establish.
In this paper, we analyze how job separations responded to arbitrary wage diﬀerences
among sales employees at a large U.S. retailer with hundreds of stores nationwide (henceforth “the firm”). Using quasi-experimental variation that resulted from a rule-based
formula for pay raises, we examine how separations were aﬀected both by the size of
one’s own raise and by the average raise of one’s peers within the store. We make three
main contributions. First, we advance the literature on relative pay in the workplace by
establishing that changes in peer wages can have large, causal eﬀects on job separations
and on quits in particular. Second, we use the peer-wage estimate to decompose the
eﬀect of own wage changes on separations into a response that is due to relative pay
comparisons within the workplace and a response due to comparisons with the market.
The latter response allows us to measure the wage-setting power of the employer. Third,
we present evidence that the separation response to peer wages cannot be explained by
rational learning about own future wage growth; instead, the patterns we find suggest
concerns about fairness.
In response to the federal minimum wage increases in 1996 and 1997, our firm implemented a policy that raised wages above the new minimum. Two features of this policy
provide the basis for our research design. First, the firm raised wages by applying a
uniform rule nationwide irrespective of any local or individual characteristics other than
the initial wage. Second, this rule set the new wage as a step function of the initial wage,
grouping employees into 15-cent wide bands and assigning them to the bottom of the
same new pay step. This resulted in a set of 10-cent, discontinuous jumps in the new
1

wage (one jump at the threshold for each new pay step). Thus workers on either side
of a threshold, whose initial wages diﬀered by only one cent, received new wages that
diﬀered by ten cents—or roughly 2% of the average wage.
We begin by estimating the response of separations with respect to own wages using
a sharp regression discontinuity (RD) design that exploits the discontinuities in the new
wage as a function of the initial wage. These estimates show a strong causal eﬀect of
wages in reducing separations. However, the interpretation of this eﬀect is ambiguous.
If workers make only market comparisons, then a large separation elasticity is indicative
of a highly competitive labor market. But if workers also compare their own wages with
those of their peers, then the size of the separation response reflects not only how much
workers react to the market but also how much they care about relative pay within the
workplace.
To distinguish between these two channels, we estimate a multi-dimensional RD
(MRD) model of separations that incorporates both a sharp RD in the own-wage (as
before) and a fuzzy RD that uses peer-wage discontinuities to instrument for the average
peer wage.1 In this model, the own-wage estimate continues to give the total eﬀect of
wages on separations. But now the peer-wage estimate lets us recover the eﬀect of a
change in wages relative to one’s peers—i.e., the eﬀect of peer comparisons. And by
netting out the latter from the former, we get an estimate of the eﬀect of a raise that
holds relative pay constant—i.e., the eﬀect of market comparisons.
Overall, we find strong evidence that peer comparisons matter. Our estimates suggest
separations are highly responsive to increases in the average peer wage—with elasticities
of 20, 9 and 3 for 3, 6 and 9 months after the raise. For the median worker in our sample,
who separates roughly 9 months after the raise, the estimates imply that a $0.10 increase
in the average raise among peers reduces tenure by about a month. Compared to the
own-wage responses, the estimates of peer-wage separation responses are broadly similar
in magnitude but opposite in sign—which implies that relative-pay concerns account
for much of the total eﬀect of own wages on separations. In contrast, market wage
comparisons appear relatively unimportant in explaining the separation response. The
estimates suggest that when a raise is uniform across peers (so that the gap between
own and peer wage is held constant), the elasticities are not statistically distinguishable
from zero.
1

We define peers generally as coworkers in the same job and store who earn broadly similar initial
wages. Our preferred specification uses wages within 30 cents of one’s own initial wage (roughly 70% of
the low-wage coworkers who receive a wage adjustment). Section 5.6 explains our data-driven procedure
for choosing the peer definition and presents estimates based on alternative definitions.

2

To check this interpretation, we estimate the own-wage RD model separately for two
samples formed on the basis of whether the majority of one’s peers are on the opposite
side or same side of a pay-step threshold. These estimates show that the eﬀects of own
wages on separations are large in the opposite-side sample where workers receive raises
that diﬀer from those of their peers, but are small in the same-side sample where the
raises are similar across peers. Consistent with the MRD results, these results also imply
that the overall eﬀect of wages on separations is driven mostly by peer comparisons.
Further analysis sheds light on the motives underlying the peer-wage eﬀect. We
find that the eﬀect is asymmetric: it is driven by comparisons with higher-paid peers.
This asymmetry suggests workers are averse to unequal treatment that is to their disadvantage, and we interpret this aversion to disadvantageous inequity as evidence of
concerns about fairness.2 An alternate theory of peer-wage eﬀects that does not rely
on other-regarding preferences is that workers use peer wages to help predict their own
future pay.3 However, the peer-wage response in our setting cannot be easily explained
by such rational learning. We find no evidence that peer raises predict future wage
growth—which is consistent with the arbitrary nature of the raises we study. Moreover,
even under very conservative assumptions about selective attrition, the signal conveyed
by peer wages about future raises can explain no more than 20% of the separation eﬀect
we find.
Our findings on relative pay complement a set of recent field experiments that find
negative eﬀects of pay disparities in the workplace on morale, job satisfaction, and eﬀort
(Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani 2017; Card et al. 2012; Cohn et al. 2014). We advance the
literature by documenting the causal eﬀects of relative pay in a non-experimental setting
and by showing that the eﬀects extend to job separations.4 Our paper is most closely
related to Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani (2017), who randomly vary wage increases across
worksites in India and find strong evidence that wage inequality causes reductions in
2

See Fehr and Schmidt (1999) on aversion to disadvantageous inequity as a notion of fairness.
The standard learning model posits that having peers with higher pay sends a positive signal about
future wage growth. Consistent with this hypothesis, some non-experimental studies have found that
low relative pay is associated with higher job satisfaction and lower quit rates (Clark, Kristensen and
Westergård-Nielsen 2009; Galizzi and Lang 1998; Pfeifer and Schneck 2012); however, others have found
patterns that are the opposite in sign and consistent with our results (Clark and Oswald 1996; Rege and
Solli 2013). The mixed evidence in this literature is hard to interpret, partly because the endogeneity of
wages raises questions about causality. It is also likely that signaling value of peer wages varies across
settings. In some cases, having higher-paid peers may signal negative wage growth due to poor match
quality (e.g., Buntrock 2014); while in other cases (like ours) there is no signaling value.
4
Card et al. (2012) examine actual separations, but their estimates are too imprecise to reach a
definite conclusion and are likely attenuated by the diﬀusion of their information treatment over time
to employees in their control group.
3

3

attendance and productivity. Our results also complement those of Card et al. (2012),
who find that employees at the University of California reported lower job satisfaction
and increased likelihood of job search after learning they earned less than their peers.
Despite diﬀerences across settings and outcomes, the magnitude of our estimates are
broadly consistent with those implied by these two papers (see Section 7).
Our findings also have implications for the wage-setting power of the firm. Consistent with models of monopsonistic competition (Burdett and Mortensen 1998; Manning
2003), the modest response of separations to an across-the-board wage increase indicates
the presence of search frictions that give the firm significant monopsony power. While
prior empirical studies of labor market monopsony have reached similar conclusions,
only a few have used quasi-experimental variation to estimate separation responses to
firm-specific wage changes, and these studies focus on a narrow range of settings.5 Moreover, the evidence for low-wage labor markets is particularly scarce and the empirical
relevance of monopsony power in these markets remains a subject of debate.6 Our results thus complement the extant literature and provide novel evidence that considerable
wage-setting power exists in a setting characterized by low wages and high turnover. At
the same time, they also suggest that employee concerns about fairness may serve as
an important constraint on a firm’s wage-setting behavior beyond the constraints of
the market. Such internal constraints could help explain why the rise in inequality has
occurred mainly between firms (Song et al. 2015) and why firms have increasingly restructured employment in ways that limit interaction between workers who are paid very
diﬀerently (Weil 2014).
5

Falch (2011) and Ransom and Sims (2010) both use plausibly exogenous wage variation in the
market for teachers; they find separation elasticities of -3.5 and -1.8 respectively. Mas (2017) estimates
an elasticity of -11 using quasi-experimental wage variation for city managers. Using observational
data, several studies have estimated separation elasticities between -2 and zero, implying large search
frictions (Depew and Sørensen 2013; Hirsch, Schank and Schnabel 2010; Ransom and Oaxaca 2010;
Webber 2015); however, these estimates are potentially biased toward zero due to the endogeneity of
wages (Manning 2003). Others have studied employer responses to labor market regulations to assess
labor market frictions. Evidence of substantial monopsony power has been found in studies of legislated
wage changes for registered nurses (Staiger, Spetz and Phibbs 2010) and changes in mobility restrictions
for migrant workers (Naidu, Nyarko and Wang 2016). Using both experimental and machine learning
evidence, Dube et al. (2018) find evidence of strong monopsony power in online labor markets, with
labor supply elasticities smaller than 0.5. In contrast, however, Matsudaira (2014) finds no evidence of
monopsony power in a study of minimum staﬃng regulation for nurses aides.
6
Much theoretical work on labor market frictions has been stimulated by empirical research showing
that minimum wages do not always have negative eﬀects on employment as predicted by a competitive
model of low-wage labor markets (Card and Krueger 2016). Though estimates of the employment
response to a minimum wage increase are mixed, recent studies have produced evidence consistent with
search frictions in low-wage labor markets such as the retail setting we study here (e.g., Giuliano 2013;
Dube, Lester and Reich 2016).

4

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we extend the job ladder
model to incorporate relative-pay concerns. In Section 3, we discuss the institutional
setting and our payroll data. In Section 4, we present the regression discontinuity
estimates of the total eﬀect of own wages on separations. Section 5 extends the analysis
to estimate peer eﬀects, and assesses the relative importance of market competition and
peer comparisons in determining the total own-wage eﬀect. Section 6 presents additional
falsification tests, and Section 7 concludes.

2

Theoretical Framework

In the canonical “job ladder” model of on-the-job search (Burdett and Mortensen 1998),
separations occur either as exogenous transitions to non-employment, or as endogenous
transitions (quits) to jobs oﬀering wages that exceed the worker’s current wage w. The
separation rate is given by S(w) = δ + λ [1 − F (w)], where F (w) is the wage oﬀer
distribution, δ is the exogenous separation rate, and λ is the oﬀer arrival rate; search
frictions are captured by lower values of λ.7
A key assumption of this model is that wages vary across firms but not within firms.
The separations (or quits) response to a wage increase therefore depends only on market
dS
= −λf (w). Hence in a context where wages vary only
comparisons, and is given by dw
across firms, the separation response can be used to assess the degree of competition in
the labor market. And under a stationarity assumption, the separation elasticity can

be used to derive the extent of wage-setting (monopsony) power that arises from search
frictions (Manning 2003).8
We expand the model to allow for internal comparisons by introducing a reference
wage, wp , which is a function of the wages earned by one’s peers. We now assume that
a worker’s job satisfaction U depends not only on her own wage, w, but also on the gap
between her own wage and the reference wage, wg = w − wp :9
U(w, wp ) = v0 w + v (w − wp ) = v0 w + v (wg ) .
7

Here we make the simplifying assumption that individuals are similar in terms of their oﬀer arrival
rates and wage oﬀer distributions; i.e, that λi = λ, Fi (.) = F (.) ∀i. The corresponding assumption in
our empirical model is that λ and F (.) do not change discontinuously at the firm’s pay-step thresholds.
8
Manning (2003) shows that if recruited and separating workers face the same oﬀer wage distribution, then the labor supply elasticity facing the firm is -2 times the separation elasticity; he also derives
the conditions under which this assumption holds.
9
Our approach is similar to that used elsewhere in the literature on peer comparisons in the workplace (e.g., Charness and Kuhn (2007), Fehr and Schmidt (1999), and Card et al. (2012)).

5

When v ′ (.) = 0, workers are only self-regarding, and we revert to the standard job
ladder model. However, when v ′ (wg ) > 0, workers also care about their pay relative to
the reference wage; and in the case where v0 = 0, workers care only about relative pay:
an equal raise in both w and wp that keeps the gap wg constant does not improve the
worker’s welfare. This formulation also allows for asymmetries depending on whether
workers are earning more or less than their peers; in particular, when v ′′ (wg ) < 0, workers
care more about relative pay when wg < 0 than they do when wg ≥ 0, as in Fehr and
Schmidt’s (1999) model of fairness.
How does a worker choose between her current job (with wage w) and a new wage
oﬀer w ′ ? Since there is no obvious rationale for a worker to expect her peers at the new
job to be systematically paid more or less than herself, we assume the expected wage of
peers at the new job is equal to the oﬀered wage: wp′ = w ′ .10 Job-to-job transitions are
now based on a comparison of U and U ′ , so the worker leaves when:
U = U(w, wp ) = v0 w + v (w − wp ) = v0 w + v (wg ) < v0 w ′ = U ′ .
Separations are now a function of both own wage w and the peer wage wp :
!

"

#$

v(w−wp )
v0 #$
v(wg )
+ v0
.

S(w, wp) = θδ + λ 1 − F w +
=

!

"

θδ + λ 1 − F w

(1)

Diﬀerentiating equation (1) with respect to w and wp gives the partial eﬀects of own
and peer wage increases, which can be expressed in terms of the wage gap wg as:
and

∂S(w,wp )
=
∂w
∂S(w,wp )
∂wp

"

"

=λ·f w

v′ (wg )
v
" ′
#0
v (wg )
.
v0

# "

v(wg )
·
v0 #
v(wg )
+ v0 ·

−λ · f w +

1+

#

(2)

These two separation responses are estimated directly in our empirical analysis. Imp)
, the total eﬀect of an own wage increase on separations, reflects two
portantly, ∂S(w,w
∂w
conceptually distinct responses—one based on market comparisons and the other based
on peer comparisons. Totally diﬀerentiating equation (1) with respect to w gives the
decomposition

dS
dw

=

∂S(w,wg )
∂w

+

∂S(w,wg ) dwg
∂wg
dw

where:

10

While the assumption wp′ = w′ simplifies the exposition, it is not necessary for our key results on
identification of the separation elasticities. These rely only on the weaker assumption that any change
in w or wp does not aﬀect the peer wage wp′ at the new job. To see this, note that workers move when
&
%
v0 w + v (w − wp ) < v0 w′ + v w′ − wp′ . If we interpret F (.) as the distribution function of the utility
v (w ′ −wp′ )
, the expressions for the separation function
from the outside oﬀer scaled by v10 , i.e., w′ +
v0
(equation 1) remain the same, as do the expressions for all the subsequent separation responses.

6

and

∂S(w,wg )
∂w
∂S(w,wg ) dwg
∂wg
dw

"

= −λ · f w +
"

= −λ · f w +

v(wg )
v0

v(wg )
v0

# "

·

#

v′ (wg )
v0

#

dwg
.
dw

(3)

The first term in equation (3) holds the wage gap constant and thus shows the impact
of a wage increase that is common across peers. This “gap-constant” eﬀect represents
the separation response that is due to market comparisons. As in the standard model
without peer eﬀects, this response is stronger in more competitive markets with higher
values of the oﬀer arrival rate λ and the wage oﬀer density f (.). The second term shows
the impact of an increase in the wage gap—and thus represents the response that is
due to peer comparisons. For a given level of market competition, this “relative pay”
response is larger the more workers care about relative pay and the larger the increase
in the wage gap wg .
Because raises in our setting generally cause wages to vary relative both to the market
and to one’s peers, the partial derivatives in equation (3) are not directly estimable. However, they can be recovered from the estimates of the derivatives in equation (2). First,
p ) 11
.
the relative-pay eﬀect is identified as the negative of the peer-wage eﬀect: − ∂S(w,w
∂wp
Second, we get the gap-constant separation response by subtracting the relative wage
eﬀect from the total own-wage eﬀect, or equivalently by summing the own-wage and
peer-wage eﬀects:
∂S(w, wg )
∂S(w, wp ) ∂S(w, wp )
=
+
.
∂w
∂w
∂wp

(4)

The ratio of the two separation responses is the marginal rate of substitution between
relative and absolute pay:
α(w − wp ) =

∂S(w,wp )
∂wp
∂S(w,wp )
∂w

=

v ′ (wg )
,
v0 + v ′ (wg )

(5)

which can be interpreted as the compensating diﬀerential for a higher peer wage. For
example α = 0.5 means the worker will accept a $0.50 wage reduction to avoid a $1.00
increase in the peer wage.

11

In Section 5.5, we also construct a Wald estimate for the relative-pay eﬀect, which is based on the
diﬀerence in own-wage separation responses in two sub-samples—one where raises diﬀer across peers
and one where the raises are more similar.

7

Our empirical analysis begins by assuming that v(wg ) is linear and symmetric in wg ;
in Section 5.7, we relax this assumption by allowing a worker’s separation response to
vary with the ex ante wage gap. We are particularly interested in whether the response
is asymmetric – as would be the case if workers are especially averse to disadvantageous
inequity.
We consider another potential source of nonlinearity in Online Appendix B, where
we extend the theoretical model to allow search intensity–and thus the oﬀer arrival rate
λ–to depend on own and peer wages. As before, the total eﬀect of an increase in own
wage is the sum of the gap-constant eﬀect and the peer-wage eﬀect, and the ratio of the
own and peer-wage separation responses still recovers the compensating diﬀerential for
an increase in the peer wage. But now, both responses also depend on the sensitivity of
the oﬀer arrival rate to search activity, which opens the door to further non-linearities.
With a fixed search cost, for example, small reductions in wg may produce large increases
in separations while further reductions have smaller marginal eﬀects. The possibility of
such non-linearities cautions against extrapolating the results from small wage increases
to much larger ones.
Our theoretical framework does not include an information channel whereby peer
wages provide a signal about one’s own future wage. While such a learning mechanism
may be relevant in other contexts, we think it is unlikely to explain the separation
behavior in our setting. We address this point more fully in Section 5.8.

3
3.1

Data and Institutional Setting
The firm and its compensation policy

Our data is constructed from personnel records spanning the 30-month period from
February 1, 1996, to July 31, 1998. The firm operated more than 700 retail stores
nationwide during this period, and employed an average of 33 workers per store. As
a matter of policy, this chain pursues uniform benefits, working conditions, and job
duties across all stores. We analyze the separation behavior of employees in a single,
entry-level sales job that accounts for 90 percent of the firm’s retail workforce. This
job involves customer service and various support duties; it requires only basic skills
and employees receive cursory on-the-job training. This is a relatively low-wage job
in which hourly wages are the main form of compensation and there is little expected
wage growth. Employees do not receive commissions or performance-based bonuses; and

8

promotions are rare–among those who remain employed, less than 5% are promoted to a
higher-paid job within a year of being hired. The main opportunity for wage growth in
the firm is through merit raises that are given annually. All those employed for at least
90 consecutive days are eligible for the annual merit raise, and roughly 80% of eligible
employees receive one. These raises are determined by store managers and averaged
2.2% across all workers.
Our analysis focuses on a non-standard set of raises that the firm implemented in
response to increases in the federal minimum wage. The minimum wage rose twice
during our sample period—from $4.25 to $4.75 on October 1, 1996, and then to $5.15
on September 1, 1997. On each of these dates, the firm applied a uniform rule to all
hourly employees nationwide irrespective of any local or individual characteristics other
than initial wage. This policy increased wages substantially more than was necessary
to comply with the law. Whereas the share of hourly retail employees who earned less
than the new minimum was roughly 5% in 1996 and 10% in 1997, the firm extended
raises to the 30th percentile of the wage distribution in 1996 and to the 40th percentile
in 1997.12 The average raise was $0.21 or 4.1%.
A key feature of the firm’s policy—and the source of the arbitrary wage variation
exploited in our analysis—is the discontinuous nature of the formula used to implement
the raises. For a worker with wage w0 y before the minimum wage increase in year y, the
scheduled raise, ∆wy , was calculated as:13
∆wy = wy − w0 y

⎧
#
"
⎨ (M W1y − w0 y ) + 0.10 × int w0y −MW0y
0 .15
=
⎩
0

if w0 y ∈ [M W0 y ,w 0 y )
otherwise

(6)

Here MW0 y is the initial minimum; MW1y is the new minimum; and w 0 y represents the
maximum initial wage for which there is a raise, and is equal to $5.45 in 1996 and $5.65
in 1997. In both years, the resulting new wage schedule is a step function with new pay
steps at 15-cent intervals of w0 y within the indicated range. These wage schedules are
illustrated in Figure 1, which shows scatter plots of new (“day after”) wages on initial

12

There is little direct evidence on the extent to which minimum wage increases result in wage
spillovers, and measurement error makes it hard to quantify spillovers using household data such as
the Current Population Survey (Autor, Manning and Smith, 2016). It is thus noteworthy that our firm
implemented sizable spillovers as a matter of corporate policy, giving raises to workers earning as much
as 15 percent above the new minimum.
13
We refer to the raise determined by equation (6) as the “scheduled raise” to distinguish it from
the actual raise. The actual raise may be diﬀerent if, for example, the employee receives a promotion
on the same day. In practice, however, fewer than 0.5% of raises diﬀer from the scheduled raise, so the
scheduled raise predicts the actual raise very closely (see Figure 2).

9

(“day before”) wages for all hourly employees who had at least one month tenure and a
wage less than $1.00 above the new minimum on the day before the increase.14
As Figure 1 illustrates, the firm’s wage policy created multiple discontinuities in the
relationship between the initial wage and the new wage. The number and location of the
thresholds, Tyk , varies by year: there are seven thresholds in 1996 and five in 1997. But
in all cases, the initial wages for employees on either side of a threshold diﬀered by one
cent, while their new wages diﬀered by ten cents. The raises, therefore, diﬀered by $0.09
or roughly 2% of the typical wage. These arbitrary diﬀerences provide the identifying
variation in both own and peer wages that we use to estimate separation responses.
A prerequisite condition for relative pay to aﬀect separations is that coworkers learn
about each other’s wages. While we have no direct evidence about what our employees
knew about coworker wages, several features of our context may have promoted information sharing. First, the raises were highly salient - they were relatively large (4.1% on
average vs. 2.2% for a typical merit raise) and were given simultaneously in the context
of a federal minimum wage increase.15 Further, since workers who got these raises likely
assumed that their similarly paid coworkers did as well, they may have felt relatively
comfortable discussing their raises with their peers.16 Finally, it is worth noting that
since our identifying variation in the average peer wage, wp , is due to diﬀerences in the
fraction of peers above or below the nearest threshold, we need not assume that workers
learn the exact wage of each peer. We would obtain the same results if workers instead
learn the fraction of peers that gets “lucky”.
3.2

Sample construction and descriptive statistics

In the job we analyze, there were 10,390 workers scheduled for raises on October 1, 1996,
and 13,548 such workers on September 1, 1997. Our estimation sample is a subset of these
employees that meets two conditions. First, we condition on w0 y ∈ [MW0 y + 0.08, w0 y −
0.08], which ensures a consistent bandwidth of ± $0.07 around each of the twelve pay14

In practice, employees hired less than a month before the minimum wage increase were often paid
starting wages based on the new pay scale and hence they did not receive subsequent raises. We exclude
these new hires from our estimation sample.
15
In another context where large raises were given simultaneously to all workers in a production unit,
Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani (2017) find direct evidence of substantial learning about coworker wages.
Although managers maintained pay secrecy, 87% of workers were able to accurately report the wages
of both coworkers in their 3-person production unit within 3 weeks of the raises.
16
We have no information on what managers told employees about the raise schedule, and this
information may have diﬀered across stores. But it seems likely that workers were aware of the federal
minimum wage increase and were aware that the raises resulted from this increase.

10

step thresholds. Second, we exclude workers who are still earning their starting wages
by restricting attention to those who had received a merit raise during the previous raise
cycle. This is important because our RD design rests on the assumption that wages are
exogenously determined in the vicinity of the discontinuity thresholds. Since starting
wages for new hires are always multiples of $0.05, and since step thresholds occur only
at multiples of $0.05, starting wages can be located at pay-step thresholds but are never
located just below a threshold. Including starting wages in the sample would therefore
lead to sharp discontinuities in employee tenure and other associated characteristics.17
The final estimation sample consists of 6,691 scheduled raises. Wages and scheduled
raises are summarized in Panel A of Table 1. Employees in our sample earned an average
of $4.99 and $5.28 before the 1996 and 1997 raises, and received average raises of $0.21
and $0.18. For the pooled sample, the average initial wage is $5.15 and the average raise
is $0.19.
Apart from wages, the data contains each employee’s age, race, gender, and full or
part time status. For employment spells that begin or end within our sample period, we
also observe dates of hire or termination; and for terminations, we observe the reason.
Panel B shows the characteristics of our estimation sample. The sample is largely female
(81%) and white (76%), and is relatively young—the mean age is 23 and about half are
teenagers. Less than 1% work full time. Since we don’t observe hire dates before Feb.
1, 1996, and since sample employees are hired before April 1st of each year, our measure
of tenure is censored at 8 months for 86% of those employed on the date of the first
increase (October 1, 1996). Of those employed on the second date (September 1, 1997),
tenure is censored for only 16% and the median tenure is 11.7 months. Because the
sample is limited to employees who have both a scheduled raise and a prior merit raise,
it consists of relatively low-wage earners with relatively high job tenure.
Panel C shows summary statistics for several variables describing an employee’s
coworkers; these variables serve as controls in some of our models. Coworkers are defined
as all those who work in the same, entry-level job and in the same store on the day of the
minimum wage increase—including workers who do not meet the conditions for being
in the estimation sample. A typical employee in our sample has 27 such coworkers, who
on average are slightly older than sample employees (24.2 vs. 22.6) and earn somewhat
higher wages ($5.55 vs. $5.15).
17

Since merit raises are given annually at the end of June and eligibility requires at least 90 days
of tenure, this sample restriction excludes employees who were hired after April 1st of the year of each
minimum wage increase. It also excludes about 15% of the remaining sample because despite being
eligible, these employees did not receive the most recent merit raise.

11

Because estimation of peer wage eﬀects requires exogenous variation in peer wages,
our analysis focuses on wage increases among coworkers in the same job whose initial
wages were in the range that received a scheduled raise. We consider all such coworkers potential members of an employee’s peer group—including coworkers who are not
themselves in the estimation sample because they have not received a merit raise.18 The
typical sample employee has roughly 13 such “potential peers”; characteristics of these
peers are summarized in Panel D. Because some potential peers may be more relevant
than others, we treat the definition of one’s “peer group” as an empirical question (see
Section 5.6). Panel E of Table 1 summarizes peer-group characteristics using our preferred definition: potential peers whose initial wages are within ± $0.30 of the employee’s
own initial wage. On average, employees in our estimation sample have 9 such peers,
and the average peer wage ($5.13) and average peer raise ($0.21) are both close to the
means for sample employees themselves.
Our primary outcome of interest is the probability of separating from the workplace
within a window following one of the minimum wage increases. We examine windows of
1, 2, 3, 6 and 9 months.19 The separation rate ranges from 12% within one month of a
wage increase to 51% within 9 months (Panel F). Over 90% of separations in our sample
are voluntary, and roughly 55% of those who leave within 9 months report job-related
reasons for leaving (e.g., dissatisfaction with the job or finding a better one). Thus
the majority of separations correspond closely to the “quits” or job-to-job transitions
in our theoretical framework. Other reasons for leaving including returning to school
(21%), moving or transferring to another store (16%), and being fired (8%). To guard
against bias due to potentially endogenous competing risks, most of our analysis does
not distinguish between reasons for separating; however, in Section 5.4, we show that our
main conclusions do not change if we exclude “non-quit” separations from the analysis.

18

Our main conclusion that separations respond to higher peer wages is robust to excluding coworkers
who had not received a merit raise. However, estimates based on the narrower peer-group definition
are somewhat attenuated, which suggests that the restriction excludes relevant peers (see Section 5.6).
19
Although our data set extends through July 1998 (11 months after the 1997 minimum wage increase), we restrict attention to intervals of 9 months or less because the relationship between the
scheduled raise and wages is diluted by merit raises given in June 1997 and in June 1998 (9 and 10
months, respectively, after the minimum wage increase).

12

4

Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Separation Response to an Increase in Own Wage

4.1

RD estimation framework

To analyze the eﬀect of own wage increases on separation decisions, we use an RD design
that exploits discontinuities in the scheduled raise formula shown in equation (6). We
begin by examining the relationship between the scheduled raise and the actual raise
received on the date of each minimum wage increase. For each date, Figure 2 plots the
mean observed raise against the initial wages of employees in the estimation sample. It
also shows fitted values from regressions of the observed raise on the scheduled raise.
The scheduled raise predicts the actual raise very well (R2 = 0.998); both decline linearly
with the initial wage except for the positive 10-cent jump at each 15-cent interval. We
use the “scheduled wage” (obtained by applying the scheduled raise to the initial wage)
as a proxy for the actual wage, and we treat the own-wage RD design as “sharp.”20
Figure 3 presents visual evidence that the positive wage discontinuities seen in Figure
2 are associated with negative discontinuities in separations. After partialing out ZIPcode based fixed eﬀects,21 we plot residual separation rates by initial wage and include
a non-parametric fitted line for each 15-cent interval corresponding to a new pay step.
The figure shows visible negative discontinuities at 7 of the 12 thresholds and a visible
positive discontinuity at only one of the steps.
While Figures 2 and 3 provide motivation for our research design, Figure 3 also
reveals a considerable amount of noise in separation rates – which limits our power to
estimate each discontinuity separately. To gain power, we pool the data from the 1996
and 1997 raises and estimate parametric models of the form:
m
Siy
= β × wiy + fy (w0 iy ) + Xiy Γ + λz(i) + ϵiy .

(7)

m
The dependent variable, Siy
, is an indicator for whether employee i leaves the store
within m months of the year y raise; wiy = w0 iy + ∆wiy is the scheduled new wage;
20

The impact of the scheduled raise on wages tends to be diluted over time due to wage growth from
promotions; however, its impact is quite persistent over the windows we examine. Even after six months,
a $0.10 discontinuity in the scheduled raise predicts a discontinuity of $0.095 in actual wage growth;
after 9 months the equivalent discontinuity is $0.078 (see Appendix Table A1). The discontinuity is
diluted further (to 0.075)–but is not oﬀset–by subsequent merit raises.
21
For reasons discussed later in this section, we use fixed eﬀects for the store’s 3-digit ZIP code
to limit comparisons to similar labor markets. Section 4.2 discusses the robustness of our results to
alternative specifications.

13

fy (w0 iy ) is a smooth function of the initial wage; and Xiy is a vector of employee and store
characteristics that is used for sensitivity tests and varies by specification.22 Because
the scheduled wage is a close proxy for the actual wage, we can interpret β as the eﬀect
of a $1.00 wage increase on the probability of separating.
If the specification for fy is suﬃciently flexible, then β is estimated using only the discontinuities in the scheduled wage function. Our simplest specification controls linearly
for the initial wage and allows a diﬀerent intercept and slope in each year. However,
when pooling across multiple thresholds, potential misspecification of fy is of particular
concern—and in our context, a linear function may be insuﬃcient. One reason is that the
global relationship between separations and wages reflects both variation across workers
in the same market and variation across diﬀerent labor markets. In our preferred specification, we control flexibly for the cross-market heterogeneity using fixed eﬀects, λz(i) ,
for 3-digit ZIP codes based on the store’s location (hereafter “ZIP codes”).23 We then
use a linear function to control for variation within markets, though we also document
robustness using quadratic and cubic functions.24
As an alternative to the global RD model in equation (7), we also estimate a “stacked”
RD model in which we stack the 15-cent wage intervals that are centered at a pay threshold and control for the distance from w0 iy to the nearest threshold. Formally, the nor*
*

*
*

malized running variable is defined as riy = w0 iy − Tiyk , where Tiyk = arg minTyκ *Tyκ − w0 iy *
is the wage threshold nearest to w0 iy .25 This specification more closely resembles the
standard RD setup, which makes it useful for visual representation of the data. However, unlike the traditional RD setup, the “above” and “below” side of the discontinuity
22

Our approach is similar to Angrist and Lavy (1999) and Angrist, Battistin and Vuri (2016). These
studies use the discontinuous Maimonides’ rule as an instrument for actual class size to estimate the
impact on educational outcomes. Like their Maimonides-predicted class size, our scheduled wage is a
discontinuous function of a running variable with multiple thresholds. And like these studies, we use the
discontinuous treatment variable as a regressor while controlling for a smooth function of the running
variable (total enrollment in their case, the initial wage in ours).
23
Within-ZIP code variation includes both variation across stores that share 3-digit ZIP codes and
within-store variation across the two years and multiple peer groups. Our analysis sample contains 375
3-digit ZIP codes and each ZIP has an average of 3.3 stores. We obtain broadly similar results from
models that use wider (e.g., region) or narrower (e.g., 5-digit ZIP code) geographic controls. We also
obtain qualitatively similar results from models with store fixed eﬀects (see Tables 2 and 3).
24
The decision to use a low-order polynomial with a separate intercept for each labor market (instead
of simply adding higher-order terms to fy ) is theoretically motivated but also has practical advantages.
For one, the small number of bins and the pooling across many thresholds limits the usefulness of
higher-order functions in our context. Gelman and Imbens (2016) describe other reasons why reliance
on higher-order polynomials should be avoided in RD designs.
25
Workers are considered “above” the threshold when w0 iy ≥ Tyk , or equivalently riy ≥ 0. They are
considered “below” when riy < 0.

14

are not ordered in terms of the wage w0 iy (since the wage intervals are stacked), and
this prompts us to constrain the slopes on the running variable to be the same on both
sides. (We show that this increases power without significantly aﬀecting the results.)
The stacked model estimates are similar to the global RD estimates and are also robust
to the use of narrower bandwidths (less than $0.07) around each threshold.
In both variants of our model, the key identifying assumption for a causal interpretation of β is that the latent propensity to separate evolves smoothly across the thresholds.
Of potential concern here is the fact that even after excluding starting wages, the distribution of wages in our sample is still quite lumpy with bunching that appears mainly
at multiples of $0.05 (Appendix Figure A1). When bunching occurs at threshold values,
it often raises concerns about precise manipulation of the running variable, which can
invalidate the smoothness assumption (Lee and Lemieux 2010; McCrary 2008). In our
setting, a concern might be that managers anticipated the raise schedule and “topped
up” the merit raises of their most valuable workers to ensure they were at a higher pay
step when the minimum wage increased. However, as we show in Appendix C, the evidence in our case is not consistent with such manipulation. First, the bunching occurs
not only at the pay-step thresholds but also at non-threshold wages – and there is no
excess mass at the pay-step thresholds. Second, the bunching does not lead to discontinuities in the size of the merit raise. Instead, the bunching pattern is similar to the
“round number” heaping found in other payroll data.26
A more pertinent concern is that even in the absence of precise manipulation, heaping at round numbers can result in bias if the heaping is not accounted for (Barreca,
Lindo and Waddell 2016). We employ three complementary methods to remove heapinginduced bias. Our preferred approach is to include a dummy variable in equation (7)
for wages that are multiples of $.05. For robustness, we also present two alternatives:
a “donut-hole” specification that excludes all initial wages just at or below a threshold
(i.e., riy = 0 and riy = −1) and another that uses only wages that are multiples of $0.05.
These two alternatives both rely on extrapolation using data away from the thresholds,
but they use diﬀerent variation to guard against mixing $0.05 and non-$0.05 multiples.
Models that satisfy the conditions for valid RD-based inference should show no evidence of discontinuities for predetermined covariates. In Appendix Table A2, we test
this implication for various specifications of our model, using predicted separations as
26

Dube, Naidu and Manning (2017) find that bunching of wages at round numbers is pervasive in
administrative hourly wage data from the Unemployment Insurance records of several states. They also
present evidence suggesting that this bunching is consistent with employer optimization frictions and
monopsony power.

15

the outcome.27 Column 1 shows that the simplest specification, which controls only
for a global linear function of the initial wage, produces statistically significant positive
discontinuities.28 As discussed above, there are two likely sources of misspecification in
this model. First, a linear wage function may not suﬃciently control for the global relationship between wages and separations. Column 2 shows that the inclusion of ZIP-code
fixed eﬀects reduces the discontinuities by about one half. Second, there may be some
non-random sorting associated with the bunching of wages at round numbers. Column
3 controls directly for this variation by including a dummy variable for initial wages that
are multiples of $0.05. Once we control for these ZIP-code fixed eﬀects and the 5-cent
dummy, the discontinuities in predicted separations are mostly eliminated (though a
small and marginally significant discontinuity remains for 3-month separations). Reassuringly, the estimates from the stacked model are also very small and statistically
insignificant (column 4),29 and we find similarly small discontinuities from specifications
that include higher order terms (columns 5 and 6), replace ZIP-code fixed eﬀects with
store fixed eﬀects (column 7), or exclude donut-hole observations (column 8). Only the
specification estimated using 5-cent wages (column 9) produces evidence of moderate
positive bias; however, the standard errors from this model are also relatively large,
consistent with the smaller sample. In our main analysis we estimate models that correspond to all of the specifications in Appendix Table A2; we also demonstrate robustness
using models that control for all of the predetermined covariates (including both individual and coworker characteristics). Two falsification tests, presented in Section 6, lend
further support to the causal interpretation of our estimates. First, separation rates do
not change discontinuously at the 1996 pay-step thresholds in the months before the
raises were implemented. Second, there are no discontinuities at wages other than the
pay-step thresholds, including non-threshold multiples of $0.05. In all specifications, the
27

To construct the predicted separations, we estimate a linear probability model that includes our
covariates along with dummies for each value of the new wage w1iy . The covariates are the employee
characteristics described in Panel B of Table 1, including a dummy for each month of tenure, and the
store-level coworker characteristics described in Panel C of Table 1. The inclusion of the wage dummies
fully controls for any influence of wages on separations and ensures that the covariate coeﬃcients from
this auxiliary regression are not biased due to a correlation with wages. We then use these coeﬃcients
to predict the separation rate.
28
The table reports coeﬃcients on the scheduled wage; these must be re-scaled to obtain the change
associated with a $0.10 discontinuity in the wage. For example, the coeﬃcient of 0.12 for 3-month
separation in column 1 corresponds to a discontinuity of 0.012 while the mean 3-month separation rate
is 0.23 (Table 1, panel F).
29
Although not shown in the table the estimated discontinuities for the stacked model are small and
not statistically significant even without ZIP FE and dummies for $0.05 multiples.

16

standard errors are clustered by store; but our conclusions are robust to clustering at
the level of the ZIP code or state, or by the discrete values of the running variable.30
4.2

RD estimates of own wages on separations

Table 2 presents the estimated values of β, the eﬀect of own wage on the separation
decision. Each row corresponds to a diﬀerent window for the separation rate and each
column reports a diﬀerent model specification. The first column controls linearly for
the initial wage but does not include any additional controls. These estimates are all
negative and imply that a $0.10 wage increase is associated with a 0.8-4.2 percentage
point fall in the separation rate; the 2, 6 and 9-month separation estimates are marginally
significant. Recall, however, that the covariate smoothness test in Appendix Table A2
suggests this simple linear specification is misspecified and produces a positive bias.
In the next two specifications, we first add ZIP code fixed eﬀects (column 2) and
then a dummy for initial wages that are multiples of $0.05 (column 3). The coeﬃcients
from these models are again negative, but are larger in magnitude than those in column
1 – due primarily to the inclusion of ZIP fixed eﬀects.31 The model in column 3 serves
as our baseline model, and the estimates here imply that a $0.10 increase in the wage
results in a 0.9 – 6.1 percentage point reduction in the separation rate depending on
the time window. Notably, the coeﬃcients increase sharply in magnitude between the
1 and 2-month windows (from 0.09 to 0.47), but they increase by at most another 32%
between 2 and 9 months. This pattern implies that most of the separations caused by
the wage increase occur within 2 months of the raise.
Column 4 includes the same set of controls as in column 3 but uses the stacked model,
which controls linearly for distance from the nearest threshold (the running variable, riy ).
The global and stacked models produce very similar estimates; for example, the 3-month
coeﬃcients in columns 3 and 4 are -0.52 and -0.50. A graphical representation of the
stacked model for 3-month separations is shown in Figure 4. We plot the mean residuals
for each value of riy , along with the fitted relationship between riy and the residuals. We
30

If anything, the standard errors tend to be smaller when we use these alternative methods for
inference; hence the standard errors presented in the main tables are conservative (see Appendix Table
A3 for details).
31
Some change in the coeﬃcient is expected given the evidence of covariate imbalance seen in Appendix Table A2. But in addition, this increase in the coeﬃcient is consistent with the own-wage eﬀect
being driven largely by peer-wage comparisons, since the ZIP code fixed eﬀects cause the estimates to
be identified oﬀ of ZIP codes that have greater within variation in raises. In ZIP codes with no such
variation (i.e., where raises are similar across all workers and thus all peers in each store) the own-wage
estimate (based on between-ZIP variation) identifies a pure market response.

17

normalize the fitted values so they are equal to zero at the left limit at the threshold;
the right limit at the threshold thus represents the eﬀect of a $0.10 discontinuity in
the wage, and the shaded area at riy = 0 shows the confidence interval of β̂.32 Aside
from deviations at -$0.04 (the most thinly populated bin), Figure 4 shows that the
data fit the linear model reasonably well and the plotted points show clear evidence of
discontinuities.
Additional results for the stacked model are presented in the Online Appendix. Focusing on 3-month separations, Appendix Table A4 shows that the estimates are generally robust (though less precise) when we allow the slope to change at the threshold.
Appendix Table A5 shows how the stacked model estimates vary when we use bandwidths of less than $0.07 above and below the threshold. The RD estimates are quite
stable for bandwidths of $0.06 and $0.05. When we narrow the bandwidth to $0.04
(or smaller), the estimates typically get larger, but the standard errors also increase
substantially.
Returning to Table 2, columns 5 and 6 show that the estimates are nearly identical
when we replace the linear specification for fy (w0 iy ) with a quadratic or cubic. Column
7 adds controls for employee and coworker characteristics, including a dummy for each
month of tenure, and column 8 replaces the ZIP-code fixed eﬀects with store fixed eﬀects.
The estimates from these specifications are slightly bigger than the baseline estimates:
for example, the 3-month estimates are -0.56 and -0.57 instead of -0.52. All but the
1-month estimates remain statistically significant at conventional levels.
Column 9 shows the “donut-hole” specification, which is similar to the baseline model
except that the estimation sample excludes wages that are just at or just below a paystep threshold. While the estimates from this model are less precise (the standard errors
are 33-40% larger than those from the baseline model), the point estimates remain
negative and sizable, ranging from -0.16 and -0.42. Finally, as an alternative way to
avoid comparing observations that are multiples of $0.05 with those that are not, column
10 shows the estimates for a sample that includes only the 5-cent wages. Again, while
the standard errors are nearly twice as large, the point estimates (which now range from
-0.34 to -0.63) are negative and large in magnitude.
Overall, then, the estimates in Table 2 imply significant negative eﬀects of own wages
on separation rates. These do not appear to be driven by heterogeneity associated with
round-number bunching of the running variable.
32

This is approximately equal to the scheduled wage coeﬃcient scaled by 0.10 (the size of the wage
discontinuity).

18

5

Peer Comparisons: The Eﬀects of Unequal Raises

The finding that workers who receive arbitrarily larger wages are less likely to separate
is consistent with two broad explanations. First, the labor market might be highly
competitive, causing workers to respond to small diﬀerences when comparing their wages
to outside oﬀers from other employers. Second, workers might be reacting to changes in
how their own pay compares to the wages of others who work in the same store. In this
section, we assess the “peer eﬀect” channel directly by asking how separations respond
to arbitrary variation in peer wages, and we assess the relative importance of market
competition and peer comparisons in driving the observed behavior.
5.1

Defining the peer group

A worker’s peer group potentially includes all coworkers in the same entry-level job in
the same store who qualified for a scheduled raise. However, some of these coworkers
may be more relevant than others. When making wage comparisons, workers may pay
more attention to coworkers whose initial wages were similar to their own. Further, if
workers assumed that coworkers with similar wages got similar raises, they might have
felt more comfortable discussing their raises with these peers. Or, if workers who are
similar on other dimensions (e.g., age, tenure or residential proximity) are more likely
to interact with one another, then these other criteria could help define a worker’s peer
group.
While the broadest set of coworkers in the same job and same store is a natural
starting point for defining peers, we can improve on this choice if some “potential peers”
are, in fact, irrelevant. In general, a definition that is too inclusive will reduce identifying
variation in the peer average wage—and this, in turn, will reduce the precision of the
estimated peer eﬀect. On the other hand, using a definition that is too narrow will
attenuate the estimated peer eﬀect, similar to classical measurement error (Cornelissen,
Dustmann and Schönberg, 2017).33 The choice of peer group therefore involves a tradeoﬀ between variance and bias.
To select a group of coworkers that best approximates the set of relevant peers, we
begin by focusing on subgroups whose initial wages are within a fixed distance from the
worker’s own initial wage (see Section 5.6.1). We show that among these wage-based
definitions, the trade-oﬀ between variance and bias appears best resolved by a wage
33

Cornelissen, Dustmann and Schönberg (2017) show this formally; they also show that in a model
with covariates, defining the peer group as too large can lead to attenuation bias as well.

19

band of ± $0.30 (or about 6% of the worker’s own initial wage).34 Thus defined, peer
groups average 9 peers per worker and include roughly 70% of coworkers who qualified for
scheduled raises. In Section 5.6.2, we compare the estimates from wage-based definitions
to those based on alternative, non-wage criteria for defining peers—including age and
tenure similarity and distance between residential 5-digit ZIP codes. We show that
definitions based on non-wage criteria generally lead to attenuated estimates that are
similar to those obtained from excluding coworkers at random. In light of this evidence,
we present our main results using our preferred definition of peers as those within ±
$0.30 of the worker’s initial wage.
5.2

Identifying peer eﬀects

To identify the eﬀect of peer wage comparisons, we extend the RD model in equation
(7) to include a discontinuous function of the reference wage wp . For intuition, suppose
that for each worker i in each year y, we randomly select a single peer j with initial
wage w0 jy and scheduled wage, wjy , and we extend the model as follows:
m
Siy
= β × wiy + δ × wjy + fy (w0 iy ) + gy (w0 jy ) + Xijy Γ + λz(i) + ϵijy

(8)

Equation (8) is a multi-dimensional RD (MRD) that uses smooth functions fy and gy of
initial own wage, w0 iy , and initial peer wage, w0 jy , respectively, as running variables. As
in equation (7), a flexible specification for fy ensures that the variation used to estimate
β comes only from the discontinuities in wiy at the pay-step thresholds. Similarly,
controlling for a flexible function gy (w0 jy ) ensures that the coeﬃcient δ on the peer
scheduled wage is estimated using only the discontinuities in wjy . In this single-peer
case, the scheduled peer wage wjy is a proxy for the actual peer wage and the peer-wage
RD is sharp. The coeﬃcient δ thus represents worker i’s separation response to the wage
increase of a randomly selected peer.
As this “single peer” example makes clear, discontinuities in single peer wages provide
the identifying variation we need to estimate the peer eﬀect. However, most workers in
our sample have multiple peers. To aggregate the peer eﬀects,
+ we model the separation
wjy
, where Np(i,y) is
decision as a function of the average peer wage, wp(i,y)y = j∈p(i,y)
Np(i,y)
the number of peers of worker i. We then instrument w p(i,y)y with the discontinuity in

34

A formal justification for choosing the $0.30 wage band, based on a cross-validation technique, is
presented in Appendix E.

20

wjy by replacing the sharp RD for wjy in equation (8) with a fuzzy RD for wp(i,y)y .35
The two-stage specification is as follows:
1st :

w p(i,y)y = γ × wiy + γp × wjy + f˜y (w0 iy ) + g̃y (w0 jy ) + Xijy Γ̃ + λ̃z(i) + ϵ̃ijy

m = β × w +β × w
2nd : Siy
iy
p
p(i,y)y + fy (w0 iy ) + gy (w0 jy ) + Xijy Γ + λz(i) + ϵijy

(9)

The first-stage coeﬃcient γp gives the eﬀect of a single peer-wage discontinuity on
the average peer wage. A strong first-stage relationship is ensured by the small number
of peers in most peer groups. The second-stage equation contains our two parameters
of interest. First, as in equation (7), β continues to represent the total eﬀect of the own
wage on separations. The assumed exogeneity of wiy implies that the estimate for β
should be robust to the inclusion of peer wages and the other peer controls, and should
therefore be similar across the RD and MRD models. Second, we now have an estimate
for βp —the separation response to an increase in the average wage of one’s peers. And
we use the latter to decompose the own-wage response (β) into the eﬀect of an increase
in relative pay (= −βp ) and the eﬀect of a “gap-constant” pay increase that is uniform
across peers (= β + βp ; see equation 4).
While equation (9) is estimable using a randomly selected peer for each worker,
we gain eﬃciency by using all of a worker’s peers. To do this, we stack the data by
pairing each worker i in year y with all peers j ∈ p(i, y). The stacked dataset replicates
each observation in the original dataset Np(i,y) times; hence, to ensure the results are
1
representative of our initial estimation sample, we weight each observation by Np(i,y)
. By
clustering the standard errors at the store level, we account for the impact that repeated
observations may have on our statistical inference.
In our baseline specification for equation (9), we continue to include a set of ZIP-code
dummies and a dummy for workers earning multiples of $0.05. Now, we also include a
5-cent wage dummy for peer j and a dummy for the peer having received a merit raise.36
Again, the heaping of wages at 5-cent multiples suggests a potential threat to internal
validity; for example, excess heaping of peer wages may be associated with heterogeneity
35

Note that at the discontinuities, variation in wp(i,y)y reflects variation in the fraction of peers who
are just above (vs. just below) the threshold; hence wp(i,y)y is a natural way to aggregate the peer wages.
Our approach is similar to the more familiar linear-in-means model for peer eﬀects (see also Section 5.3
and Appendix Table A8) but it involves less stringent parametric assumptions about the aggregability
of the peer wage. Methodologically, our paper adds to the growing literature on aggregating across
multiple discontinuities (e.g., Papay, Willett and Murnane 2011; Reardon and Robinson 2012).
36
Recall that while our estimation sample is restricted to workers with a history of at least one merit
raise, we do not impose this restriction when defining a worker’s potential peers (except as a special
case—see Section 5.6.2).

21

in store or market characteristics that predict separations. We document the robustness
of our baseline results to a set of alternative specifications analogous to the specifications
used for the RD model, and we again test for the smooth evolution of covariates at the
thresholds by estimating models for predicted separations.
Finally, as an alternative to the two-stage MRD model estimated with worker-peer
data, we also estimate a simpler model that uses worker-level data and controls for
a function of the average initial peer wage, w 0 p(i,y)y . This model aggregates the peer
running variables, which requires that separations are a linear function of w0 jy . This
“linear-in-means” model provides yet another check on our results.
5.3

Peer eﬀect main estimates and decomposition of own-wage eﬀect

Table 3 reports results from the two-stage MRD model.37 Consistent with the exogeneity
of the identifying wage variation, the coeﬃcients on own wage are similar to those from
the univariate RD models in Table 2 (where we do not control for peer wages), and we
continue to find strong eﬀects of own wages on separations. In the baseline specification
(column 3) the estimates of β for all but 1-month separations range from -0.46 to -0.66
and all are statistically significant.
The estimates in Table 3 also show sizable eﬀects of the peer average wage. The
estimates for βP are often quite similar in magnitude to the estimates of β, but are
positive instead of negative—implying that workers respond to higher peer wages with
a substantially higher probability of separating. In the baseline specification (column 3)
the coeﬃcients range from 0.29 (at one month) to 0.89 (at three months).
While the estimates vary somewhat across the other specifications, they generally
imply sizable, positive eﬀects of peer wages on separations. Column 4 shows estimates
from a stacked model in which the running variables, riy and rjy , are defined as the
distance from the own or peer initial wage (w0 iy or w0 jy ) to the nearest discontinuity
threshold.38 The estimates from this model are similar, though typically a little larger,
than those in column 3. Returning to the global model, columns 5 and 6 show that
37

The first-stage and the reduced-form estimates for all of the specifications shown in Table 3 are
reported in Appendix Table A6. As expected, the first-stage estimates suggest a strong relationship
between the wage of a specific peer and the average peer wage, with coeﬃcients of between 0.25 and
0.42 and t-statistics between 15 and 25 .
38
k
k
As before,
* κ the *normalized running variable for own wage is riy = w0 iy − Tiy , where Tiy =
*
*
arg minTyκ Ty − w0 iy is the wage threshold closest to the worker’s own initial wage, w0 iy . Simik
k
larly, the *normalized* running variable for peer wage is defined as rjy = w0 jy − Tjy
, where Tjy
=
κ
*
*
arg minTyκ Ty − w0 jy is the nearest wage threshold to the peer’s wage, w0 jy .

22

the estimates are less stable when we use quadratic or cubic functions of the running
variables; however, these specifications also produce relatively large standard errors.
Importantly, the remaining columns show that the finding of sizable, positive peer-wage
eﬀects is robust to controlling for additional worker and peer covariates (column 7); to
the inclusion store fixed eﬀects (column 8); and to models that either exclude “donuthole” observations around the peer-wage threshold (column 9) or use only peers with
initial wages at $0.05 multiples (column 10). Across these specifications, the 3-month
estimates of βP range from 0.66 to 0.82; most are statistically significant at the 5 percent
level, and all are statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
Smooth evolution of covariates. In Appendix Table A7, we test for smooth
evolution of predetermined covariates in the MRD specifications by replacing the dependent variable with predicted separations as we did in the RD model.39 The global
model that includes only linear controls for running variables (column 1) produces significant coeﬃcients consistent with positive bias in the peer eﬀects estimates (as well as
in the own-wage estimates, similar to what we saw in Appendix Table A2). Inclusion
of ZIP code fixed eﬀects substantially reduces this bias (column 2), and evidence of
discontinuities is mostly eliminated in column 3 where we control for initial own and
peer wages that are multiples of $0.05 and a dummy for peers that received a merit
raise. The remaining columns of Appendix Table A7 corroborate the robustness of our
alternative approaches for isolating exogenous variation in peer wages. The peer-wage
coeﬃcients from the stacked model (column 4) are all small and statistically insignificant, and the global specifications in columns 5-10 produce a mix of small positive and
small negative coeﬃcients that are again mostly close to zero and insignificant. In the
model for 3-month separations, for example, the estimated eﬀects on predicted separations in columns 3-10 range from -0.04 to 0.10. Even the positive estimates are an order
of magnitude smaller than the estimated positive eﬀects on observed separations.
Additional specifications and graphical representation. Appendix Table A8
provides additional tests of robustness for the peer-wage estimates. Focusing on models
for 3-month separations, columns 1-5 show estimates from “linear in means” models
estimated using worker-level data (instead of worker-peer pairs). The table shows coefficients on peer average wage, and the models control for functions of the peer average
initial wage plus other aggregated control variables that diﬀer across specifications. Column 2 in Panel B is the closest to our baseline model, and the estimate of 0.82 is very
39

Predicted separations are constructed from a model that includes all worker, peer and store-level
controls included in columns 7 and 8 of Table 3 (see section 4.1 and Table 3 note for details).

23

similar to our baseline estimate of 0.89. The estimates are also fairly robust to the exclusion of direct controls for heaping at 5-cent wages (column 1) and to the inclusion of
controls for worker characteristics and the average characteristics of peers and store-level
coworkers (column 3).
The specifications in columns 6-12 of Appendix Table A8 show variants of the stacked
MRD model in which the running variables measure own and peer distance from the
nearest threshold. These include specifications that control for quadratic functions of
the running variable, relax the restriction of equal slopes above and below the threshold,
and/or exclude ZIP code fixed eﬀects. The coeﬃcients from these specifications all
generally fall within the range of estimates from the 3-month separation models in Table
3, although allowing for diﬀerent slopes results in some loss of precision. Finally, we show
results from stacked MRD models that use narrower bandwidths for the peer’s distance
from the threshold in columns 5-8 of Appendix Table A5. Reducing the bandwidth
by $0.01 or $0.02 tends to increase the estimates only slightly (by 13% at most). But
estimates from models with bandwidths of $0.04 (or less) are uninformative due to a
substantial loss of precision.
Figure 5 is graphical representation of the stacked model with baseline controls and
symmetric slopes for the peer-wage eﬀect on 3-month separations (as in column 4 of
Table 3). As in Figure 4 (for the own-wage eﬀect), the fitted values are normalized to
equal zero at the left limit at the threshold, and the right limit at the threshold represents
the eﬀect of a $0.10 discontinuity in the wage of a representative peer. Though the mean
residuals are somewhat more scattered than in Figure 4, reflecting lower precision in the
peer-wage estimates, there is a visible jump in separation rates at the threshold.
Timing and magnitude of eﬀects. The estimates in Table 3 show that as we
vary the time horizon for separating, both the own-wage and peer-wage coeﬃcients
display a similar pattern: both increase the most between 1 and 3 months. This pattern
is confirmed in Figure 6, which shows the timing of the eﬀects in more detail. Using
10-day intervals, the dark line plots the fraction of workers who remain employed at
their store against time elapsed since the raises. Also shown are the mean survival rates
at each interval, adjusted for the eﬀect of a $0.10 increase in either the own wage or the
peer average wage. Both the own and peer-wage eﬀects are close to zero in the first 30
days, increase quickly over the next two months, and are then relatively stable. The onemonth lag in the response might partly reflect the time it took for workers to learn about

24

their coworkers’ raises.40 Interestingly, the pattern of stabilization after three months is
inconsistent with market-driven separations in the framework of our model, where the
number of outside oﬀers continues to increase over time. But it can easily be reconciled
with preferences over relative pay. For example, if preferences are heterogeneous across
workers, this would cause the aggregate response to weaken, and the cumulative eﬀect
to stabilize, as those with the strongest preferences are selected out of the sample.41
Figure 6 also confirms that after the first month, the own-wage and peer-wage eﬀects
are consistently opposite in sign. And although the peer-wage eﬀect is estimated with less
precision and is more variable than the own-wage eﬀect, the two eﬀects are generally
similar in magnitude. To interpret these magnitudes, we can use the information in
Figure 6 to infer the eﬀects of wage increases on the duration of employment. The median
worker in our sample stays employed for slightly less than nine months following the
raise. The rightward shift of the survival curve when adjusted for the own-wage response
implies that all else equal, a raise of $0.10 increases tenure by about one month–so that
the median employee leaves after 10 months instead of 9. Similarly, an employee whose
peers all receive an additional $0.10 (the maximum jump at the thresholds) is predicted
to leave roughly one month sooner than she otherwise would have. It is also useful to
consider what the estimates imply about the compensating diﬀerential for a decline in
relative pay. The fact that a $0.10 own-wage increase roughly oﬀsets the impact on
separations of a $0.10 peer-wage increase suggests that workers are willing to forego
roughly $0.10 (or 2% of pay) in order to avoid a $0.10 (or 2%) reduction in relative
pay.42
Decomposition of own-wage eﬀect. The oﬀsetting eﬀects illustrated in Figure
6 suggest that if own and peer wages rise by the same amount (e.g., by $0.10), leaving
relative pay unchanged, then the resulting change in separations is close to zero. Formal
estimates of this “gap-constant” separation response are obtained by netting out the peer
40

Workers were paid every other Friday for the two-week period ending the previous Saturday; hence
there was a 2-3 week lag each year between the eﬀective date of the raise and first pay date that reflected
the raise.
41
As noted in section 4.1 (footnote 20), the 6- and 9-month estimates for the own-wage eﬀect may
reflect a small attenuation bias due to subsequent raises that, over time, dilute the impact of the
scheduled raise discontinuities on own wages. However, accounting for this would increase the 6-month
elasticities by only 5% and the 9-month elasticities by about 20%; hence they would both remain
substantially smaller than the elasticities at 2-3 months. The impact of scheduled raises on peer wages
may be diluted more quickly due to the turnover of one’s peers. This could help explain why the peerwage separation response appears to stabilize (and also become less precise) after around 3 months.
42
Depending on the time horizon (between 2 and 9 months), the implied compensating diﬀerential
for a $.10 increase in peer wage is between $0.06 and $0.16.

25

eﬀect from the total own-wage eﬀect (equation 4). In Table 4, we report the separation
elasticities implied by our estimates of β and βP from the baseline MRD model, and
we decompose the total eﬀect of an own-wage increase on separations into the eﬀect
of an increase in relative pay and the eﬀect of a gap-constant wage increase. At two
and three months, the own-wage and peer-wage elasticities are both large at around
-13 and 20 respectively. Consistent with the relative stability of the coeﬃcients after
2 months, both elasticities diminish in magnitude over time, but even at 9 months the
total own-wage elasticity remains significant at -5.9.
The gap-constant elasticities, while imprecise (especially at 1-3 months), imply separation responses that are much closer to zero than those implied by the total own-wage
elasticities. The gap-constant elasticity becomes more negative and also more precisely
estimated as the separation window lengthens, but at 9 months it is still only -2.3 and
the 95% confidence interval rules out elasticities more negative than -11.1. Following
Manning (2003), we can multiply the estimated separation elasticity by -2 to infer that
the firm faces a labor supply elasticity of around 4.6. This, in turn, implies that the
firm can reduce wages by roughly 20% below the value marginal product of labor. If
we focus instead on the lower bound of our 95% confidence interval, we can rule out
potential wage mark-downs of less than 4%.
In short, our estimates suggest that the overall eﬀect of own wages on separations is
largely driven by peer wage comparisons, and that after accounting for this peer eﬀect,
the eﬀect of market comparisons is relatively modest. In Section 7, we compare the
magnitudes of our estimates to those found elsewhere in the literature and we discuss
further implications of our findings.
5.4

Separations versus Quits

Our analysis thus far has examined separations for any reason—including quitting, returning to school, moving, transferring to another store, or being fired. While any one of
these outcomes might be aﬀected by wage changes, workers arguably have more discretion over the decision to quit than they do over other types of separations. Quit behavior
is also more consistent with the behavior considered in our theoretical framework, where
endogenous separations represent job-to-job transitions and the separation elasticity is
informative about the extent of labor market frictions.
If the observed separation response to changes in own and peer wages were driven
only by quits–and if separations for other reasons were strictly exogenous–then we might

26

improve precision without aﬀecting the estimates by excluding “non-quit” separations
from the estimation sample since this would reduce the error variance. On the other
hand, to the extent that non-quit separations are also responsive to wages, censoring
these observations may lead to discontinuities in sample attrition and might therefore
bias the estimated quit response. Appendix Table A9 shows estimates from models in
which the dependent variable is an indicator for quitting – with quits defined as voluntary
separations that occur for job-related reasons (leaving for another job, dissatisfaction,
or simply not showing up). For employees who separate for other reasons within the
relevant window (roughly half of the sample), quit decisions are treated as censored.
Compared to the estimates in Table 3 based on all separations, the estimates from the
models of quits are sometimes smaller in magnitude; however the diﬀerences between
the two sets of results are neither systematic nor large—suggesting that any bias due
to endogenous competing risks is small.43 Further, the estimates from the quits models
are generally more precise—suggesting that censoring non-quit separations eliminates a
fair amount of noise.
The gain in precision is evident in Appendix Figure A2, which shows a graphical
representation of the stacked model in column 4 of Appendix Table A9. Panel A shows
the relationship between quit rates and own initial wage (normalized as distance to
the nearest threshold) and is analogous to Figure 4 (where the model is based on all
separations). Similarly, Panel B shows how quit rates vary with distance from peer wage
to the nearest threshold and is analogous to Figure 5. The improved fit is especially
visible in Panel B, where the data now fit the linear model reasonably well and the
plotted points show clear evidence of a discontinuity. Aside from the improved precision,
the figures based on quits look similar to those based on all separations. In fact, the
point estimates from the stacked models are very close (compare the own and peerwage coeﬃcients of -0.72 and 0.86 in Appendix Table A9 to the coeﬃcients of -0.73 and
0.95 in Table 3). This evidence provides further support for our empirical model and
also strongly suggests that the separation responses we estimate are driven mainly by
voluntary job transitions or “quits.”
43

Appendix Table A10 presents formal tests for diﬀerential sample attrition at the thresholds; it
shows estimates from MRD models for the probability of being in the quits analysis sample. These
results are inconclusive: while most of the coeﬃcients are not statistically significant, some of the peerwage coeﬃcients are sizable and negative, suggesting that the censoring of quit outcomes for employees
with non-quit separations may induce some negative bias. Reassuringly, however, tests for covariate
smoothness that use predicted quits as the outcome show no evidence of discontinuities in either the
global or stacked versions of our baseline MRD model (see Appendix Table A11).

27

5.5

Additional validation: Split-sample RD

If the own-wage separation response is driven mainly by relative-pay concerns and the
response to a “gap-constant” wage increase is relatively small, then separation discontinuities at the own-wage thresholds should be small among workers whose peers receive
similar raises. To test this prediction, we now return to the univariate RD framework
and estimate our baseline model separately for two sub-samples of workers. In the first
sample, the majority of a worker i’s peers are on the opposite side of the closest pay-step
threshold;44 as a result, the average peer raise is large (small) when the worker’s raise
is small (large). The second sample is the complement of the first set. Here the worker
and the majority of her peers are on the same side of a threshold and thus the average
peer raise is similar to the worker’s raise.
Appendix Figure A3 presents visual evidence consistent with our prediction. The two
panels show plots based on stacked RD models estimated separately for the “opposite
side” and “same side” sub-samples. Aside from using diﬀerent samples, these plots are
constructed in the same manner as Figure 3 (see Section 4.1). In the first sample,
where the worker and the majority of her peers are on opposite sides of a threshold, the
discontinuity at the own-wage threshold is large, negative, and clearly significant (Panel
A). In the second sample, where the majority of peers are on the same side of a threshold
as the worker, there is no visible evidence of a discontinuity in separations (Panel B).
Importantly, the discontinuity in the own wage does not diﬀer across samples–it is always
$0.10. Hence, the only diﬀerence in treatment between the two samples is the change in
relative pay that is associated with the change in own wage. The diﬀerential separation
response therefore supports our interpretation of the MRD results—that the eﬀect of
wages on separation behavior operates mainly through the eﬀect on relative pay.
We present a more formal “split-sample” analysis in Table 5. The top row shows
estimates from the baseline MRD model for the eﬀect of an increase in the own wage
g
, in each sample. These estimates confirm that the discontinuity
on the wage gap, dw
dw
in the wage gap is much larger in the “opposite-side” sample (1.46) than in the “sameside” sample (0.69). The table also shows the estimated own-wage separation responses
for each window and for each sample. Consistent with the graphical evidence, the
coeﬃcients are all sizable and statistically significant in the first sample and are smaller
and statistically insignificant in the second.
44
k
Either worker i is above the closest threshold (w0 iy ≥ Tiy
) while the majority of peers are below
+
+
k
k
k
1{w
≥
T
}),
or
the
worker
is below (w0 iy < Tiy
) while the
( j∈p(i,y) 1{w0 jy < Tjy } ≥
0 jy
jy
+
+j∈p(i,y)
k
k
majority of peers are above ( j∈p(i,y) 1{w0 jy ≥ Tjy } ≥
j∈p(i,y) 1{w0 jy < Tjy }).

28

We also use these split-sample RD estimates to construct alternative estimates for the
$
!
g
denote the eﬀect of an
peer eﬀect represented by βp in our MRD model. If we let dw
dw A
increase in the own wage on the wage gap in a given sample A, then the total eﬀect of the
!

$

!

$

∂S(w,wg )
dwg
g)
+ ∂S(w,w
, where
∂w
∂wg
dw A
∂S(w,wg )
∂S(w,wp )
the second term is the eﬀect of relative pay comparisons. Since ∂wg = − ∂wp ,
! $
!
$
∂S(w,wp ) dwg
g)
dS
we can also write the total separation response as: dw
= ∂S(w,w
−
.
∂w
∂wp
dw A
A
$
!
$
!
g
g
̸= dw
(as is true of our our “oppositeConsider two samples A and B where dw
dw A
dw B

wage increase on separations can be written as:

dS
dw A

=

side” and “same-side” sub-samples). Under the additional assumption that both the
g)
p)
gap-constant eﬀect, ∂S(w,w
, and the peer-wage eﬀect, ∂S(w,w
, are constant across the
∂w
∂wp
two samples, we can construct a Wald estimator for the peer eﬀect as follows:

∂S(w, wp )
=
∂wp

!

$

dS
dw B
!
$
dwg
dw A

−
−

!

$

dS
dw A
!
$ .
dwg
dw B

The Wald estimates of the peer eﬀect, reported in the final column of Table 5, range
from 0.05 (9 months) to 1.39 (3 months). These estimates are less precise and more
variable than the estimates of βp from the baseline MRD model (Table 3, column 3);
however, the 2 and 3-month estimates are both large and statistically significant. On the
whole, the Wald estimates, like the MRD estimates, show a pattern of positive separation
responses to changes in relative pay that are largest in the 2-3 months following the raise.
We stress that the two estimators for the peer-wage eﬀect are distinct in that they
are identified oﬀ of diﬀerent parts of the joint distribution of own and peer wages.
While the MRD uses worker-peer pairs that are near a peer-wage threshold, the splitsample RD uses pairs near an own-wage threshold (see Online Appendix D for a detailed
explanation). For causal inference, the MRD is preferred because it is identified oﬀ of
the discontinuities in peer wage, while the Wald estimator based on the split-sample RD
requires the extra assumption that peer wages are as good as random near the ownwage threshold. The split-sample approach is nevertheless appealing because it provides
a simple and transparent validation of our conclusions.
5.6
5.6.1

Varying definitions of peer group
Wage-based definitions and choice of wage band

As discussed in Section 5.1, a definition of peers that is too narrow will lead to attenuation of the estimated peer eﬀect. In contrast, too broad a definition will tend to
make the estimate imprecise by reducing identifying variation. Figure 7 illustrates the
29

bias-variance trade-oﬀ when defining peers as coworkers with similar initial wages. It
presents the estimated peer eﬀects and 95 percent confidence intervals from models of
3-month separations, for peer groups based on all “potential peers” (coworkers in the
same job and store who qualify for a scheduled raise), and on subsets of these potential
peers who initially earned within $0.10, $0.20, $0.30,...,$0.80 of the worker’s own initial
wage. (The estimates for all separation windows are reported in Appendix Table A12.)
Consistent with attenuation bias from the exclusion of relevant peers, estimates based
on narrow wage bands are relatively small. In particular, the $.10 wage bands produce
little evidence of peer eﬀects. The estimates generally increase with the size of the wage
band, especially as it expands from $0.10 to $0.30. Beyond that point, they are relatively
stable; in fact, the estimates based on the store-wide definition of peers (0.96) is only
slightly larger than the estimate of 0.89 based on peers within $0.30. However, the standard errors tend to increase with the size of the band. For example, the standard error
is 0.55 for the store-wide estimate but only 0.29 for the $0.30 estimate. Hence, while
estimates based on wider wage bands are less likely to be biased due to the exclusion of
relevant peers, they are also less precise.
In short, the visual evidence in Figure 7 suggests that the $0.30 wage band does a
good job of resolving the bias-variance trade-oﬀ. Appendix E presents a more formal
justification for using the $0.30 wage band to define peers. Taking the store-wide estimate (based on all potential peers) as a benchmark, we show that a cross-validation
procedure selects the $0.30 wage band as the one that minimizes the (out-of-sample)
mean squared error when predicting the store-wide estimate.
5.6.2

Other peer definitions

Criteria other than proximity of initial wages may also be useful for defining peers. For
example, coworkers may be more likely to interact in the workplace if they are similar in
tenure or age or if they live near each other. Importantly, however, even if all coworkers
in a given subgroup are relevant peers, an estimate based on the subgroup will be biased
toward zero if it excludes relevant peers, and the bias will be greater the more relevant
peers it excludes. To evaluate how well various criteria identify relevant peers, we must
therefore take into account the size of the peer group identified by those criteria.
To do this, we compare the estimates based on each alternative peer definition to a
benchmark based on a peer group of the same size that is selected at random from all
potential peers. In Figure 8 the locus traces out estimated peer-wage eﬀects on 3-month

30

separations based on randomly selected peer groups of diﬀerent sizes. The figure also
plots estimates based on alternative peer group definitions against the share of potential
peers who are included in each definition.45 If a peer definition is better at keeping
relevant peers than a randomly selected subset of equal size, the estimate will tend to
lie above the “random-peer” locus. If the definition loses more relevant peers than a
randomly selected subset of equal size, it will tend to lie below the locus. Appendix
Table A13 reports 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9 month separation responses for the peer definitions
in Figure 8 and several others.
To start, we note that our baseline definition using initial wages within $0.30 includes around 72 percent of potential peers, but has an estimate substantially above
the random-peer locus. This provides further validation of our baseline definition, and
suggest that the coworkers excluded from this definition are disproportionately irrelevant. Next, we consider peers defined as the 5, 10, 15 or 20 closest coworkers in terms
of initial wages. The estimates for the closest 5 or 10 workers tend to be smaller than
our baseline, while the point estimates based on the closest 15 or 20 workers are quite
similar in magnitude but are less precise than our baseline estimate (Appendix Table
A13). These results therefore suggest that a definition based on all peers within a fixed
wage band tends to perform better than a definition based on a fixed number of nearby
peers.
Turning to non-wage definitions, we consider peer groups based on age, tenure, past
merit raise status and geographic proximity of residences.46 These definitions reduce
the share of potential peers substantially, retaining between 42 and 67 percent of them
depending on the definition. The point estimates based on similar merit status (for
which the peer group includes all potential peers who received a merit raise in the
past) is marginally statistically significant and somewhat higher than would be expected
from dropping an equivalent share of peers at random, but it is still smaller and less
precise than our baseline estimate. The estimates using similarity in age or tenure or
geographic proximity to define peers are either similar to or smaller than their random-

45

For each share s ∈ {10, 20, ..., 90} of potential peers, we define peers as a randomly selected s
percent of all eligible coworkers and we estimate the peer-wage eﬀect in this sub-sample using the
baseline MRD specification. For each s we repeat this 500 times and report the average estimate. The
rightmost point with 100 percent of potential peers is the full-store estimate of 0.96.
46
The definitions are as follows: age diﬀerence between the worker and the peer was under 5 years;
both the worker and the peer were employed for more than 8 months or both less; both the worker and
the peer received a merit raise; and the distance between the worker’s and peer’s residential 5-digit ZIP
code was under 9 miles. In Appendix Table A13 we also report 6 and 12 mile cutoﬀs.

31

peer counterparts. And again, the standard errors are all larger than those from our
baseline model.
In sum, the smaller size and relative imprecision of the estimates in Appendix Table
A13 suggests that these alternative non-wage peer definitions exclude large shares of
relevant peers. Moreover, in all cases but one (merit raise status), the estimates are
no larger than what would be expected from randomly dropping the share of coworkers
excluded by these definitions. Overall, these findings provide little support for peer
definitions based on non-wage criteria.
5.7

Heterogeneous peer eﬀects by initial wage gap

So far, we have estimated the average eﬀect of peer wages on separations. But theory
suggests that if workers are especially concerned about being treated fairly, then the
separation response may be asymmetric—and stronger when workers are paid less than
their peers (Card et al. 2012; Fehr and Schmidt 1999). In our setting, since the wage
schedule is weakly monotonic (and so raises are weakly rank preserving), larger peer
raises tend to reduce existing wage gaps vis-à-vis lower-paid peers (without ever leading
to rank-reversals), but to widen existing gaps with peers who were initially paid more.
Fairness concerns might therefore lead workers to be especially sensitive to raises received
by their higher-paid peers. To test for such patterns in our data, we allow the separation
response to diﬀer depending on the initial wage gap between the worker and the peer.
Using our baseline MRD model, we estimate separate models for six groups of workerpeer pairs defined based on the ex ante wage gap between own and peer wage, ∆w0 ip(i)y =
w0 iy − w0 p(i)y : < −$0.30, [−0.30, −0.16], [−0.15, −0.01], [0.01, 0.15], [0.16, 0.30], > 0.30.
(Note that the four interior groups comprise our baseline definition of peers making
within $0.30 of the worker, while the other two include peers who fall outside of this
definition.)47 We then compare the causal eﬀect of peer wages on separation rates across
these six groups.
Figure 9 plots the 3-month separation response for each of the six groups, along with
the group’s share of all potential peers. We find a clear asymmetry in the response: the
positive separation response to a peer-wage increase occurs when the peers in question
initially earned more than the worker (and the initial gap is negative). The 3-month
separation estimates for the [−0.30, −0.16] and [−0.15, −0.01] groups are 0.95 and 0.70,
respectively, and both are statistically significant at the 5 percent level (see Appendix
47

We exclude cases where ∆w0 ip(i)y = 0 because there is no independent variation in w0 p(i)y among
these observations.

32

Table A14 for the estimates). The estimate for the leftmost group where the peers earned
> 30 cents more than the worker is also sizable, but imprecise. In contrast, for the
three groups where the peers were initially earning less than the worker, the separation
responses are small in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero. If we
compare the [−0.30, −0.16] group with the [0.16, 0.30] group, the point estimate for
the former lies outside of the 95 percent confidence interval for the latter. Similarly,
the estimate for the [−0.15, −0.01] group lies outside of the confidence interval for the
[0.01, 0.15] group. It is important to note that the eﬀects are much larger in the groups
with negative initial wage gaps even though these groups have slightly smaller numbers
of peers than their counterpart groups with a positive wage gap.
Appendix Table A14 shows the estimates from models of 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9-month
separations; there is a similar pattern of asymmetry across all separation windows. The
table also reports estimates using more aggregated categories. If we simply classify
peers as initially earning either more or less than the worker, we find that the 3-month
separation estimate is 1.39 and statistically significant for the former, but only 0.16 and
not significant for the latter. The pattern is similar if we restrict our sample of peers
to only those whose initial wages are within $0.30 (our baseline definition). Here the
3-month separation estimate is 0.94 when the initial peer wage is above the worker’s
wage, but only 0.15 when it is below. For both the unrestricted and within-$0.30 peer
definitions, the 2, 3, and 6-month responses are statistically significant at least at the 10
percent level when we consider peers initially earning more than the worker, but close
to zero otherwise.
In sum, we find that a worker’s likelihood of separating increases sharply in response
to larger peer raises only when the peers getting the raises were initially earning more
than the worker, in which cases larger peer raises tend to widen existing gaps. In
contrast, worker separations do not appear sensitive to the size of raises received by
peers who were initially earning less. These results suggest that workers are averse
to unequal treatment that is to their disadvantage–which we interpret as evidence of
concerns about fairness.
5.8

Do peer eﬀects reflect learning about future wages?

Is it possible that the response to peer wages reflects some type of rational learning? We
think this is unlikely. In the standard learning model, workers use peer wages to help
predict their own future pay within the firm. The model predicts that an unexpected

33

increase in peer wages causes workers to revise their expected future wage upwards and
thus makes them less likely to separate. Since the direction of the peer eﬀects we find
is the opposite of that predicted by the model, this type of rational updating clearly
cannot explain our results. In general, it is also possible that a higher peer raise (and a
reduction in relative pay) sends a negative signal about one’s future wage. For example,
it might suggest employer discrimination or signal a mismatch between the worker and
the firm. A priori, these explanations also seem doubtful because the variation in peer
raises is based on arbitrary cutoﬀs and should not predict future raises at all.
In Appendix F, we confirm that peer wages lack predictive power - and thus have no
signaling value - for own future wage growth. Appendix Table F1 presents MRD models
for future wage growth, defined as the change in log own wage from the day after the
raise through the next merit raise cycle 10 months later. Among workers who remain
in the sample at least 10 months, the peer-wage coeﬃcient is small and positive (0.074)
and not statistically significant; hence, there is no indication of a decline in observed
future raise at the peer-wage discontinuity. Since fewer that half of the workers in our
sample are still at the firm after 10 months we also estimate bounds for the peer-wage
eﬀect that account for non-random attrition.48 The lower bound estimate is -0.063 and
not statistically diﬀerent from zero, implying that if all of one’s peers received a $0.10
larger raise, the worker’s future raise would be at most 0.6 percentage points smaller.
The upper bound is quite large at 0.48; however, it is not meaningful in our context
since it cannot explain why workers whose peers got bigger raises were more likely to
separate.
Setting aside the fact that it is not statistically distinguishable from zero, can the
lower bound estimate of a 0.6 percentage point reduction in one’s own future raise
explain our estimated separation response to a larger peer raise? If we take the 3-month
separation response to own wage of -0.55 (Table 3, column 3) and multiply by the implied
future wage increase of -$0.32 (= −0.063 × $5.15) at the peer-wage discontinuity, we
get an implied separations response of 0.18 – which is only 1/5 the size of the actual
separations response of 0.89. Therefore, even under the most pessimistic assumption
about selective attrition, rational updating about future wages cannot plausibly explain
the large separation response to an increase in peer wages.
The fact that peer raises do not predict own future raises not only implies that the
arbitrary variation in peer wages has no signaling value; it also rules out other potential
48

Similar to Dong (2017) and Kim (2016), we modify Lee’s (2009) procedure for application to an
RD context. See Appendix F for details.

34

explanations that rely on rationally updated expectations. For example, higher peer
raises could in principle make peers more likely to remain with the firm and could
thereby increase competition for promotions; however, our analysis suggests that any
such eﬀect is too small to explain the peer-wage eﬀects on separations. The high rate
of turnover and low promotion rates in the jobs we study also suggest that our findings
are unlikely to be explained by career concerns.49
Could peer wages instead be providing workers with a signal about market wages?
If higher peer wages signaled that there were better paid jobs available in the market,
then workers might increase their search intensity and be more likely to leave the job.
Again, this seems unlikely because peer raises are based on arbitrary pay-step thresholds,
and the true distribution of wage oﬀers from the market is unlikely to change at these
arbitrary cutoﬀs. Hence, in our context, peer wages cannot provide a basis for rational
learning about the market. However, we cannot rule out updating based on non-rational
beliefs, including mistaken inferences about the market.50

6

Falsification Tests

6.1

Tests for discontinuities prior to implementation of raises

If our estimates were biased due to a correlation between threshold wages and the latent
propensity to separate, then this correlation should cause discontinuities in separation
rates even before the raises were implemented. We test for such “pre-treatment” eﬀects
in the three months before the implementation date of Oct. 1, 1996. Here we focus
on employees who received a merit raise during the week that annual merit raises were
given, June 30 - July 7, 1996; who were employed on July 8, 1996; and whose wages on
July 8 would have made them eligible for a scheduled raise on October 1 if they were still
employed. For this pre-treatment placebo sample, we use our baseline RD and MRD
specifications to model separations within 1, 2, and 3 months of July 8 as a function of
the scheduled wage that would take eﬀect on October 1. Because this sample is drawn
from only one date, it is smaller than our main estimation sample, which consists of two
49

Career-related explanations are also inconsistent with the fact that in-store peers are not the
main source of competition for managerial jobs; rather, the majority of new managers in our data are
transferred from other stores or hired from outside the firm.
50
Similarly, we cannot rule out non-rational beliefs that make expected future wages discontinuous
in the own wage. For example, if in stores where everyone got aribtrarily small raises workers believed
they would be compensated during the next merit raise cycle, then such beliefs might help explain
the small gap-constant separation response. However, own-wage RD models for future merit raises,
estimated for stayers, show no evidence of discontinuities in the size of the next merit raise.

35

such increases (October 1, 1996 and September 1, 1997). So for comparison, we also
re-estimate our main models using the subsample of employees who were present on the
day of the first minimum wage increase (October 1, 1996).
Table 6 shows these results. In Panel A, we continue to find significant negative
eﬀects of own wages and significant positive eﬀects of peer wages even when we restrict
attention to the October 1, 1996 subsample. In contrast, we find no evidence of a pretreatment eﬀect of either own or peer wages in the placebo sample. In Panel B, the
placebo estimates of own-wage eﬀects are generally small and not statistically diﬀerent
from zero, while the peer-wage estimates are all negative and statistically insignificant.
Appendix Figure A4 provides visual confirmation of these results, focusing on the 3month separation rates. Panels A and C reproduce the “stacked” RD and MRD plots
from Figures 4 and 5 using the October 1, 1996 subsample. As before, these plots show
clear discontinuities in separation rates at the own and peer-wage thresholds. The analogous plots for the placebo sample in Panels B and D show no evidence of discontinuities
at the threshold wages in the months before the raises were implemented, which lends
further support to the causal interpretation of our estimates.
6.2

Tests for discontinuities at non-threshold wages

Our second test looks for discontinuities in separation rates at wage values where there is
no associated discontinuity in the scheduled wage. We are especially interested in values
$.05 above and below each threshold since bunching at these values raises the concern
that workers whose own wages are multiples of $0.05 have diﬀerent latent separation
propensities than those who do not. By testing directly for discontinuities at these
non-threshold values, we provide yet another test for heaping-induced bias.
For the univariate RD, we implement this test by replacing the initial wage w0 iy
(which enters equation 7 both directly and indirectly through the scheduled wage wiy )
with a “shifted” wage w0siy = w0 iy + s for s ∈ {−.07, −.06, . . . , +.07}. For the MRD,
we replace w0 iy with w0siy in equation (9) and similarly we replace each peer wage w0 jy
with a shifted peer wage w0sjy . In Appendix Figure A5, Panel A plots the t-statistics for
the estimated separation discontinuities from the univariate RD for each value of s. We
see evidence of a significant negative discontinuity at the true threshold (indicated by
s = 0), and also when wages are shifted by +$0.01. The discontinuity at s=0.01 occurs
because bins just above the true threshold are more heavily populated than bins just
below it; as a result, shifting wages by +$.01 has little impact on the predicted value

36

just above the threshold. But importantly, we do not see discontinuities elsewhere in the
wage distribution, including at w0 y +$.05 or w0 y −$.05. Panel B shows t-statistics for the
peer-wage estimates from the wage-shifted versions of the two-stage MRD model. Here
we see significant estimates at s = 0 and also at s ∈ {.01, .02, .03, .04}, the latter being
driven by the fact that these bins are sparsely populated compared to s = 0. But again,
the estimates at $.05 above and below the true thresholds are statistically insignificant
(and are opposite in sign from the true discontinuity estimates). In sum, this test helps
confirm that our findings are not driven by unobserved heterogeneity in the separation
propensity associated with either own wages or peer wages at $0.05 multiples.

7

Discussion

We use exogenous variation in wages to identify the eﬀects of both market competition
and peer comparisons on quit behavior. In our context, we find that separations (and
specifically quits) are highly responsive to wage increases and that this behavior is driven
largely by relative-pay concerns. After accounting for peer eﬀects, separations do not
appear to be very sensitive to wages—consistent with the presence of monopsony power.
Our findings complement the existing evidence on both the wage-setting power of
employers and the eﬀects of relative pay in the workplace. Despite diﬀerences across
settings, our estimates are broadly similar in magnitude to prior estimates based on
related treatments and outcomes. In the literature on labor market monopsony, for
example, our estimate of -2.3 for the 9-month “gap-constant” separation elasticity is
similar to the estimates of two studies that use exogenous wage variation for teachers.
These studies find one-year separation elasticities of -1.8 (Ransom and Sims 2010) and
-3.5 (Falch 2011), and their estimates imply potential wage markdowns of 14%-27%. Our
findings suggest that similar wage-setting power exists in a retail labor market marked
by low wages and high turnover. Our point estimate implies that the firm can reduce
wages by roughly 20%, and we can reject potential wage mark-downs of less than 4% at
the 95% confidence level.
On relative pay, our findings are most easily compared to those of Breza, Kaur
and Shamdasani (2017), who randomize Indian manufacturing workers to pay units
where pay raises resulted in either compressed or unequal wage structures. In unequal
workplaces, the wage gap was roughly 7.4% between the highest and lowest-paid worker,
or 5.8% between the lowest-paid worker and the average of the other two. During the
one-month experiment, absenteeism responded very strongly to the presence of the pay
37

gap; the study estimates an elasticity of around 26 and a willingness to forego 7.1% 9.3% of earnings to avoid the unequal workplace.51 Our results are remarkably similar.
We estimate a peer-wage elasticity of 20.4 in the second month after treatment, and like
Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani (2017), we find a compensating diﬀerential for unequal
pay that is roughly equal to the size of the pay gap (6-7% in their case and about 2%
in ours).
It is also useful to compare our results to those of Card et al. (2012), whose outcomes include measures of job satisfaction and job search. They find that for workers
earning below the median in their pay unit and occupation, learning about coworker
salaries leads to a 40% - 144% increase in the probability of being both “dissatisfied”
and “very likely” to search for a new job shortly after the treatment.52 Since the treatment in Card et al. (2012) involves information about peer wages and not a change in
those wages per se, we cannot quantify how sensitive workers in their setting are to
pay inequality without knowing the extent of “surprise” associated with the treatment.
However, under the plausible assumption that the information treatment reduced the
posterior mean relative pay by 5-10% for those workers, the elasticities implied by Card
et al. (2012)’s estimates would lie between 4 and 29—broadly similar to the range of
peer-wage separation elasticities we find (see Table 4).53
Other patterns in our results bear qualitative similarities to those found in the recent
literature. Notably, the parallels between our findings and those of Breza, Kaur and
Shamdasani (2017) go beyond the large responses to relative pay; like us, they also find
relatively small eﬀects of a common wage increase. Also, our finding of asymmetry in

51

We use the estimates in Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani (2017) Table 4 to compute the elasticity
WL
Rate
, where ∆ measures the diffor the lowest paid worker with wage WL as: ∆Absentee
∆(W P −WL ) Absentee Rate
ference between treatment and control units. The percentage point diﬀerence in the absentee rate,
∆Absentee Rate , is equal to -0.117 (their Table 4), the baseline Absentee Rate is 0.061, and the wage
∆(W P −WL )
gap as a share of base wage,
, is 0.058. The authors calculate a willingness to pay between
WL
7.1% and 9.3% of earnings to avoid the unequal workplace.
52
The range of estimates reflects diﬀerent assumptions regarding heterogeneity in the “first stage”
eﬀect of the information treatment on workers’ use of a website to learn their peer wages (see Card
et al. 2012, pp. 2994-2995).
53
There are other diﬀerences between our setting and Card et al. (2012) that aﬀect the comparability
of our estimates. First, since the Card et al. (2012) estimates are based on intent to search rather than
actual turnover, the eﬀects on actual turnover in their setting are likely to be smaller than the eﬀects we
find. Second, the wage diﬀerences we study were clearly arbitrary, but in their setting even unexpected
diﬀerences in pay may have been viewed as at least partly justified by productivity diﬀerences, which
could have moderated the eﬀects.

38

the peer-wage response adds to a growing body of evidence that workers are averse to
disadvantageous inequity (Breza et al. 2017; Card et al. 2012; Cohn et al. 2014).54
While our conclusions are broadly consistent with prior research, there are limits
to their generalizability, and the sensitivity of quit behavior to seemingly small pay
gaps (at most $.10 or 2% of the typical wage) may have been mediated by contextspecific factors. In particular, given the arbitrary location of the thresholds, it is likely
that the inequities were perceived as unjustified. Recent experiments have found that
arbitrary pay gaps elicit stronger responses than gaps that can either be justified by
productivity diﬀerences (Breza, Kaur and Shamdasani 2017) or at least rationalized in
some way (Bracha, Gneezy and Loewenstein 2015).We also caution against the linear
extrapolation of our estimates to infer how workers might respond to much larger wage
gaps since the response function is likely to be nonlinear. For example, Card et al.
(2012) find that rank appears to matter more for job satisfaction than the size of the
pay gap—suggesting a diminishing marginal eﬀect of inequity. One mechanism that
could create such nonlinearities is a fixed cost to job search. As we show in Online
Appendix B, if we endogenize search intensity in our model and allow for a fixed search
cost (so that wage disparities may generate separations in part by provoking search),
then small relative wage changes may produce large increases in separations, but further
changes may have smaller marginal eﬀects.
With those caveats in mind, it is useful to consider how peer comparisons may
aﬀect wage-setting practices when wages are not fully dictated by the market. Absent
internal constraints, monopsony power creates an incentive for firms to suppress the
wages of workers whose labor supply to the firm is the least elastic. But relative pay
concerns like those we identify will raise the cost of wage discrimination among close
peers, and in turn could lead firms to pursue strategies that redefine firm boundaries
and produce a fissured workplace (Weil 2014). More generally, if firms are motivated to
circumvent internal equity constraints, this could help explain why rising wage inequality
has been accompanied by greater sorting of workers into high or low-wage firms (Song
et al. 2015), and by a rise in domestic outsourcing and other types of employment
restructuring (Katz and Krueger 2016) that often result in lower wages for outsourced
workers (Dube and Kaplan 2010, Goldschmidt and Schmieder 2017). Evidence linking
54

Asymmetric responses to relative pay have also been found in some lab experiments. Bracha,
Gneezy and Loewenstein (2015) show that unequal pay can reduce the eﬀort and labor supply of lowerpaid workers with no eﬀect on higher-paid workers. On the other hand, both Charness and Kuhn
(2007) and Goerg, Kube and Zultan (2010) find that eﬀort provision is very sensitive to the subjects’
own wages but is not systematically aﬀected by the wages of coworkers or team members.

39

pay equity concerns to specific wage policies and employment relations is an important
area for future research.

40

References
Angrist, Joshua D, Erich Battistin, and Daniela Vuri. 2016. “In a Small Moment: Class
Size and Moral Hazard in the Italian Mezzogiorno,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics.
Angrist, Joshua D and Victor Lavy. 1999. “Using Maimonides’ rule to estimate the eﬀect
of class size on scholastic achievement,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):
533–575.
Autor, David H, Alan Manning, and Christopher L Smith. 2016. “The contribution of the
minimum wage to US wage inequality over three decades: a reassessment,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1): 58–99.
Barreca, Alan I, Jason M Lindo, and Glen R Waddell. 2016. “Heaping-Induced Bias in
Regression-Discontinuity Designs,” Economic Inquiry, 54(1): 268–293.
Bracha, Anat, Uri Gneezy, and George Loewenstein. 2015. “Relative pay and labor
supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 33(2): 297–315.
Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. 2017. “The morale eﬀects of pay
inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Buntrock, Evan. 2014. “Comparison-Group Position and Job Search: Information or
Irritation?”, Mimeo.
Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T Mortensen. 1998. “Wage diﬀerentials, employer size, and
unemployment,” International Economic Review: 257–273.
Card, David and Alan Krueger. 2016. Myth and measurement: The New Economics
of the Minimum Wage, Twentieth Anniversary Edition: Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at
work: The eﬀect of peer salaries on job satisfaction,” The American Economic Review,
102(6): 2981–3003.
Charness, Gary and Peter Kuhn. 2007. “Does pay inequality aﬀect worker eﬀort? Experimental evidence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4): 693–723.

41

Clark, Andrew E, Nicolai Kristensen, and Niels Westergård-Nielsen. 2009. “Job satisfaction and co-worker wages: Status or signal?” The Economic Journal, 119(536):
430–447.
Clark, Andrew E and Andrew J Oswald. 1996. “Satisfaction and comparison income,”
Journal of Public Economics, 61(3): 359–381.
Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, Benedikt Herrmann, and Frédéric Schneider. 2014. “Social
comparison and eﬀort provision: Evidence from a field experiment,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 12(4): 877–898.
Cornelissen, Thomas, Christian Dustmann, and Uta Schönberg. 2017. “Peer eﬀects in
the workplace,” The American Economic Review, 107(2): 425–456.
Depew, Briggs and Todd A Sørensen. 2013. “The elasticity of labor supply to the firm
over the business cycle,” Labour Economics, 24: 196–204.
Dong, Yingying. 2017. “Regression discontinuity designs with sample selection,” Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics(just-accepted).
Dube, Arindrajit, Jeﬀ Jacobs, Suresh Naidu, and Siddharth Suri. 2018. “Monopsony in
Online Labor Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 24416.
Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. “Does outsourcing reduce wages in the lowwage service occupations? Evidence from janitors and guards,” ILR Review, 63(2):
287–306.
Dube, Arindrajit, T William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum wage shocks,
employment flows, and labor market frictions,” Journal of Labor Economics, 34(3):
663–704.
Dube, Arindrajit, Suresh Naidu, and Alan Manning. 2017. “Monopsony and Employer
Mis-optimization Account for Round Number Bunching in the Wage Distribution,”
Unpublished manuscript.
Falch, Torberg. 2011. “Teacher mobility responses to wage changes: Evidence from a
quasi-natural experiment,” The American Economic Review, 101(3): 460–465.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M Schmidt. 1999. “A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 817–868.
42

Galizzi, Monica and Kevin Lang. 1998. “Relative wages, wage growth, and quit behavior,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(2): 367–390.
Gelman, Andrew and Guido Imbens. 2016. “Why High-order Polynomials Should Not
Be Used in Regression Discontinuity Designs,” NBER Working Paper No. 20405.
Giuliano, Laura. 2013. “Minimum wage eﬀects on employment, substitution, and the
teenage labor supply: Evidence from personnel data,” Journal of Labor Economics,
31(1): 155–194.
Goerg, Sebastian J, Sebastian Kube, and Ro’i Zultan. 2010. “Treating equals unequally:
Incentives in teams, workers’ motivation, and production technology,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 28(4): 747–772.
Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes F Schmieder. 2017. “The rise of domestic outsourcing and the evolution of the German wage structure,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 132(3): 1165–1217.
Hirsch, Boris, Thorsten Schank, and Claus Schnabel. 2010. “Diﬀerences in labor supply
to monopsonistic firms and the gender pay gap: An empirical analysis using linked
employer-employee data from Germany,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 291–330.
Katz, Lawrence F and Alan B Krueger. 2016. “The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
Arrangements in the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 22667.
Kim, Bo Min. 2016. “Do Developmental Mathematics Develop Mathematics Proficiency?
Bounding their Eﬀectiveness in RDD with the Presence of Dropouts.”
Lee, David S. 2009. “Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds
on treatment eﬀects,” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071–1102.
Lee, David S and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), p. 281.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets:
Princeton University Press.
Mas, Alexandre. 2017. “Does transparency lead to pay compression?” Journal of Political Economy, 125(5): 000–000.

43

Matsudaira, Jordan D. 2014. “Monopsony in the low-wage labor market? Evidence
from minimum nurse staﬃng regulations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1):
92–102.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density test,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698–714.
Naidu, Suresh, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang. 2016. “Monopsony power in migrant
labor markets: evidence from the United Arab Emirates,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(6): 1735–1792.
Papay, John P, John B Willett, and Richard J Murnane. 2011. “Extending the regressiondiscontinuity approach to multiple assignment variables,” Journal of Econometrics,
161(2): 203–207.
Pfeifer, Christian and Stefan Schneck. 2012. “Relative wage positions and quit behavior:
Evidence from linked employer-employee data,” ILR Review, 65(1): 126–147.
Ransom, Michael R and Ronald L Oaxaca. 2010. “New market power models and sex
diﬀerences in pay,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 267–289.
Ransom, Michael R and David P Sims. 2010. “Estimating the firm’s labor supply curve
in a "new monopsony" framework: Schoolteachers in Missouri,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(2): 331–355.
Reardon, Sean F and Joseph P Robinson. 2012. “Regression discontinuity designs with
multiple rating-score variables,” Journal of Research on Educational Eﬀectiveness,
5(1): 83–104.
Rege, Mari and I Solli. 2013. “Lagging behind the joneses: The impact of relative earnings on job separation,” Mimeo.
Song, Jae, David J Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till Von Wachter. 2015.
“Firming up inequality,” NBER Working Paper No. 21199.
Staiger, Douglas O, Joanne Spetz, and Ciaran S Phibbs. 2010. “Is there monopsony in
the labor market? Evidence from a natural experiment,” Journal of Labor Economics,
28(2): 211–236.

44

Webber, Douglas A. 2015. “Firm market power and the earnings distribution,” Labour
Economics, 35: 123–134.
Weil, David. 2014. The Fissured Workplace: Why Work Became So Bad for So Many
and What Can Be Done to Improve It: Harvard University Press.

45

Figure 1. Wages on days before and after each minimum wage increase
A. October 1, 1996
6.15

new wage ($, day after)

5.95
5.75
5.55
5.35
5.15
4.95

5.
45

5.
60

5.
75

5.
95

6.
10

6.
25

5.
30

5.
15

5.
00

4.
85

4.
70

4.
55

4.
40

4.
25

4.75

initial wage ($, day before)

B. September 1, 1997
6.55

new wage ($, day after)

6.35
6.15
5.95
5.75
5.55
5.35

5.
80

5.
65

5.
50

5.
35

5.
20

5.
05

4.
90

4.
75

5.15

initial wage ($, day before)

Note: Sample includes all hourly employees who were present on the day of the federal minimum
wage increase on October 1, 1996 (Panel A) or September 1, 1997 (Panel B), who had at least one
month of tenure, and whose “before” wage was no more than $1.00 above the new minimum.
Sample size is 15,557 (21,274) observations for Panel A (Panel B). Small dots represent cells with
fewer than five observations.

46

Figure 2. Raise by initial wage on day of minimum wage increase,
average actual raise and scheduled raise
A. October 1, 1996
0.50

scheduled raise ($)

0.40

0.30

0.20

5.
45

5.
30

5.
15

5.
00

4.
85

4.
70

4.
55

4.
40

4.
25

0.10

initial wage ($)

B. September 1, 1997
0.50

scheduled raise ($)

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

5.
65

5.
50

5.
35

5.
20

5.
05

4.
90

4.
75

0.00

initial wage ($)

Note: Circles are mean values of raise received on day of minimum wage increase for each value of the
“before” wage. Lines are fitted values from regressions of actual raise on the scheduled raise defined
by the corporate rule for wage adjustments. Regressions are fit separately for employees in the
analysis sample on each of the two days that the minimum wage increased.

47

Figure 3. Three‐month separation rate by initial wage on day of minimum
wage increase

1.5
1
Density
.5
0

5.
45

5.
30

5.
15

5.
00

4.
85

4.
70

4.
55

4.
40

-.3
4.
25

residual 3-month separation rate
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

2

.3

A. October 1, 1996

initial wage ($)

5.
65

5.
50

5.
35

5.
20

5.
05

4.
90

4.
75

0

-.3

.5

1
Density

1.5

residual 3-month separation rate
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

2

.3

B. September 1, 1997

initial wage ($)

Note: Plotted points are mean values of residualized 3‐month separation rates from a model that
controls for ZIP‐code based fixed effects (see text for details). Lines are local linear smoothers
(bandwidth=.04) estimated within each 15‐cent interval corresponding to a new pay step. Marker size
is scaled by the proportion of observations at each value within each pay step. The figure also shows
the overall density of initial wages in each year. Shaded areas indicate 95% confidence intervals.

48

Figure 4. Three‐month separation rate by distance from
own initial wage to nearest pay‐step threshold
0.02

fraction who separate

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

-0.10
-0.07 -0.06 -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07
Own distance from nearest pay step threshold ($)

Note: The figure shows residuals from the stacked RD model of 3‐month separations with baseline
controls (as in Table 2, column 4). The running variable is the distance from own initial wage to the
nearest pay‐step threshold (see text for details). The markers show the mean residuals for each
value of the running variable; marker size is scaled by the number of observations at each value.
The lines show the fitted relationship between the running variable and the residualized
separations. The intercepts are normalized to be zero at the left limit of the threshold, so that the
value at the right limit is the estimated effect of the $.10 discontinuity in the wage, and the shaded
area at the right limit shows the 95% confidence interval for this estimate. Estimation samples are
as in Table 2.

49

Figure 5. Three‐month separation rate by distance from
peer initial wage to nearest pay‐step threshold
0.06

fraction who separate

0.04

0.02

0.00

-0.02
-0.07 -0.06 -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07
Peer's distance from nearest pay step threshold ($)

Note: The figure shows residuals from the stacked MRD model of 3‐month separations with
baseline controls (as in Table 3, column 4). The running variable is the distance from a
representative peer’s initial wage to the nearest pay‐step threshold (see text for details). The
markers show the mean residuals for each value of the running variable; marker size is scaled by
the number of observations at each value. The lines show the fitted relationship between the
running variable and the residualized separations. The intercepts are normalized to be zero at the
left limit of the threshold, so that the value at the right limit is the estimated effect of the $.10
discontinuity in the wage of a representative peer, and the shaded area at the right limit shows the
95% confidence interval for this estimate. Estimation samples are as in Table 3.

50

Figure 6. Survival function, adjusted
for the effects of own and peer wage increases

sample mean
+$.10 in own wage
+$.10 in avg peer wage

Note: Dark line plots the fraction of the estimation sample that remains in the store as a function of
the time elapsed since the raise. The other two lines show the survival rates adjusted for the
estimated effect of a $.10 increase in either own or peer average wage, based on models of
separations for each interval shown, using the baseline MRD specification in column 3 of Table 3. The
shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals.

51

1.5
1
.5
0
-.5
-1

MRD Estimate; 95% CI

2

2.5

Figure 7. Estimated effects of average peer wage on 3‐month separation rate,
varying wage band used to define peer group

$.10

$.20

$.30

$.40

$.50

$.60

$.70

$.80

store

Peer Group (maximum $ from own initial wage)
Note: The figure plots estimates and 95% confidence intervals of the 3‐month separation response to
an increase in the average peer wage from two‐stage MRD models, for peer groups defined by
various wage bands. For each wage band, peers include all co‐workers who were eligible for a
scheduled raise and whose initial wage is within the given dollar distance from the worker’s own
initial wage. Models include baseline set of controls as in Table 3, model 3.

52

1

Figure 8. Estimated effects of average peer wage on 3‐month separation rate,
alternative peer groups vs. random subsets of potential peers

.8

Wage within $0.30

2SLS MRD estimate
.4
.6

Similar merit status

Similar age
Closest 10 wages

Random
subsets
of peers

Live within 9 miles

0

.2

Similar tenure

0

20

40
60
80
Share of potential peers included (%)

100

Note: Scatter plots are estimates for two‐stage MRD models of the separation response to an
increase in the average peer wage for peer groups defined using alternative peer definitions (vertical
axis), by the share of potential peers included when using that definitions (horizontal axis). Peer
definitions are based wages, age, tenure, merit pay raise status, and geography, as indicated; see the
text for more details. The straight line plots the locus of the 3‐month separation response from a
MRD model using a random subset consisting of the indicated share of all potential peers. All models
include baseline set of controls as in Table 3, model 3.

53

1
Share of all peers

1.5
1
.5
0
-.5

0

-1

MRD Estimate, 95% CI

2

2.5

Figure 9. Heterogeneous effects of average peer wage on 3‐month separation rate,
by initial wage gap (own – peer)

<-$0.30

[-$0.30,-$0.16] [-$0.15,-$0.01] [$0.01,$0.15] [$0.16,$0.30]

>$0.30

Initial wage gap: own wage - peer wage
Peer wage Effect on 3 mo separation
Share of all peers who are in group

95% CI

Note: The figure plots estimates and 95% confidence intervals from two‐stage MRD models of the
separation response to an increase in the average peer wage for six peer groups. These six groups
were constructed by partitioning all potential worker‐peer pairs by the initial wage gap between the
worker and the peer. Models include baseline set of controls as in Table 3, model 3. The bars at the
bottom of the figure indicate the share of all potential peers contained in a particular peer group,
and are plotted using the right vertical axis.

54

Table 1. Summary statistics for estimation sample
A. Wages and raises by date of minimum wage increase:
October 1, 1996:
initial wage
scheduled raise
September 1, 1997:
initial wage
scheduled raise
Pooled sample
initial wage
scheduled raise

B. Employee characteristics:
initial wage is multiple of $.05 (%)
fulltime status (%)
female (%)
white (%)
black (%)
hispanic (%)
mean of ZIP code median household income ($1000s)
(std. dev.)
age category:
16‐17 years old (%)
18‐19 years old (%)
20‐22 years old (%)
23‐29 years old (%)
30 years and older (%)
mean age (years)
(std. dev.)
tenure as of October 1, 1996:
median tenure (months)
tenure is censored at 8 months (%)
tenure as of September 1, 1997:
median tenure (months)
tenure is censored at 19 months (%)

mean

std. dev.

$4.99
$0.21
3 009

($0.29)
($0.10)

$5.28
$0.18
3 682

($0.21)
($0.07)

$5.15
$0.19
6 691

($0.29)
($0.08)

39%
0.4%
81%
76%
10%
7%
51.3
(18.6)
24%
28%
21%
14%
12%
22.6
(7.8)
≥8
86%
11.7
16%
(continued)

55

Table 1. cont'd.
C. Coworker (store‐level workforce) characteristics:
mean number of coworkers
average wage
average age
% who got scheduled raise (potential peers)
% who got a merit raise in past year
% who got both scheduled and merit raise (estimation sample)
% with initial wages at multiple of $.05

mean
27.3
$5.55
24.2
63%
44%
24%
70%

std. dev.
14.90
$0.46
2.70
23%
15%
14%
16%

D. Potential peers (coworkers with a scheduled raise)
number of possible peers
average initial wage
average scheduled raise
average age
% who got a merit raise in past year
% with initial wages at multiple of $.05

mean
12.7
$5.10
$0.22
21.7
42%
72%

std. dev.
8.0
$0.25
$0.07
3.2
23%
22%

E. Peers within +/‐ $.30 of own initial wage (preferred definition)
number of peers
average initial wage
average scheduled raise
average age
% who got a merit raise in past year
% with initial wages at multiple of $.05

mean
9.0
$5.13
$0.21
21.9
46%
70%

std. dev.
6.5
$0.28
$0.08
4.2
28%
27%

F. Separation rate, by time from minimum wage increase
within 1 month
within 2 months
within 3 months
within 6 months
within 9 months

% who separate
12%
19%
23%
38%
51%
% of all separations
55%
21%
16%
8%

G. Reason for separation (within 9‐months)
quit (job related)
return to school
move/transfer
fired

Note: Panels A‐C and E based on the full estimation sample of 6,691 scheduled raises given on the day of one of the minimum wage
increases (either September 1, 1996 or October 1, 1997) among employees who had previously received a merit raise (see Section 3.2
of text for explanation of sample restrictions). Coworkers (Panel C) are defined as all employees in the same, entry‐level job who were
employed in the same store on the day of the minimum wage increase. Potential peers (Panel D) are defined as the subset of
coworkers who got a scheduled raise. Relevant peers (Panel E) are the subset of potential peers whose initial wage is +/‐ $.30 of own
initial wage (see section 5.6 of text for explanation); peer characteristics in Panel E are shown for the sub‐sample of 6,528 employees
(97.6% of full estimation sample) who have at least one peer by this definition.

56

Table . e ression discontinuity estimates of separation response to c an e in o n a e
Separation indo

1

1

‐0.08
(0.14)

‐0.11
(0.15)

‐0.09
(0.15)

0.01
(0.15)

‐0.09
(0.15)

‐0.07
(0.16)

‐0.12
(0.15)

‐0.13
(0.16)

‐0.16
(0.21)

‐0.34
(0.27)

mont s

‐0.29
(0.17)

‐0.45
(0.18)

‐0.46
(0.18)

‐0.42
(0.17)

‐0.46
(0.18)

‐0.47
(0.19)

‐0.50
(0.18)

‐0.51
(0.19)

‐0.42
(0.25)

‐0.58
(0.33)

mont s

‐0.28
(0.18)

‐0.49
(0.19)

‐0.52
(0.20)

‐0.50
(0.19)

‐0.52
(0.20)

‐0.52
(0.20)

‐0.56
(0.20)

‐0.57
(0.20)

‐0.39
(0.27)

‐0.61
(0.35)

mont s

‐0.42
(0.22)

‐0.59
(0.23)

‐0.61
(0.23)

‐0.60
(0.22)

‐0.61
(0.23)

‐0.66
(0.24)

‐0.66
(0.23)

‐0.66
(0.24)

‐0.40
(0.32)

‐0.63
(0.40)

mont s

‐0.38
(0.23)

‐0.57
(0.24)

‐0.57
(0.24)

‐0.59
(0.24)

‐0.57
(0.24)

‐0.58
(0.25)

‐0.62
(0.24)

‐0.70
(0.25)

‐0.41
(0.32)

‐0.42
(0.44)

6691

6691

6691

6691

6691

6691

6691

6691

5503

2624

1 mont

Number of observations
inear own wage control
ZIP code fixed effects
5‐cent wage dummy
Stacked model (see note)
uadratic own wage
Cubic own wage
Worker + store controls
Store fixed effects
Donut hole (see note)
5‐cent wages only (see note)

Note: Entries are regression coefficients from linear probability models of separation within 1, 2, 3, 6 or 9 months from the day of the minimum wage increase. All entries except those
in column 4 are coefficients on own wage (as scheduled on the day of the minimum wage increase) from models that control for a smooth function of own initial wage with a separate
intercept and slope in each year. Column 4 shows coefficients on a dummy for own wages at or above the nearest pay‐step threshold from a stacked model that controls linearly for
the distance from own initial wage to the nearest threshold. In columns 7 and 8, worker controls are: a dummy for each month of tenure, age and age‐squared, gender and race
dummies, an indicator for full‐time status, si e of the most recent merit raise, and the median household income in the employee s residential ZIP code; and store controls are: total
number of entry‐level employees on the day of the minimum wage increase, average employee age, average employee wage, the fraction who received a scheduled raise, the fraction
who received a merit raise in uly of the same year, and the fraction whose initial wage is a multiple of $.05. See section 4.1 for explanation of the controls in other models. he
estimation sample in columns 1‐8 includes all employees who received a scheduled raise on the day of the minimum wage increase and who had received a merit raise in uly of the
sample year (see section 3.2 for details). In column 9, the sample excludes wages that are just at or $.01 below a pay threshold. In column 10 the sample includes only wages that are
mul ples of $.05 (see sec on 4.1 for explana ons). Parentheses contain robust standard errors clustered by store. signi cant at 10%; signi cant at 5%; signi cant at 1%.

57

Table .

estimates of separation response to c an es in o n a e and peer a era e a e

Separation indo
1 mont
own wage
peer average wage (2S S)
mont
own wage
peer average wage (2S S)
mont
own wage
peer average wage (2S S)
mont
own wage
peer average wage (2S S)
mont
own wage
peer average wage (2S S)

Number of employees
Number of observations

1

1

‐0.08
(0.14)

‐0.11
(0.15)

‐0.08
(0.15)

‐0.02
(0.16)

‐0.06
(0.15)

‐0.07
(0.16)

‐0.11
(0.15)

‐0.11
(0.16)

‐0.08
(0.16)

‐0.05
(0.16)

0.36
(0.19)

0.24
(0.21)

0.29
(0.23)

0.17
(0.19)

0.56
(0.27)

0.30
(0.74)

0.23
(0.22)

0.25
(0.23)

‐0.21
(0.39)

0.46
(0.26)

‐0.33
(0.18)

‐0.47
(0.18)

‐0.46
(0.18)

‐0.58
(0.19)

‐0.43
(0.18)

‐0.47
(0.18)

‐0.50
(0.18)

‐0.48
(0.19)

‐0.43
(0.20)

‐0.44
(0.19)

0.82
(0.23)

0.58
(0.25)

0.74
(0.27)

0.76
(0.23)

1.11
(0.32)

0.23
(0.48)

0.63
(0.26)

0.54
(0.27)

0.54
(0.45)

0.74
(0.31)

‐0.34
(0.19)

‐0.53
(0.19)

‐0.55
(0.19)

‐0.73
(0.21)

‐0.52
(0.20)

‐0.56
(0.19)

‐0.59
(0.19)

‐0.56
(0.21)

‐0.47
(0.21)

‐0.54
(0.21)

0.98
(0.25)

0.75
(0.26)

0.89
(0.29)

0.95
(0.24)

1.23
(0.35)

0.33
(0.38)

0.79
(0.28)

0.66
(0.29)

0.82
(0.48)

0.80
(0.33)

‐0.45
(0.22)

‐0.65
(0.22)

‐0.66
(0.23)

‐0.80
(0.24)

‐0.63
(0.23)

‐0.68
(0.24)

‐0.71
(0.23)

‐0.65
(0.24)

‐0.46
(0.25)

‐0.78
(0.24)

0.84
(0.30)

0.50
(0.31)

0.65
(0.35)

0.85
(0.28)

0.93
(0.40)

‐0.05
(0.99)

0.53
(0.33)

0.56
(0.34)

0.57
(0.56)

0.68
(0.39)

‐0.39
(0.23)

‐0.58
(0.23)

‐0.58
(0.24)

‐0.73
(0.26)

‐0.56
(0.24)

‐0.58
(0.25)

‐0.62
(0.24)

‐0.68
(0.26)

‐0.45
(0.26)

‐0.72
(0.26)

0.50
(0.30)

0.14
(0.31)

0.35
(0.35)

0.62
(0.29)

0.55
(0.41)

‐0.01
(1.22)

0.25
(0.34)

0.32
(0.34)

0.43
(0.56)

0.38
(0.41)

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6528
58660

6294
38401

6220
43216

inear own peer initial wage
ZIP code fixed effects
5‐cent peer merit dummies
Stacked model (see note)
uadratic own peer initial wage
Cubic own peer initial wage
Worker, peer + store controls
Store fixed effects
Donut hole, peer wage (see note)
5‐cent only, peer wage (see note)
Note: Entries are estimated effects of increases in own wage and in average peer wage on the probability of separation within 1, 2, 3, 6 or 9
months from the day of the minimum wage increase. In all but column 4, estimates are from global RD models that control for smooth functions
of own and peer initial wages. Estimates in column 4 are from a stacked RD model that controls linearly for distance from own and peer initial
wages to the nearest threshold. See section 5.2 for more detail on the RD model and alternative specifications. Peers in all models are defined
as coworkers who got a scheduled raise and whose initial wage is +/‐ $.30 of own initial wage. In columns 7 and 8, worker and store controls are
the same as in able 2 (see able 2 note); peer controls are the same variables that are included for the worker. he estimation sample in columns
1‐8 includes all worker‐peer pairs for which the worker is in the RD analysis sample (see able 2 note) and the peer fits our definition. In column 9,
the sample excludes peers with initial wages that are just at or $.01 below a pay threshold. In column 10 the sample includes only peers with
initial wages that are multiples of $.05. Parentheses contain robust standard errors clustered by store. significant at 10%; significant at 5%;
significant at 1%.

58

Table . Separation elasticities implied by

estimates
ependent ariable 1 if lea e it in
1
1 mo

mos

mos

own‐wage elasticity

‐3.6
(6.7)

‐12.7
(5.0)

‐12.5
(4.3)

‐8.9
(3.1)

‐5.9
(2.4)

peer‐wage elasticity
(
relative‐wage elasticity)

12.9
(10.2)

20.4
(7.4)

20.3
(6.6)

8.7
(4.7)

3.5
(3.5)

gap‐constant elasticity (net of peer effect)

9.3
(12.4)

7.7
(9.3)

7.8
(8.4)

‐0.1
(5.7)

‐2.3
(4.5)

sample mean of dependent variable

0.12

0.19

0.23

0.38

0.51

mos

mos

Note: Elasticities are calculated using the coefficients on own wage (estimates of ) and peer average wage
(estimates of P) from baseline RD model as in able 3, column row 3; the sample means shown in last row of
this table; and the sample average wage of $5.15. he gap‐constant own‐wage elasticity is calculated by first
summing the estimates of and P (see equation 4) to obtain the gap‐constant response to an increase in own‐
wage. Parentheses contain robust standard errors clustered by store (calcualted using delta method).

59

Table . Split sample
o n a e

estimates of separation response to c an e in
1
opposite
side

same
side

difference

1.46
(0.06)

0.69
(0.06)

0.77
(0.08)

‐0.52
(0.26)

0.18
(0.26)

‐0.70
(0.37)

0.91
(0.50)

mont s

‐0.98
(0.30)

0.05
(0.31)

‐1.03
(0.44)

1.34
(0.60)

mont s

‐1.13
(0.32)

‐0.05
(0.34)

‐1.07
(0.47)

1.39
(0.64)

mont s

‐0.80
(0.39)

‐0.34
(0.40)

‐0.46
(0.57)

0.60
(0.74)

mont s

‐0.71
(0.41)

‐0.67
(0.43)

‐0.04
(0.59)

0.05
(0.77)

2906

3485

6391

6391

ependent aria le:
a e ap o n peer

Separation it in
1 mont

Number of observations

ald estimate
of peer effect

Note: Entries are own‐wage coefficients from baseline RD models as in able 2, row 3 (see able 2
note). Sample is split by whether the worker and the majority of her peers are on the same side or
opposite sides of their nearest discontinuity threshold. Estimates and standard errors for the
differences (column 3) are from a model in which own wage and all covariates are interacted with a
dummy for the opposite‐side sample. Wald estimates of peer effect are two‐stage least squares
estimates from the interacted model (see section 5.5 for derivation). Parentheses contain robust
standard errors clustered on store. signi cant at 10%; signi cant at 5%; signi cant at 1%

60

Table . ffects of ctober 1 1
sc eduled a es on separations estimates from
models usin treated and placebo samples
o n
Separation indo
. Treated sample
own wage

a e only

and

o n and peer

1
1 mo.

mo.

mo.

1 mo.

mo.

mo.

‐0.19
(0.20)

‐0.60
(0.25)

‐0.60
(0.28)

‐0.18
(0.19)

‐0.57
(0.24)

‐0.63
(0.27)

0.18
(0.22)

0.65
(0.28)

0.60
(0.33)

ctober 1 1

peer average wage
Number of employees
Number of observations
. lacebo sample uly
own wage

3009
3009

3009
3009

3009
3009

2901
231 2

2901
231 2

2901
231 2

0.23
(0.17)

‐0.05
(0.26)

‐0.10
(0.28)

0.18
(0.17)

‐0.10
(0.25)

‐0.14
(0.27)

‐0.15
(0.23)

‐0.25
(0.35)

‐0.38
(0.36)

4269
32 64

4269
32 64

4269
32 64

1

peer average wage
4399
4399

4399
4399

4399
4399

Note: reated sample consists of observations in the main estimation from the date of the first minimum wage increase
(October 1, 1996). Placebo sample is employees who received a merit raise during the week of une 30 ‐ uly 7, 1996 (the week
that annual merit raises were given), who were employed on uly 8, 1996, and whose wages on uly 8 are in the same range as
the October 1, 1996 wages in the main estimation sample. Placebo wages are calculated by applying the corporate rule for
wage adjustments made on October 1, 1996 to initial wages on uly 8, 1996. Peers are coworkers employed on uly 8, 1996
whose wage on that day was +/‐ $.30 from the worker s own wage. Estimates are from baseline models as in column 3 of able
2 (RD) and able 3 ( RD). Parentheses contain robust standard errors clustered on store. signi cant at 10%; signi cant at
5%; significant at 1%.

61

