                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MULTINATIONAL PROFIT SHIFTING AND MEASURES THROUGHOUT ECONOMIC
                             ACCOUNTS

                                       Jennifer Bruner
                                       Dylan G. Rassier
                                         Kim J. Ruhl

                                     Working Paper 24915
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24915


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2018




This paper was prepared for the NBER-CRIW conference on The Challenges of Globalization in
the Measurement of National Accounts. For comments and helpful questions, we thank Ray
Mataloni, Brent Moulton, Marshall Reinsdorf, Peter van de Ven, Dan Yorgason and especially
our discussant Steve Redding. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational
companies and companies engaged in international transactions was conducted at the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal
confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the U.S. Department of Commerce or the Bureau of Economic
Analysis or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jennifer Bruner, Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multinational Profit Shifting and Measures throughout Economic Accounts
Jennifer Bruner, Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 24915
August 2018
JEL No. E01,F23,F60,H26

                                         ABSTRACT

Profit shifting to low-tax countries imposes challenges for the treatment of multinational
enterprises in economic accounts. Using adjustments for profit shifting calculated in Guvenen et
al. (2017) under an alternative measurement methodology, this paper empirically demonstrates
how the effects of profit shifting cascade throughout a fully articulated set of economic accounts
for the United States in 2014. We find a 1.5 percent and 3.5 percent increase in measured U.S.
gross domestic product and operating surplus, respectively, and a 33.5 percent decrease in
measured income receivable from the rest of world. As a result of offsetting effects, measured
U.S. gross national saving decreases by 0.8 percent, and national borrowing increases by 6.9
percent. There are also potentially significant implications for analytic uses of the measures,
including decreases for the labor share of income and the return on U.S. direct investment abroad
and increases for the trade in services balance and the return on domestic non-financial business.


Jennifer Bruner                                 Kim J. Ruhl
Bureau of Economic Analysis                     Department of Economics
4600 Silver Hill Road                           University of Wisconsin-Madison
Washington, DC 20233                            7444 Social Science Building
Jennifer.Bruner@bea.gov                         1180 Observatory Drive
                                                Madison, WI 53706
Dylan G. Rassier                                and NBER
Bureau of Economic Analysis                     ruhl2@wisc.edu
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
dylan.rassier@bea.gov
1. Introduction

       Economic accounts offer a comprehensive summary of stocks and flows for a given
economy. To promote consistency and comparability of economic accounting measures across
economies and time, economic accounts are based on internationally agreed principles that reflect
organizing conventions from business accounting and definitions and concepts from economic
theory. The primary sources of guidance on economic accounts are the System of National
Accounts (SNA) (European Commission et al., 2009) and the Balance of Payments and
International Investment Position Manual (BPM) (International Monetary Fund, 2009). The SNA
framework is designed with a set of inter-related balanced accounts for five domestic institutional
sectors and an additional account for transactions and positions with the rest of world. The BPM
framework is also designed with a set of inter-related balanced accounts that provide more detail
on the SNA rest of world account. The SNA and BPM frameworks are intentionally harmonized to
ensure a consistent treatment of rest of world transactions, other flows, and positions in each
framework.
       Under SNA and BPM recommendations, rest of world transactions are attributable to
economies based on the residences of transacting entities. Under this treatment, affiliates within
multinational enterprises (MNEs) are considered resident in the economies in which they are
located. While the residence of an entity is generally the economy in which the entity is physically
located, an entity with few or no attributes of physical presence – such as a holding company or a
special purpose entity – is considered resident in its economy of legal incorporation or registration.
In this case, the entity is not consolidated with its parent unless the entity is resident in the same
economy as its parent. As a result, economic accounts for a given economy reflect transactions,
other flows, and positions that are recorded in each resident entity’s separate accounting records—
known as the method of separate accounting.
       A trend in the last couple of decades is MNEs that are structured with holding companies
or special purpose entities that are created for purposes other than production. In particular, MNEs
have access to countries that vary widely in corporate tax rates, which enables profit-maximizing
MNEs to legally take advantage of differences in national tax regimes and shift profits from high
tax countries to low tax countries through transfer pricing and complex global structuring that
generally includes holding companies or special purposes entities. Sanchirico (2015) describes
these strategies as “unsoundably elaborate and only rarely publicly visible” (page 210), and they

                                                                                                    1
have generated concern among official statistics compilers and users of official statistics regarding
the SNA and BPM treatment of transactions within MNEs and their effects on economic accounting
measures.1
         In the U.S. economic accounts, the treatment of transactions within MNEs under the
residence concept is generally consistent with SNA and BPM recommendations. As a result,
Guvenen, Mataloni, Rassier, and Ruhl (2017) study offshore profit shifting within MNEs as a
source of the measured slowdown in U.S. productivity growth.2                           Under the international
guidelines, profits shifted out of the U.S. may generate low measures of domestic real value-added
growth in official statistics, yielding a slowdown in related measured productivity growth. In
contrast to the method of separate accounting, the authors construct an adjusted time series of
business sector real value-added that is based on a measurement methodology known as formulary
apportionment. Under formulary apportionment, the total worldwide earnings of MNEs are
attributed to locations based on apportionment factors such as compensation and sales that aim to
capture the true location of economic activity.                       Since earnings by U.S. MNEs are
disproportionately booked to low tax jurisdictions in which little real economic activity occurs, the
result is a net reattribution of earnings on U.S. direct investment abroad (USDIA) from tax-
advantaged locations to U.S. parents. Holding prices constant, the reattribution generates an
implied increase in measured domestic business sector real value-added and related measured
labor productivity growth.3
         In this paper, we use the same adjustments of profit shifting by U.S. MNEs calculated in
Guvenen et al. (2017) for value-added in the production account to empirically demonstrate how
“offshore profit shifting” – profit shifting accomplished through rest of world transactions – affects
other key economic accounting measures throughout the SNA and BPM frameworks for the United
States in 2014. We limit the scope of adjustments to U.S. MNEs because complete data are not
available for foreign MNEs operating in the United States. Consistent with Guvenen et al. (2017),


1
  See, for example, Lipsey (2010), Rassier (2017), and United Nations et al. (2011).
2
  Other studies that consider possible measurement explanations for the recent productivity slowdown include
Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011), Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016), Byrne, Oliner and Sichel (2015), Mokyr
(2014), and Syverson (2017).
3
  Guvenen et al. (2017) do not adjust price indices for any effects that may be caused by transfer pricing. The authors
apply their nominal adjustment series to nominal value-added and deflate the adjusted measures of value-added using
existing price indices—both aggregate and industry-level indices. Thus, the authors make an implicit assumption that
profit shifting made possible by global structuring primarily affects volume measures rather than price measures. If
transfer prices are consistent over time or reflect arm’s length values, this assumption is reasonable.

                                                                                                                     2
we determine offshore profit shifting as the difference between measures derived under formulary
apportionment and measures derived under separate accounting. We then apply the aggregate
adjustments to relevant published aggregates in each of the SNA and BPM frameworks. We focus
on the effects of our adjustments on nominal measures and do not attempt to split the adjustments
into volume and price effects. In addition to effects on key economic accounting measures, we
present implications for common analytic uses of the U.S. economic accounts, including the labor
share of income, national saving rates, returns on domestic non-financial business, returns on
foreign direct investment, and external balances.
       For 2014, we find notable changes in key economic accounting measures throughout the
U.S. economic accounts, which may have significant implications for their analytic uses. Our
adjustments yield a 3.5 percent increase in U.S. operating surplus, which generates a 1.5 percent
increase in U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) as a result of an implied increase in output that is
used as services exports. Likewise, we find a 33.5 percent decrease in U.S. income receivable
from the rest of world, which is overwhelmingly attributable to a decrease in earnings on USDIA
with a small amount attributable to net interest receivable on USDIA. In dollar amounts, the
increase in operating surplus is offset by a larger decrease in income receivable from the rest of
world. As a result of these offsetting effects, U.S. gross national income (GNI) and gross national
disposable income decrease by 0.1 percent, while gross national saving decreases by 0.8 percent
and national borrowing increases by 6.9 percent. Finally, net worth in the balance sheet decreases
by 0.3 percent.
       The results for analytic uses include a decrease for the labor share of income of 1.4 to 2.4
percentage points because the additional domestic income accrues to capital rather than labor and
include a decrease for the return on USDIA of 5.0 percentage points because the adjusted income
on USDIA decreases proportionally more than the decrease in the stock of direct investment assets.
The results for analytic uses also include an increase for the trade in services balance as a
percentage of GDP of 1.4 percentage points because the additional services exports are
proportionally higher than the increase in GDP and include an increase for the return on domestic
non-financial business of 1.3 percentage points, assuming no change in the stock of produced
assets. Changes for the national saving rate and the current account balance as a percentage of
GDP are negligible.



                                                                                                 3
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes related tax
literature and measurement literature. Section 3 outlines the SNA and BPM frameworks. Section
4 explains our empirical approach and the data. Section 5 presents results and a related discussion.
Section 6 summarizes our conclusions.


2. Related Literature
       Most of the evidence on MNE profit shifting comes from cross-country regressions of
MNE profits on tax rates, which generally find a strong relationship between differential tax rates
and income attribution. Dharmapala (2014) provides a comprehensive survey of the profit shifting
literature. In early work, Hines and Rice (1994) use cross-country regressions to study profit
shifting behavior of U.S. MNEs in 1982. They find that U.S. MNEs report high profit rates in tax
havens and that the revenue-maximizing tax rate for a typical haven is between 5 and 8 percent.
Clausing (2016) uses estimates of the elasticity of MNE income to tax rates to compute the cross-
country distribution of MNE income and determine foregone U.S. tax revenue. She finds that
profit shifting amounts to about $258 billion in 2012. Dowd et al. (2017) also compute elasticities
to determine how MNEs alter the global allocation of profits in response to changes in tax rates.
They find that log-linear specifications may understate the sensitivity of profits in low-tax
jurisdictions with the opposite effect in high-tax jurisdictions. In addition to these academic
studies, country-level indicators of base erosion and profit shifting are offered by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (2015a).
       Measurement challenges imposed on economic accountants by MNE profit shifting are
widely addressed in the literature. Under separate accounting, profit shifting has been shown
empirically to generate questionable outcomes for some published supplemental income-based
value-added measures on U.S. MNEs (Lipsey, 2010; Rassier and Koncz-Bruner, 2015). However,
no empirical study comprehensively traces the effects of profit shifting throughout the SNA and
BPM frameworks. Three papers in United Nations et al. (2011) are dedicated to identifying and
explaining challenges associated with allocating production of MNEs and special purpose entities
to national economies. In addition, Lipsey (2010) concludes that some U.S. supplemental statistics
on financial and operating activities of foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs are affected by global
structuring and the mobility of some factors of production such as intangible assets. Lipsey (2010)
suggests, but does not develop, an alternative to separate accounting for measuring transactions in

                                                                                                   4
services and intellectual property. Early work by Baldwin and Kimura (1998) and Kimura and
Baldwin (1998) also suggests supplemental concepts for organizing foreign direct investment and
trade statistics based on ownership. Landefeld et al. (1993) evaluate ownership-based trade
measures and propose an alternative residence-based trade measure.
       Formulary apportionment has been primarily applied in multijurisdictional tax practice.
The treatment of global income under formulary apportionment is explored in multidisciplinary
research (Gordon and Wilson, 1986; Clausing and Avi-Yonah, 2007), and formulary
apportionment has been proposed as an alternative to the complexity and subjectivity of transfer
pricing for the allocation of international tax obligations within multinationals in studies such as
Avi-Yonah (2010) and Fuest, Hemmelgam, and Ramb (2007). However, formulary apportionment
also presents challenges from a tax policy perspective, which is demonstrated in Altshuler and
Grubert (2010) and Hines (2010). Because firm-level data collected on statistical surveys may
only be used for statistical purposes and not for the purpose of taxation or regulation, formulary
apportionment applied in economic accounting faces fewer challenges compared to its use in
international taxation.


3. Accounting Frameworks
       Offshore profit shifting imposes two challenges for the treatment of MNEs in the SNA and
BPM frameworks. First, transactions within MNEs are valued using transfer pricing methods that
may fail to resemble market outcomes, which is the preferred basis for all transactions recognized
in the SNA and BPM. Second, MNEs are structured with holding companies and special purpose
entities that may not engage in actual production because such structuring simply facilitates the
strategic location of intangible productive assets and related income as well as the artificial
characterization of financial claims and liabilities.
       One common arrangement among MNEs is a series of sublicensing transactions on
intellectual property that results when the intellectual property is legally owned, in whole or in
part, by a holding company in a low-tax jurisdiction. In economic accounts, these arrangements
can affect production and related income measures such as GDP and operating surplus because
legal ownership of intellectual property is often used as a practical solution to determine economic
ownership. Another common arrangement is the characterization of a financial instrument as debt
in one jurisdiction and as equity in another jurisdiction to take advantage of differences in

                                                                                                  5
taxability of interest and dividend flows. In this case, economic accounting measures such as GNI
can be affected as a result of interest and dividend flows. The consequences of these and similar
arrangements is a wedge between the location of production, the location of underlying factors of
production, and the location of means for financing production, which affects the interpretability
of key economic accounting measures in the SNA and BPM frameworks.
3.1. Overview of the SNA and BPM Frameworks
        The SNA framework is divided into five domestic institutional sectors that include financial
corporations, non-financial corporations, general government, households, and non-profit
institutions serving households. For each sector, the SNA groups accounts according to whether
they include current transactions or transactions and flows in the accumulation of assets and
liabilities. The “current accounts” include a production account and multiple income accounts that
reflect the generation, distribution, redistribution, and use of income.         The “accumulation
accounts” include a capital account that records transactions in non-financial assets and a financial
account that records transactions in financial assets and liabilities. The accumulation accounts also
include accounts for other changes in assets and liabilities that are not a result of transactions. In
addition to the current accounts and the accumulation accounts, the SNA framework includes a
balance sheet that records opening and closing stocks as well as changes between them for non-
financial assets, financial assets, liabilities, and resulting net worth.
        The balanced structure of the SNA is made possible by the inclusion of a goods and services
account and by balancing items or residuals in each account. The goods and services account
supports the fundamental accounting identity that the supply of goods and services from domestic
output and imports must equal the uses of goods and services for intermediate consumption, final
consumption, capital formation, and exports. The balancing items link one account to the next in
a sequence of accounts that includes the production account, income accounts, capital account,
and financial account. The SNA balancing items are generally considered key measures in the SNA
framework because they help guide macroeconomic policy—they include items such as value-
added, operating surplus, national income, disposable income, saving, net lending/borrowing, and
net worth.
        In addition to the five domestic institutional sectors, the SNA framework includes a set of
accounts for transactions and positions with the rest of world, which are also included with more
detail in the BPM framework. Like the SNA framework, the BPM framework is a sequence of

                                                                                                    6
accounts with balancing items or residuals. In addition, concepts and definitions are intentionally
harmonized between the SNA and BPM. There are, however, two notable differences in scope and
two notable organizational differences between the two frameworks.
        One difference in scope is that the SNA framework includes three core accounts that are
not necessary in the BPM framework: production account, generation of income account, and use
of income account. The second difference in scope is that every transaction in the SNA framework
is recorded from the perspective of each institutional sector to the transaction, which requires a
quadruple entry accounting system with a debit and a credit for each sector. As a result, rest of
world transactions in the SNA framework are recorded from the perspective of the rest of world.
In contrast, each transaction in the BPM framework is recorded only from the perspective of
resident institutional sectors, which allows for a more traditional double entry accounting system.
        One organizational difference is that the BPM groups accounts according to whether they
contribute to the balance of payments or the international investment position. The “balance of
payments” consists of a current account, a capital account, and a financial account. The current
account in the balance of payments includes a goods and services account and two income
accounts. Entries in the current account generally capture current transactions, which is akin to
the current accounts of the SNA. The “international investment position” records beginning and
ending positions as well as changes between them for financial assets (i.e., claims of residents on
non-residents or reserves) and liabilities (i.e., claims of non-residents on residents), which is akin
to the balance sheet of the SNA. Changes between beginning and ending positions are attributable
to financial account transactions and other changes in financial assets and liabilities that are not a
result of transactions.
        The second organizational difference between the SNA and BPM frameworks is
classification of financial assets and liabilities. The SNA classifies financial assets and liabilities
by type of instrument (e.g., currency, debt, equity, etc.). In addition to instrument classification,
the BPM classifies financial assets and liabilities by functional category (e.g., direct investment,
portfolio investment, reserve assets, etc.). Transactions among MNE parents and affiliates are
included in the direct investment category.
        Like balancing items in the SNA framework, balancing items in the BPM framework are
generally considered key measures because they have implications for macroeconomic policy—
they include items such as the balance on goods and services, the current account balance, net

                                                                                                     7
lending/borrowing, and the net international investment position. Figure 1 provides an overview
of the SNA and BPM frameworks.
3.2. Institutional Units and Residence
       The most basic unit of observation in the SNA and BPM is an institutional unit, which
satisfies four criteria including the right to own assets and incur liabilities, the ability to make
economic decisions and to be held legally accountable for the decisions, and the existence of a
complete set of financial accounting records for the unit (or the feasibility of compiling a complete
set). The SNA and BPM attribute stocks of assets and liabilities and related flows to an economy
based on the residence of the institutional unit. Residence is the economic territory in which an
institutional unit has a center of predominant economic interest, which is generally defined in the
SNA and BPM as a physical location from which the unit engages in economic activity and
transactions. An economic territory in the SNA and BPM is defined as the legal jurisdiction to
which an institutional unit is subject. The SNA and BPM concepts of economic territory and
residence are designed to attribute the stocks and flows of an institutional unit based on residence
in a single economic territory, including stocks and flows within MNEs.
       In the case of an MNE structured with a holding company or a special purpose entity that
lacks physical presence, residence for the holding company or special purpose entity is determined
in the SNA and BPM as the economic territory under whose legal jurisdiction the unit is
incorporated or registered. If the unit is legally located in the same economy as its parent, the unit
is consolidated with the parent and not recognized as a separate institutional unit because it does
not satisfy the four SNA and BPM criteria for an institutional unit. However, if the unit is legally
located in an economy different from its parent, the unit is recognized as a separate institutional
unit. As a result, the SNA and BPM frameworks include stocks and flows within MNEs regardless
of any physical economic activity.
       The SNA and BPM recommendations to recognize an institutional unit based on legal
registration or incorporation of holding companies and special purpose entities introduces an
exception to the recommendation for determining residence based on predominant economic
interest. The recommendation raises concerns for effects on “real” economic accounting measures
such as GDP and GNI since holding companies and special purpose entities are used by MNEs for
transactions in intellectual property and other services.       However, the recommendation is
important to users of economic accounts such as central banks and other institutions responsible

                                                                                                    8
for supervising financial markets since holding companies and special purpose entities are also
used by MNEs to facilitate financing arrangements and to channel funds in a way that can expose
MNEs and compiling economies to global financial risks.
3.3. Accounting Identities and Relationships
        Based on the formulary methodology that we outline in section 4, we will be making
adjustments to three measures: operating surplus, earnings on USDIA, and net interest receivable
on USDIA. Before we make our adjustments, we first outline the relationships among the
measures. We focus on production and primary income measures because we do not make
adjustments to secondary income measures or measures of capital formation.
        The most fundamental accounting identity in the SNA framework is the supply-use identity,
which is embodied in the goods and services account. The intuition of the supply-use identity is
that the total amount of goods and services available for use in an economy for a given period must
be supplied by either domestic output ( ) or imports ( ). The uses of goods and services include
intermediate consumption ( ), final consumption ( ), capital formation ( ), and exports ( ). The
following equation summarizes the supply-use identity:
                                  .                                                                           (1)
If we rearrange equation (1) as follows, the result yields two familiar approaches to measuring
GDP:
                                  .                                                                           (2)
The left side of equation (2) yields the production approach and the right side yields the
expenditure approach—both government expenditures and private expenditures are included in
and .
        An additional approach to measuring GDP is the income approach, which is a matter of
summing the incomes generated through production. Incomes generated through production
include compensation of employees ( ), taxes ( ) less subsidies                   on production and imports,
and operating surplus ( ).4 Each of the approaches to GDP can be summarized as follows:
                                                                                      .                       (3)




4
  Operating surplus may either be measured as a residual or measured directly in which case the primary components
include entrepreneurial income of enterprises and rental income on owner-occupied housing.

                                                                                                                9
In the SNA sequence of accounts, the production account reflects the production approach to
measuring GDP. In addition, the generation of income account reflects the income approach and
the goods and services account reflects the expenditure approach.
Operating Surplus
         In the SNA framework, operating surplus is a domestic measure—i.e., it is not calculated
in the rest of world account and it is not included in the BPM framework. To better understand
operating surplus, we start with a simplified version of net income ( ) for a domestic firm (either
MNE or non-MNE), which is the difference between total income and total expenditures.5 Total
income includes sales of output ( ), holding gains ( ), earnings on equity ( ), and interest
receivable ( ).6 Total expenditures include intermediate inputs ( ), payments for labor ( ),
income taxes payable ( ), and interest payable ( ). Net income for the firm can be written as
follows:
                                                          .                                                          (4)

Note that earnings on equity and interest flows may include transactions with directly held foreign
affiliates when the domestic firm is an MNE.
         To derive a measure of operating surplus, equation (4) is adjusted to exclude all
components that do not result directly from current production, including holding gains, earnings
on equity, interest receivable, income taxes payable, and interest payable. The result is as follows:
                                                .                                                                    (5)
The first two terms in equation (5) (i.e.,          minus ) reflect a measure of value-added, and the last
term (i.e.,    ) is a measure of compensation, which reflects labor’s contribution to value-added.
Thus, operating surplus is invariant to all flows that do not result directly from current production.7




5
  In this simplified version, we ignore taxes and subsidies on production and imports, economic depreciation on
property, plant and equipment, rents on natural resources, and other income and expenditures, such as transfers, that
are not explicitly included. We also assume the domestic firm has no indirect holdings in foreign affiliates.
6
  For economic accounting purposes, the scope of sales           may include explicit sales of products to customers or
may include implicit sales of output such as own-account software.
7
  Operating surplus is measured for all institutional sectors except the rest of world in the SNA framework. In contrast,
entrepreneurial income is only measured for the non-financial and financial corporations sectors. To derive a measure
of entrepreneurial income, operating surplus in equation (5) is adjusted to include earnings on equity, interest
receivable, and interest payable. Thus, entrepreneurial income is only invariant to holding gains and income taxes
payable. We do not articulate a measure of entrepreneurial income separate from operating surplus in this paper
because we present all sectors as one total economy.

                                                                                                                     10
Income on Foreign Direct Investment
        In the SNA and BPM frameworks, foreign direct investment by a domestic firm is treated
as a financial asset, and income on foreign direct investment reflects a return on that asset. Income
on foreign direct investment includes two components: earnings and net interest receivable.
Earnings on foreign direct investment include the domestic firm’s share of a foreign affiliate’s
earnings, whether distributed or reinvested. Since they reflect a return on a financial asset, earnings
on foreign direct investment are derived by adjusting net income from equation (4) for the foreign
affiliate to exclude holding gains only.8 The calculation of earnings on direct investment in a
wholly-owned foreign affiliate ( ) is as follows:9
                                                                          .                                      (6)
Foreign income taxes payable directly by the foreign affiliate are included in equation (6) because
they reduce the domestic firm’s return.
        Net interest receivable on foreign direct investment includes interest receivable by the
domestic firm from the foreign affiliate less interest payable by the domestic firm to the foreign
affiliate. Net interest receivable by the domestic firm from the foreign affiliate is exactly equal to
net interest payable by the foreign affiliate to the domestic firm, which if all interest flows in
equation (6) are between the domestic firm and the foreign affiliate, can be calculated as follows:
                                                           .                                                     (7)
Adding equations (6) and (7) yields the following equation for income on foreign direct
investment:
                                                           .                                                     (8)
Note that equation (6) can be subtracted from equation (8) to obtain a measure of net interest
receivable on foreign direct investment as shown in equation (7)—this is the approach we take in
computing the adjustment for net interest receivable. Since equation (7) assumes that all interest
flows are between the domestic firm and the foreign affiliate, equation (8) includes no interest
flows. However, interest flows may likely exist between the foreign affiliate and unrelated firms.



8
  Since holding gains reflect changes in prices rather than production, they are not included in SNA and BPM measures
of income. They are instead reflected in the SNA and BPM revaluation accounts, which contribute to changes in net
worth and the international investment position.
9
  For a majority-owned foreign affiliate that is not 100 percent owned, equation (6) would need to include the parent
firm’s ownership share in the foreign affiliate.

                                                                                                                 11
         Intuitively, income on foreign direct investment reflects “actual” income after the
elimination of intrafirm interest flows, and earnings on foreign direct investment reflects amounts
booked to each part of the firm. Measures comparable to equations (6) and (8) for the foreign
affiliate can also be calculated for the domestic firm in order to generate consolidated measures of
earnings and income for the entire MNE.
Gross National Income
         The difference between GDP and GNI in the SNA framework is income receivable from
and payable to the rest of world, which can be summarized as follows:
                                                                                                   .10        (9)
Income receivable from and payable to the rest of world includes income on foreign direct
investment, income on portfolio investment, income on other investment, and income on reserve
assets. Offshore profit shifting may affect each of the right-side components of equation (9).
However, we only calculate adjustments for GDP and income receivable from the rest of world
due to limited data on foreign MNEs that would be required to adjust income payable to rest of
world.


4. Empirical Approach and Data
         Our objective is to demonstrate the effects of offshore profit shifting on key U.S. economic
accounting measures that are compiled under a method of separate accounting. As explained in
section 3, profit shifting within MNEs is generally accomplished under separate accounting
through transfer pricing and global structuring that includes the use of holding companies or
special purpose entities with very little physical presence and very little economic activity. While
the identification of a typical institutional unit under the SNA and BPM recommendations depends
on the four criteria that generally reflect economic substance, the SNA and BPM make an exception
for holding companies and special purpose entities that are located in economies other than their
parents or other affiliated entities. As a result, key measures throughout the SNA and BPM
frameworks may not adequately capture the economic activity of some MNE entities. Thus, we
follow Guvenen et al. (2017) and design an empirical framework to attribute economic accounting



10
  GNI is an SNA term for income earned by domestic-owned factors of production anywhere in the world. In the
U.S., the equivalent of GNI is gross national product (GNP), which is derived from expenditure-based GDP by adding
income receivable from the rest of world and subtracting income payable to the rest of world.

                                                                                                               12
measures based on physical presence and other attributes of economic activity within MNEs. In
particular, we use formulary apportionment to reattribute operating surplus, earnings, and net
interest received by U.S. parents from their foreign affiliates.
        Formulary apportionment attributes measures to locations based on apportionment factors
intended to reflect economic activity of each entity in an MNE—the essence of the SNA and BPM
concepts of institutional unit and residence. For our apportionment factors, we use compensation
and sales to unaffiliated parties. Compensation reflects labor’s contribution to production. In
contrast to employment, which only captures number of employees, compensation captures
variation in returns to labor across entities located in different countries and industries, assuming
workers are paid their marginal products. Likewise, the market presence of each entity is captured
by the sales measure, and restricting sales to unaffiliated parties mitigates problems with transfer
pricing and global structuring.          Under each factor, formulary apportionment allocates less
economic activity (e.g., operating surplus) to locations with low-paid workers and low market
presence than to locations with high-paid workers and high market presence.11
        In addition to the conceptual basis of our chosen apportionment factors, there are two
practical considerations that support formulary apportionment as a reasonable alternative to
separate accounting. First, formulary apportionment is suggested in the SNA as a potential
alternative to allocate the market value of global firms in the balance sheet. As a result, formulary
apportionment should also be a reasonable potential alternative to allocate production and income
measures. Second, in contrast to the opacity of separate accounting under complex global
structuring, formulary apportionment promotes transparency because it is easy to understand and
easy to apply if appropriate data are available.
        In lieu of formulary apportionment, another option for allocating measures on holding
companies and special purpose entities is a treatment that either consolidates them entirely with
their parents or considers them supranational entities with no location as suggested for intellectual
property products in Moulton and Van de Ven (2018). If the apportionment factors for a holding
company or special purpose entity reflect no economic activity (e.g., no compensation and no
unaffiliated sales), then formulary apportionment allocates measures away entirely from the


11
  Under country-by-country reporting, the Organization for Economic Cooperating and Development (2015b) asserts
that indicators such as profits, income taxes paid, revenue, number of employees, and tangible assets of individual
MNE entities should help tax administrations determine the location of economic activity and evaluate the presence
of audit risk.

                                                                                                                13
holding company or special purpose entity and toward other entities within the firm where
economic activity is evident. The measures are split between the parent and other entities based
on their own proportionate shares of economic activity reflected in the apportionment factors. As
a result, formulary apportionment strikes a balance between the current treatment of holding
companies and special purpose entities as completely separate institutional units and a treatment
that either consolidates them entirely with their parents or considers them supranational entities
with no location.
         Despite the strengths associated with formulary apportionment as a measurement tool, note
that we are not proposing formulary apportionment as a replacement for separate accounting in the
SNA and BPM but rather using it to generate a point of reference to estimate the effects of profit
shifting under a method of separate accounting.
4.1. Formulary Apportionment
         Consider an MNE ( ) that is composed of one domestic parent and at least one foreign
affiliate. Let         denote operating surplus, earnings, or income determined under a method of
separate accounting for each entity ( ) (i.e., parent and foreign affiliates). Following Guvenen et
al. (2017), we construct for each entity in the MNE an apportionment weight (                     ) that reflects the
entity’s share of the total apportionment factors. Weighting unaffiliated sales and compensation
equally yields the following apportionment weights for each entity within the MNE:

                   ∑                    ∑
                                                      ∀    ∈     .12                                             (10)


Under formulary apportionment, measured operating surplus, earnings, or income ( ) attributable
to each entity     within MNE           is calculated as follows:
               ∑          ∀    ∈    .                                                                            (11)
The measure attributable to each entity under formulary apportionment is a weighted average of
the consolidated measure determined for the MNE (i.e., parent and foreign affiliates) under
separate accounting. Thus, measured operating surplus, earnings, or income attributable to each




12
   Results will be affected by the chosen apportionment factors, and papers such as Runkel and Schjelderup (2011)
contribute to a body of literature that focuses solely on the choice of apportionment factors. Guvenen et al. (2017)
present alternative results under different weights on the apportionment factors – weighting compensation 100 percent
and unaffiliated sales 100 percent in separate calculations – and find that their results are robust to the alternative
weighting schemes. They ultimately settle on a simple average for their core results.

                                                                                                                   14
entity is proportionate to the entity’s economic activity embodied by the chosen apportionment
factors.
           The formulary adjustment for each entity is calculated by subtracting the measure
determined under separate accounting from the measure determined under formulary
apportionment as follows:
                        ∀    ∈    .                                                                          (12)
The formulary adjustment for each entity reflects an amount of operating surplus, earnings, or
income to be added to or subtracted from each entity, depending on whether the adjustment is
positive or negative. The aggregate formulary adjustment for U.S. parents is exactly equal (with
an opposite sign) to the aggregate formulary adjustment for their foreign affiliates.
4.2. Data
           We use unpublished firm-level survey data collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) on the financial and operating activities of U.S. MNEs – referred to as the activities of
multinational enterprise (AMNE) data – and on the direct investment income transactions of U.S.
MNEs for 2014.13 The AMNE data cover the worldwide operations of U.S. MNEs and contain
balance sheet information and income statement information for U.S. parents and their foreign
affiliates. For each U.S. parent and foreign affiliate, the data include information on net income
and the components of total income and total expenditures consistent with equation (4) under
separate accounting. In addition, the data include compensation and unaffiliated sales for each
U.S. parent and foreign affiliate necessary for the apportionment weights in equation (10).
Moreover, the AMNE data include information necessary to construct measures of operating
surplus, earnings, and income equivalent to equations (5), (6), and (8) for each U.S. parent and
foreign affiliate. The direct investment income transactions data include data on earnings of
foreign affiliates and interest flows between U.S. parents and foreign affiliates.14
           In addition to the firm-level survey data, we use published data for 2014 from the U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs), the U.S. Industry Economic Accounts (IEAs),


13
   The financial and operating data are reported on the Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (form
BE-10) for all U.S. parents and all foreign affiliates. The income transactions data are reported on the Quarterly
Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad Direct Transactions of U.S. Reporter with Foreign Affiliates (form BE-577)
subject to thresholds for assets, sales, and net income.
14
   The income transactions data do not include information on operations that are needed to construct the
apportionment factors. Likewise, the data do not include information on U.S. parents. In order to get a complete
picture of each U.S. MNE, we use the AMNE data to generate proxies for earnings and income.

                                                                                                               15
the U.S. Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts (IMAs), the U.S. International Transactions
Accounts (ITAs), and the U.S. International Investment Position (IIP) accounts. We use the NIPA
data and the IEA data to compile the SNA current accounts, and we use the IMA data to compile
the SNA accumulation accounts and balance sheets. We use the ITA data to compile the BPM
balance of payments, and we use the IIP data to compile the BPM international investment
position.15
4.3. Adjustments
        We calculate formulary adjustments as shown in equation (12) using the measures
constructed from the BEA survey data – operating surplus, earnings, and income – for each U.S.
parent and each foreign affiliate. We then tabulate the formulary adjustments for each measure to
derive an aggregate adjustment for domestic operating surplus, earnings on USDIA, and income
on USDIA. To derive an aggregate formulary adjustment for net interest receivable on USDIA
consistent with equation (7), we subtract the aggregate adjustment for earnings on USDIA from
the aggregate adjustment for income on USDIA.
        Since the scope of our adjustments is limited to U.S. MNEs due to data limitations, we can
rewrite equation (9) to focus exclusively on incomes receivable on USDIA as follows:
                                                                                                   / ⋯.        (13)
The ellipsis in equation (13) denotes all omitted incomes receivable and payable that account for
differences between GDP and GNI. We apply our aggregate formulary adjustments constructed
with the unpublished survey data to the relevant published aggregates in each of the SNA and BPM
frameworks. In particular, we apply our aggregate adjustment for operating surplus to U.S. GDP.
Likewise, we apply our aggregate adjustment for earnings on USDIA to the portion of earnings on
USDIA that is calculated as reinvested since dividends reflect an actual payment. Finally, we
apply our aggregate adjustment for net interest receivable on USDIA to the interest portion of
income on USDIA.




15
  In practice, there are statistical discrepancies between key measures for the U.S. – such as net lending/borrowing
and trade balances – in the NIPAs, IMAs, ITAs, and IIP as a result of different source data and measurement
methodologies. We do not attempt to reconcile the discrepancies but rather use data as published in each of the
accounts.

                                                                                                                 16
5. Results
         Our formulary adjustment for operating surplus in equation (5) amounts to a $255.5 billion
increase in U.S. operating surplus in 2014, which implies that level of value-added attributable to
foreign affiliates of U.S. MNEs under a method of separate accounting is instead attributable to
U.S. parents under a method of formulary apportionment. Likewise, our adjustment for earnings
on USDIA in equation (6) amounts to a $273.1 billion decrease in earnings on USDIA, which
reflects earnings attributable to foreign operations of U.S.-owned firms under separate accounting
that are no longer attributable under formulary apportionment because they are accrued
domestically. In addition, the adjustment for net interest receivable on USDIA amounts to an $8.7
billion decrease, which is the difference between the adjustment for income on USDIA of $281.8
billion calculated with equation (8) and the adjustment for earnings on USDIA of $273.1 billion.
The adjustment for net interest suggests that financing arrangements between U.S. parents and
foreign affiliates also raise the measure of income on USDIA under the SNA and BPM
recommendations for separate accounting. For each of the adjustments, about 75 percent of the
adjustment is attributable to foreign affiliates classified as holding companies, which is consistent
with profit shifting accomplished through the use of holding companies and special purpose
entities.
         We present three sets of adjusted and unadjusted (i.e., published) measures. The first set
(tables 1.1 to 1.2 and 2.1 to 2.2) shows adjusted and unadjusted measures for the U.S. in the BPM
framework. The second set (tables 3.1 to 3.3) shows adjusted and unadjusted measures for the
U.S. in the SNA framework. The SNA and BPM sets of results demonstrate the effects of offshore
profit shifting on the key measures in each framework. The initial entries for our adjustments are
outlined in boxes in our presentation of the SNA and BPM accounts. In addition, the adjustments
are shown separately by type: operating surplus, earnings on USDIA, and net interest received on
USDIA.16 The third set of results includes figures to demonstrate implications for five common


16
   Although the standard presentation of BEA statistics on direct investment transactions, positions, and associated
income is on an asset-liability basis in accordance with international guidelines, we use a directional basis in tables
1.1 to 1.2 and 3.1 to 3.3. For our purposes, the directional basis is more analytically useful, and it is consistent with
the recording of direct investment in the U.S. IMAs. For equity, there is no difference between a directional basis and
an asset-liability basis. However, there is a difference for debt. Measures of direct investment transactions and
earnings are shown with current cost adjustment in tables 1.1 to 1.2 and 3.1 to 3.3. Direct investment positions are
shown at market value in tables 2.1 to 2.2. We provide a reconciliation of the direct investment position on a
directional basis with current cost adjustment and the direct investment position on an asset-liability basis at market
value in appendix table A1.

                                                                                                                     17
analytic uses of the U.S. economic accounts: labor share of income, national saving rates, returns
on domestic non-financial business, returns on foreign direct investment, and external balances.
5.1. BPM Measures
         The BPM balance of payments is presented in table 1.1. In the goods and services account,
we apply the $255.5 billion adjustment for operating surplus as an implied increase in charges for
the use of intellectual property (row 14) by foreign affiliates. The increase in measured exports of
goods and services is 10.8 percent, which is a result of the increase in U.S. exports of services with
no change for trade in goods.
         The treatment of the adjustment as charges for the use of intellectual property is consistent
with a simple model outlined in Guvenen et al. (2017) that attributes profit shifting made possible
by the mobility of intangible capital. Likewise, the treatment is consistent with literature that
focuses on intangible capital as an explanation for higher rates of return earned by U.S. MNEs on
their direct investments abroad compared with rates of return earned by foreign MNEs on their
direct investments in the U.S. (McGrattan and Prescott, 2010; Bridgman, 2014). Intangible capital
may result from research and development (R&D) efforts, which are generally embodied in
observable measures such as patents or formulas in addition to a firm’s profits. Intangible capital
may also result from efforts other than R&D such as brand and trademark development,
management consulting, and workforce training, which are generally less observable but still
reflected in the firm’s profits. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) refer to the latter form of
intangible capital as “economic competencies” and subsequent authors have referred to it as
“organization capital” (e.g., Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013). We consider transactions (explicit
and implicit) in both forms of intangible capital to be candidates for charges for the use of
intellectual property.
         In the primary income account in table 1.1, we apply the $273.1 billion adjustment for
earnings on USDIA as a decrease in reinvested earnings (row 25). Likewise, we apply the $8.7
billion adjustment for net interest received on USDIA as a decrease in interest flows (row 26),
which we consider a change in the price of intrafirm lending (i.e., arm’s length interest rates) rather
than a change in the underlying stocks of intrafirm debt.17 In addition, the adjustment for net


17
   This treatment means we do not adjust the underlying stocks of intrafirm debt. In reality, the result may suggest
changes in both the price of intrafirm lending and stocks of intrafirm debt. In either case, the result is counterintuitive
if firms engage in intrafirm financing arrangements to shift profits—a practice known as earnings stripping. In a
report to Congress, the U.S. Treasury Department (2007) concludes that U.S. MNEs are less inclined to engage in

                                                                                                                       18
interest implies either a decrease in interest received by U.S. parents from their foreign affiliates
or an increase in interest paid by U.S. parents to their foreign affiliates.18 The decrease in measured
income receivable from non-residents is 34.9 percent. We do not calculate any measured effects
in the secondary income account.
         The positive effects of the operating surplus adjustment in the goods and services account
are more than offset by the larger negative adjustments for earnings and net interest received on
USDIA in the primary income account. Thus, the net effect on the current account balance (row
1) in table 1.1 is a $26.4 billion decrease—7.1 percent. Measured U.S. net borrowing (row 35)
increases as a result of changes in the preceding accounts. The only change in the financial account
in table 1.2 is on measured equity (rows 5 and 6) as a result of the previous adjustment transactions,
which also increases net borrowing in the financial account. The increases in measured U.S. net
borrowing in both the current and capital accounts and the financial account are 7.1 percent and
8.1 percent, respectively, the difference of which is a result of the statistical discrepancy between
the two accounts.
         The BPM international investment position for 2014 is presented in table 2.1. Since the
international investment position reflects stocks of assets and liabilities, we include accumulations
for each of our adjustment measures in the financial account for 1973-2014 using annual estimates
from Guvenen et al. (2017). The cumulative adjustments for operating surplus, earnings on
USDIA, and net interest received on USDIA (row 3) from the financial account are $3.457 trillion,
$3.587 trillion, and $145.4 billion, respectively.                    The decrease in measured international
investment position assets is 1.1 percent because the increases in services exports are less than the
decreases in reinvested earnings and net interest receivable on USDIA over time. Thus, the
decrease in the measured net international investment position is 4.0 percent.



earnings stripping than foreign MNEs operating in the U.S. because U.S. firms are subject to anti-deferral rules and
passive income rules under U.S. Treasury Regulations that do not apply to foreign firms. BEA’s published statistics
on direct investment seem to support this conclusion. In 2014, U.S. affiliates’ payments of interest to foreign parents
were $30.0 billion on $945.8 billion of debt – an implied interest rate of 3.2 percent – and U.S. affiliates’ interest
receipts were $4.6 billion on $384.7 billion of debt – an implied interest rate of 1.2 percent – which suggests U.S.
affiliates incurred a higher interest expense per dollar of debt. In contrast, U.S. parents’ payments of interest to foreign
affiliates were $5.7 billion on $528.0 billion of debt – an implied interest rate of 1.1 percent – and U.S. parents’ interest
receipts were $14.7 billion on $764.6 billion of debt – an implied interest rate of 1.9 percent – which suggests U.S.
parents incurred lower interest expense per dollar of debt.
18
   The $8.7 billion decrease reduces net interest received by U.S. parents published for 2014 to almost nothing and
could generate a negative net interest received in some years. Since net interest received includes interest received
from foreign affiliates less interest paid to foreign affiliates, net interest received can be positive, negative, or zero.

                                                                                                                         19
         The BPM beginning and ending direct investment positions for 2014 are presented in table
2.2, which provides further detail on rows 2 to 4 in table 2.1. The difference between the
international investment position at the beginning and end of the year results from two sources:
financial transactions and other changes. Given the modest size of the net adjustments for financial
transactions – a decrease of $26.4 billion – we do not make an adjustment for other changes. For
the beginning net direct investment position (column 5), the cumulative adjustments decrease the
U.S. net direct investment position by 15.4 percent. For the ending net direct investment position
(column 8), the cumulative adjustments decrease the U.S. net direct investment position by 27.8
percent because the increases in services exports are less than the decreases in reinvested earnings
and net interest receivable on USDIA over time.
5.2. SNA Measures
         The SNA current accounts are presented in table 3.1. The $255.5 billion adjustment for
operating surplus in 2014 is a net reattribution of measured operating surplus from foreign
affiliates to U.S. parents, which we apply in the production account as an implied increase in output
(row 3) and in the goods and services account as an implied increase in exports (row 2) to account
for the increase in receipts on the use of intellectual property, which was presented in the
discussion of the BPM balance of payments in section 5.1. Thus, the supply-use identity is
maintained, and the statistical discrepancy is unaffected. The increase in GDP is 1.5 percent, and
the percentage increase in operating surplus is 3.5 percent.
         The $273.1 billion adjustment for earnings on USDIA is also a net reattribution of
measured earnings from foreign affiliates to U.S. parents, which we apply in the allocation of
primary income account as a decrease in reinvested earnings on foreign direct investment (row
20). Likewise, the $8.7 billion adjustment for net interest received on USDIA reflects a reduction
in measured net interest received by U.S. parents from their foreign affiliates, which we also apply
in the primary income account as a decrease in interest flows (row 18). The decrease in income
receivable from the rest of world for both adjustments is 33.5 percent, which is a bit lower than
the BPM measures as a result of the difference in the scope of rest of world transactions between
the two sets of accounts.19




19
  In the U.S. NIPAs, U.S. territories, Puerto Rico, and the Northern Mariana Islands are included in the rest of world.
In the U.S. ITAs, they are treated as part of the United States.

                                                                                                                    20
         From an accounting perspective, the adjustment for operating surplus in the production and
generation of income accounts may be expected to exactly offset the adjustments for earnings and
net interest received on USDIA in the allocation of primary income account. However, the effect
of the operating surplus adjustment is more than offset by the effect for earnings and net interest
received because of the differences in concepts outlined in section 3.3. Thus, the net effect on
measured GNI is a $26.4 billion decrease – about 0.1 percent – which we demonstrated is also the
change in the current account balance. Absent any related changes in the secondary distribution
of income account, the decrease in measured disposable income is also about 0.1 percent.
However, measured gross saving in the use of disposable income account decreases by 0.8 percent,
and measured net saving decreases by 4.3 percent. The $26.4 billion decrease in GNI, disposable
income, and saving is a contrast to the increase in operating surplus and GDP. However, the $26.4
billion decrease is small relative to the effects on operating surplus and income on USDIA. In
addition, all adjustments – operating surplus, earnings on USDIA, income on USDIA – are of
similar magnitudes.
         The SNA accumulation accounts are presented in table 3.2. The only change we include in
the capital account is the amount carried forward with the saving measure (row 36) from the use
of disposable income account. We do not reallocate capital formation in intellectual property
products.20 Likewise, the only change we include in the financial account is in equity (row 55) as
a result of the previous adjustment transactions—we assume the additional exports that result from
the operating surplus adjustment are financed with equity rather than debt. The balancing items
in the capital account and the financial account – net lending/borrowing – are also affected by the
net decrease of $26.4 billion in external transactions. The increase in measured U.S. net borrowing
in the capital account is 6.9 percent, and the increase in the financial account is 7.8 percent—the
difference between the percentages is a result of the statistical discrepancy between the two




20
  We do not make an effort to reallocate flows and stocks of intellectual property products for three reasons. First,
the income measures that we reallocate reflect returns to all intangible capital but intellectual property products are
only a subset of intangible capital. Second, intellectual property products in the U.S. national accounts are measured
as a sum of costs and any reallocation under formulary apportionment would, thus, be reduced by the extent to which
costs incurred consist of payments to unrelated parties and to labor. Third, to the extent that intellectual property
products consist of R&D expenditures, very little reallocation would likely result because the majority of R&D
expenditures by U.S. MNEs are incurred by U.S. parents and consist largely of payments to unrelated parties and to
labor. Of the $330.8 billion spent on R&D by U.S. MNEs in 2014, $275.5 billion – 83.3 percent – was incurred by
U.S. parents.

                                                                                                                   21
accounts. There are no measured effects in the other changes in the volume of assets account or
the revaluation account at the bottom of table 3.2.
       The SNA balance sheets are presented in table 3.3. Just like the BPM international
investment position, the SNA balance sheets reflect stocks of assets and liabilities, which requires
an accumulation of each of our adjustment measures using annual estimates from Guvenen et al.
(2017). The opening balance sheet at the top of table 3.3 presents the cumulative adjustments for
operating surplus, earnings on USDIA, and net interest received on USDIA for the period 1973-
2013. The closing balance sheet at the bottom of table 3.3 presents the cumulative adjustments for
the period 1973-2014. Retaining our assumption that the additional exports that result from the
operating surplus adjustment are financed with equity rather than debt, the cumulative adjustments
decrease measured U.S. equity assets by 0.5 – 0.6 percent for both the opening balance of equity
(row 77) and the closing balance of equity (row 102) because the increases in operating surplus
are less than the decreases in income receivable from rest of world over time. Thus, measured
U.S. net worth in both the opening balance sheet and the closing balance sheet decreases by 0.3
percent.
5.3. Analytic Uses
       We consider implications for five common analytic uses of the U.S. economic accounts:
labor share of income, national saving rates, returns on domestic non-financial business, returns
on foreign direct investment, and external balances. We provide additional details on calculations
for each of the analytic uses in appendix A.
       Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and Bridgman (2018) each report declines in the labor
share of income since 1975. Following the previous authors, we calculate the labor share for the
U.S. corporate business sector by dividing compensation by value-added with and without our
operating surplus adjustment for 1975 and 2014.         Since compensation in the numerator is
unchanged, the results yield declines in the labor share. The shares are reported in figure 2 for
three alternative denominators used in Bridgman (2018): gross value-added, net value-added, and
net value-added minus taxes less subsidies on production and imports. The adjusted shares
reported in figure 2 for 2014 demonstrate a decline of 1.4 percentage points, 1.9 percentage points,
and 2.4 percentage points for gross-value-added, net value-added, and net value-added minus taxes
less subsidies on production and imports, respectively.         In addition, the adjusted shares
demonstrate a larger decline in the labor share from 1975 to 2014 under each alternative

                                                                                                 22
denominator—15.6 percent for gross value-added, 25.5 percent for net value-added, and 28.8
percent for net value-added minus taxes less subsidies on production and imports.
       Reinsdorf (2004) presents measures of U.S. personal saving, business saving, and national
saving as a percentage of national income. In addition, BEA publishes quarterly and annual
measures of net national saving and gross national saving as a percentage of GNI. We present net
and gross national saving rates for 2014 in figure 3. We calculate the rates by dividing the national
saving measures by GNI, and we apply our formulary adjustments from table 3.1 to both the
numerator and the denominator. The rates in figure 3 show relatively small declines of 0.1 and
0.2 percentage point for the net and gross saving measures, respectively, which is a result of the
same downward adjustment of $26.4 billion that affects both the numerator and the denominator
in the calculation.
       Osborne and Retus (2017) report rates of return for U.S. domestic non-financial business.
The returns are calculated by dividing net operating surplus by the net stock of produced assets for
non-financial business. We use the unadjusted rate of return for 2014 directly from Osborne and
Retus (2017) and add our formulary adjustments on operating surplus for non-financial industries
– an amount of $217.4 billion – to the numerator in their calculation to derive an adjusted rate of
return for 2014. As we explained in section 5.2, we do not adjust the stock of intellectual property
products in the denominator. The result is reported in figure 4, which shows a 1.3 percentage point
increase in the rate of return after our adjustments are applied.
       McGrattan and Prescott (2010) and Bridgman (2014) document a persistent gap since 1982
between rates of return on direct investment abroad by U.S. MNEs and foreign direct investment
in the U.S. (FDIUS) by foreign MNEs. Rates of return are calculated by dividing income on
foreign direct investment by the direct investment component of the international investment
position. In 2014, the rate of return on USDIA at current cost was 8.5 percent, and the rate of
return on FDIUS at current cost was 5.5 percent (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2017a,
2017b). McGrattan and Prescott (2010) focus on the exclusion of intangible assets in the
denominator as a source of the gap. Bridgman (2014) focuses on the exclusion of intangible assets
and repatriation taxes as a source of the gap. Both studies find a much narrower gap when they
make adjustments for the exclusions. Following calculations in table 1 of U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis (2017a), we calculate an adjusted rate of return on USDIA at current cost using
the adjusted income on USDIA reported in table 1.1 and the adjusted beginning and ending direct

                                                                                                  23
investment position assets reported in appendix table A1. The adjusted and unadjusted returns are
presented in figure 5. Since our formulary adjustments decrease the numerator of the calculation
by a larger percentage than the denominator, the adjusted rate of return on USDIA of 3.5 percent
is less than half of the unadjusted rate of 8.5 percent. In addition, the adjusted rate of return on
USDIA is closer to the rate of return on FDIUS for the year.21
         Figure 6 presents adjusted and unadjusted external balances from the current account of
the U.S. balance of payments presented in table 1.1. Balances are presented as a percentage of
expenditure-based GDP or GNI presented in table 3.1. Since we treat our adjustments as an
implied increase in exports of services, there is no effect on the measured goods balance. However,
the goods balance as a percentage of GDP declines slightly because of the implied increase in
services exports and the resulting increase in GDP. As a percentage of GDP, the services balance
almost doubles from 1.5 percent to 2.9 percent, which increases the trade balance from negative
2.8 percent to negative 1.3 percent. As a percentage of GNI, the primary income balance decreases
from 1.2 percent to negative 0.4 percent. The only effect our adjustments have on the current
account balance is the decline of $26.4 billion, which reduces the current account balance from
negative 2.1 percent of GNI to negative 2.2 percent of GNI.


6. Conclusions
         Offshore profit shifting accomplished through complex global structuring that includes
holding companies and special purpose entities imposes challenges for the treatment of MNEs in
the SNA and BPM frameworks. The international guidelines recommend that transactions and
other flows with a holding company or special purpose entity be recognized in economic accounts
if the holding company or special purpose entity is resident in an economy other than its parent.
Using results from Guvenen et al. (2017), this paper empirically demonstrates the effects on the
U.S. economic accounts in 2014 of using a method of formulary apportionment in lieu of separate
accounting, which results in a reattribution of operating surplus and income on USDIA from
foreign affiliates to U.S. parents.

21
   The unadjusted rate of return of 8.5 percent is closer to the long-run rate of return on an investment portfolio of
listed stocks such as the S&P 500. Given the resources that MNEs devote to actively managing their operations
abroad, management and owners are unlikely to accept a rate of return that falls significantly short of a return on a
passive portfolio over the long run. In order to draw a reliable conclusion regarding the accuracy of the unadjusted
rate of return over the adjusted rate of return would require an analysis over a much longer period of time than the
single year we present here.

                                                                                                                  24
       For 2014, we find notable changes in key economic accounting measures throughout the
U.S. economic accounts, which may have significant implications for their analytic uses. Our
adjustments yield a 3.5 percent increase in U.S. operating surplus, which generates a 1.5 percent
increase in U.S. GDP as a result of an implied increase in output that is used as services exports.
We find a 33.5 percent decrease in U.S. income receivable from the rest of world, which is
overwhelmingly attributable to a decrease in earnings on USDIA with a small amount attributable
to net interest receivable on USDIA. In dollar amounts, the increase in operating surplus is offset
by a larger decrease in income receivable from the rest of world. As a result of these offsetting
effects, U.S. GNI and gross national disposable income decrease by 0.1 percent while gross
national saving decreases by 0.8 percent and national borrowing increases by 6.9 percent. Finally,
net worth in the balance sheet decreases by 0.3 percent.
       The results for analytic uses include a decrease for the labor share of income of 1.4 to 2.4
percentage points and a decrease for the return on USDIA of 5.0 percentage points. The results
for analytic uses also include an increase for the trade in services balance as a percentage of GDP
of 1.4 percentage points and an increase for the return on domestic non-financial business of 1.3
percentage points. Changes for the national saving rate and the current account balance as a
percentage of GDP are negligible.




                                                                                                25
References

Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert. 2010. Formula Apportionment: Is it better than the
        Current System and Are there better Alternatives? National Tax Journal, 63(4), pp.
        1145-1184.
Avi-Yonah, Reuven S. 2010. Between Formulary Apportionment and the OECD Guidelines: A
        Proposal for Reconciliation. World Tax Journal, 2(1), pp. 3-18.
Avi-Yonah, Reuven S. and Kimberly A. Clausing. 2007. Reforming Corporate Taxation in a
        Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment. The Hamilton Project
        Discussion Paper 2007-08.
Baldwin, Robert E. and Fukunari Kimura. 1998. Measuring U.S. International Goods and
        Services Transactions, in Geography and Ownership Bases for Economic Accounting,
        Robert E. Baldwin, Robert E. Lipsey, and David J. Richards, eds. The University of
        Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 9-48.
Bridgman, Benjamin. 2018. Is Labor’s Loss Capital’s Gain? Gross versus Net Labor Shares.
        Macroeconomic Dynamics, 22(8), pp. 1-18.
Bridgman, Benjamin. 2014. Do Intangible Assets Explain High U.S. Foreign Direct Investment
        Returns? Journal of Macroeconomics, 40(A), pp. 159-171.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee. 2011. Race against the Machine: How the Digital
        Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly
        Transforming Employment and the Economy. Lexington, MA: Digital Frontier Press.
Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. Does the United States
        have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? Brookings Paper on
        Economic Activity, March 10-11.
Byrne, David M., Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel. 2015. How Fast are Semiconductor
        Prices Falling? NBER Working Paper No. 21074.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2016. The Effect of Profit Shifting on the Corporate Tax Base in the
        United States and Beyond. National Tax Journal, 69(4), 905-934.
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Dany
        Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2015. Business Income in the United States: Who
        Owns it and How Much Tax do They Pay? NBER Working Paper No. 21651.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic
        Growth. Review of Income and Wealth, 55(3), pp. 661-685.
DeBacker, Jason M. and Richard Prisinzano. 2015. The Rise of Partnerships. Tax Notes,
        147(13), pp. 1563-1575.
Dharmapala, Dhammika. 2014. What Do We Know about Base Erosion and Profit Shifting? A
        Review of the Empirical Literature, Fiscal Studies, 35(4), pp. 421-448.
Dowd, Tim, Paul Landefeld, and Anne Moore. 2017. Profit Shifting of U.S. Multinationals.
        Journal of Public Economics, 148, pp. 1-13.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L and Dimitris Papanikolaou. 2013. Organization Capital and the Cross-
        Section of Expected Returns. Journal of Finance, 68(4), pp. 1365-1406.
Fernald, John. 2014. Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great
        Recession. NBER Working Paper No. 20248.
Fuest, Clemens, Thomas Hemmelgarn and Fred Ramb. 2007. How Would the Introduction of
        an EU- Wide Formula Apportionment Affect the Distribution and Size of the Corporate
        Tax Base? International Tax and Public Finance, 14(5), pp. 605-626.

                                                                                          26
Gordon, Roger and John D. Wilson. 1986. An Examination of Multi-jurisdictional Corporate
       Income Taxation under Formulary Apportionment. Econometrica, 54(6), pp. 1,357-1,373.
Gresik, Thomas A. 2001. The Taxing Task of Taxing Transnationals. Journal of Economic
       Literature, 39(3), pp. 800-838.
Guvenen, Fatih, Raymond J. Mataloni Jr., Dylan G. Rassier, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2017. Offshore
       Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement. NBER Working Paper No.
       23324.
Hines, James R. 2010. Income Misattribution under Formula Apportionment. European
       Economic Review, 54(1), pp. 108-120.
Hines, Jr., James R. and Eric M. Rice. 1994. Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
       American Business, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1), pp. 149-182.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman (2014). The Global Decline of the Labor Share.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), pp. 61-103.
Kimura, Fukunari, and Robert E. Baldwin. 1998. Application of a Nationality-Adjusted Net
       Sales and Value-Added Framework: The Case of Japan, in Geography and Ownership
       Bases for Economic Accounting, Robert E. Baldwin, Robert E. Lipsey, and David J.
       Richards, eds. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 49-82.
Landefeld, J. Steven, Obie G. Wichard, and Jeff H. Lowe. 1993. Alternative Frameworks for
       U.S. International Transactions, Survey of Current Business, 73(12), pp. 50-61.
Lipsey, Robert E. 2010. Measuring the Location of Production in a World of Intangible
       Productive Assets, FDI, and Intrafirm Trade. Review of Income and Wealth, 56(1), pp.
       S99-S110.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott. 2010. Technology Capital and the U.S. Current
       Account. American Economic Review, 100(4), pp. 1493-1522.
Mokyr, Joel. 2014. “Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life” in Secular Stagnation: Facts,
       Causes and Cures, Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds. London: CEPR Press.
Moulton, Brent R. and Peter van de Ven. 2018. Addressing the Challenges of Globalization in
       National Accounts. Paper prepared for the NBER-CRIW conference on The Challenges
       of Globalization in the Measurement of National Accounts.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2015a. Measuring and Monitoring
       BEPS, Action 11 – 2015 Final Report. OECD Publishing, Paris.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.               2015b.     Transfer Pricing
       Documentation and Country-by-Country Reporting, Action 13 – 2015 Final Report.
       OECD Publishing, Paris.
Osborne, Sarah and Bonnie A. Retus. 2017. Returns for Domestic Nonfinancial Business.
       Survey of Current Business, 97(12), pp. 1-6.
Rassier, Dylan G. 2017. Improving the SNA Treatment of Multinational Enterprises.        Review
       of Income and Wealth, 63(s2), pp. S287-S320.
Rassier, Dylan G. and Jennifer Koncz-Bruner. 2015. “A Formulary Approach for Attributing
       Measured Production to Foreign Affiliates of U.S. Parents” in Measuring Globalization:
       Better Trade Statistics for Better Policy, Susan N. Houseman and Michael Mandel, eds.
       W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Reinsdorf, Marshall B. 2004. Alternative Measures of Personal Saving. Survey of Current
       Business, 84(9), pp. 17-27.
Runkel, Marco and Guttorm Schjelderup. 2011. The Choice of Apportionment Factors under
       Formula Apportionment. International Economic Review, 52(3), pp. 913-934.

                                                                                             27
Sanchirico, Chris William. 2015. As American as Apple Inc.: International Tax and Ownership
       Nationality. Tax Law Review, 68(2), pp. 207-274.
Syverson, Chad. 2017. Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. Productivity
       Slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(2), pp. 165-186.
United Nations; Eurostat; and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2011.
       The Impact of Globalization on National Accounts. New York and Geneva: United
       Nations.
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2017a. U.S. Direct Investment Abroad for 2014-
       2016: Detailed Historical Cost Positions and Related Financial Transactions and Income
       Flows. Survey of Current Business, 97(9).
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2017b. Foreign Direct Investment in the United
       States for 2014-2016: Detailed Historical Cost Positions and Related Financial
       Transactions and Income Flows. Survey of Current Business, 97(9).
United States Department of the Treasury. 2007. Report to the Congress on Earnings Stripping,
       Transfer Pricing, and U.S. Income Tax Treaties.




                                                                                          28
Table 1.1: BPM Balance of Payments Current Account and Capital Account for the U.S.
             Credits                                                                                                                                                                   Debits
                                                     Adjustments                                                                                                                                                               Adjustments
                                 Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Operating Surplus
                                                                    Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Net Interest
                                                                                                           BPM Code




                                                                                                                           SNA Code
               Published




                                                                                                                                                                                         Published
                                                                                    Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adjusted
                                                         Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Earnings
  Line




               (1)               (2)                     (3)        (4)             (5)                                                                                                  (6)               (7)                     (8)        (9)            (10)
         1                                                                                                            B12             Current account balance                            -373.8            255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          -400.2


                                                                                                                                      Goods and Services Account
         2   2,375.9             255.5                                             2,631.4           1.A              P6/P7           Transactions in goods and services                2,866.2                                                              2,866.2
         3                                                                                                            B11             Balance on goods and services                      -490.3            255.5                                             -234.9
         4   1,634.0                                                               1,634.0           1.A.a            P61/P71         Goods                                             2,385.5                                                              2,385.5
         5                                                                                                                            Balance on trade in goods                          -751.5                                                              -751.5
         6   1,611.0                                                               1,611.0           1.A.a.1                            General merchandise                             2,370.0                                                              2,370.0
         7                 0.3                                                                 0.3   1.A.a.2                            Net exports of goods under merchanting
         8          22.7                                                                 22.7        1.A.a.3                            Nonmonetary gold                                       15.5                                                                15.5
         9     741.9             255.5                                              997.4            1.A.b            P72/P82         Services                                            480.8                                                               480.8
    10                                                                                                                                Balance on trade in services                        261.2            255.5                                              516.6
    11              21.1                                                                 21.1        1.A.b.2                            Maintenance and repair                                       7.5                                                                 7.5
    12         282.6                                                                282.6            1.A.b.3-4                          Transport and travel                              199.9                                                               199.9
    13         124.3                                                                124.3            1.A.b.6-7                          Insurance and finance                                  75.9                                                                75.9
    14         129.7             255.5                                              385.2            1.A.b.8                            Charges for the use of intellectual property           42.0                                                                42.0
    15              34.7                                                                 34.7        1.A.b.9                            Telecommunications and information                     36.5                                                                36.5
    16         128.9                                                                128.9            1.A.b.10                           Other business services                                94.8                                                                94.8
    17              20.5                                                                 20.5        1.A.b.12                           Government goods and services                          24.2                                                                24.2


                                                                                                                                      Primary Income Account
    18         807.1                                    -273.1       -8.7           525.3            1.B                              Transactions in primary income                      596.4                                                               596.4
    19                                                                                                                                Balance on primary income                           210.8                                   -273.1       -8.7             -71.1
    20                     6.5                                                                 6.5   1.B.1            D1              Compensation of employees                                17.1                                                                17.1
    21         800.6                                    -273.1       -8.7           518.8            1.B.2                            Investment income                                   579.3                                                               579.3
    22         464.6                                    -273.1       -8.7           182.7            1.B.2.1          D4D               Direct investment                                 187.9                                                               187.9
    23         455.6                                    -273.1                      182.5            1.B.2.1.1                            Income on equity                                162.4                                                               162.4
    24         144.0                                                                144.0            1.B.2.1.1.1      D42D                    Dividends and withdrawals                        67.6                                                                67.6
    25         311.6                                    -273.1                           38.5        1.B.2.1.1.2      D43D                    Reinvested earnings                              94.8                                                                94.8
    26                     9.0                                       -8.7                      0.3   1.B.2.1.2        D41D                Interest                                             25.4                                                                25.4
    27         305.0                                                                305.0            1.B.2.2          D4P               Portfolio investment                              377.5                                                               377.5
    28              30.7                                                                 30.7        1.B.2.3          D4O               Other investment                                       13.9                                                                13.9
    29                     0.3                                                                 0.3   1.B.2.4          D4R               Reserve assets


                                                                                                                                      Secondary Income Account
    30         140.1                                                                140.1            1.C                              Transactions in secondary income                    234.3                                                               234.3
    31                                                                                                                                Balance on secondary income                          -94.2                                                                -94.2


                                                                                                     2                                Capital Account
    32                                                                                                                                Capital account balance                                        0.0                                                                 0.0
    33                                                                                               2.1              N2                Gross acquisitions
    34                     0.0                                                                 0.0   2.2              D9                Capital transfers                                            0.0                                                                 0.0

                                                                                                                                      Net lending / borrowing (current and capital
    35                                                                                                                B9              account)                                           -373.8            255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          -400.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              29
Table 1.2: BPM Balance of Payments Financial Account for the U.S.
             Net Acquisition of Financial Assets                                                                                                                                           Net Incurrence of Liabilities
                                                     Adjustments                                                                                                                                                              Adjustments
                                 Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Operating Surplus
                                                                    Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Net Interest
                                                                                                          BPM Code




                                                                                                                          SNA Code
               Published




                                                                                                                                                                                             Published
                                                                                   Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Adjusted
                                                         Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Earnings
  Line




               (1)               (2)                     (3)        (4)            (5)                                                                                                       (6)          (7)                     (8)        (9)            (10)
         1                                                                                                                           Stat. disc. (current and capital-financial account)       -47.0                                                           -47.0
         2                                                                                                           B9              Net lending / borrowing (financial account)             -326.8       255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          -353.2


         3     313.5             255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          287.2            3.1              FD              Direct investment                                        212.3                                                          212.3
         4     330.4             255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          304.0            3.1.1            F5D               Equity                                                 146.4                                                          146.4
         5          18.8         255.5                               -8.7          265.5            3.1.1.1                               Equity other than reinvestment of earnings               51.6                                                           51.6
         6     311.6                                    -273.1                          38.5        3.1.1.2                               Reinvestment of earnings                                 94.8                                                           94.8
         7      -16.8                                                                -16.8          3.1.2            F3D               Debt instruments                                            65.9                                                           65.9
         8     582.7                                                               582.7            3.2              FP              Portfolio investment                                     703.5                                                          703.5
         9     431.6                                                               431.6            3.2.1            F5P               Equity                                                 154.3                                                          154.3
    10         151.1                                                               151.1            3.2.2            F3P               Debt securities                                        549.2                                                          549.2
    11                                                                                              3.3              F7F             Financial derivatives                                         54.3                                                           54.3
    12          -99.2                                                                -99.2          3.4              FO              Other investment                                         150.2                                                          150.2
    13        -161.8                                                               -161.8           3.4.2            F2O               Currency and deposits                                       59.7                                                           59.7
    14              68.4                                                                68.4        3.4.3            F4O               Loans                                                       77.9                                                           77.9
    15               -5.8                                                                -5.8       3.4.4-6                            Other                                                       12.6                                                           12.6
    16               -3.6                                                                -3.6       3.5              FR              Reserves
    17                     0.0                                                                0.0   3.5.1            F11               Monetary gold
    18                     0.0                                                                0.0   3.5.2            F12               Special drawing rights
    19               -3.8                                                                -3.8       3.5.3                              Reserve position in the IMF
    20                     0.2                                                                0.2   3.5.4                              Other


    21         793.5             255.5                  -273.1       -8.7          767.1            3                F               Totals                                                 1,120.3                                                         1,120.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
Table 2.1: BPM International Investment Position for the U.S.
                Assets                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liabilities
                                                               Operating Surplus   Adjustments                                                                                                                                                                                                             Adjustments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                            Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Net Interest
                                                                                                                                                                       BPM Code


                                                                                                                                                                                              SNA Code
                       Published




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Published
                                                                                                                                                  Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Adjusted
                                                                                                              Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Earnings
  Line




                       (1)                                     (2)                                            (3)            (4)                  (5)                                                                                                 (6)                              (7)                                            (8)                 (9)             (10)
            1                                                                                                                                                                                B90             Net position                            -6,980.2                         3,451.5                              -3,587.0               -145.4                 -7,261.2


            2      7,189.4                                    3,451.5                    -3,587.0                        -145.4                   6,908.5             1                      AFD             Direct investment                        6,369.5                                                                                                             6,369.5
            3      6,040.1                                    3,451.5                    -3,587.0                        -145.4                   5,759.2             1.1                    AF5D                    Equity                           4,895.8                                                                                                             4,895.8
            4      1,149.3                                                                                                                        1,149.3             1.2                    AF3D                    Debt instruments                 1,473.8                                                                                                             1,473.8
            5      9,704.2                                                                                                                        9,704.2             2                      AFP             Portfolio investment                   16,921.4                                                                                                             16,921.4
            6      6,770.6                                                                                                                        6,770.6             2.1                    AF5P                    Equity                           6,642.5                                                                                                             6,642.5
            7      2,933.6                                                                                                                        2,933.6             2.2                    AF3P                    Debt securities                10,278.9                                                                                                             10,278.9
            8      3,252.3                                                                                                                        3,252.3             3                      AF7F            Financial derivatives                    3,166.8                                                                                                             3,166.8
            9      4,252.4                                                                                                                        4,252.4             4                      AFO             Other investment                         5,355.1                                                                                                             5,355.1
     10            1,807.1                                                                                                                        1,807.1             4.2                    AF2O                    Currency and deposits            2,890.0                                                                                                             2,890.0
     11            2,398.2                                                                                                                        2,398.2             4.3                    AF4O                    Loans                            2,253.7                                                                                                             2,253.7
     12                            47.0                                                                                                                      47.0     4.4-7                                          Other                                211.5                                                                                                                211.5
     13                    434.3                                                                                                                     434.3            5                      AFR             Reserves
     14                    315.4                                                                                                                     315.4            5.1                    AF11                    Monetary gold
     15                            51.9                                                                                                                      51.9     5.2                    AF12                    Special drawing rights
     16                            25.2                                                                                                                      25.2     5.3                                            Reserve position in the IMF
     17                            41.8                                                                                                                      41.8     5.4                                            Other


     18          24,832.6                                     3,451.5                    -3,587.0                        -145.4                  24,551.7                                    AF              Totals                                 31,812.8                                                                                                             31,812.8



Table 2.2: BPM Direct Investment Position for the U.S.
                                   Assets                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Liabilities
                                                                                                                Changes                                                                                                                                                                                                               Changes
                                                                                     Financial Transactions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Financial Transactions
                                          Beginning of Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Beginning of Year
                                                                                                                          Other Changes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Other Changes
                                                                                                                                                        End of Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          End of Year
                                                                                                                                                                                  BPM Code



                                                                                                                                                                                                          SNA Code
                Line




                                          (1)                                         (2)                                 (3)                            (4)                                                                                                      (5)                                        (6)                                 (7)                      (8)
                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                      Net position                            1,305.8                                             101.2                       -587.1                       819.8
  Published




                   2                      7,120.7                                              338.9                       -270.2                       7,189.4             1                            AFD              Direct investment                       5,814.9                                             237.7                            316.9              6,369.5
                   3                      6,054.2                                              330.4                            344.5                   6,040.1             1.1                          AF5D                 Equity                              4,443.2                                             146.4                            306.1              4,895.7
                   4                      1,066.5                                                               8.5                74.3                 1,149.3             1.2                          AF3D                 Debt instruments                    1,371.7                                                            91.2                 10.8            1,473.8


                   5                                                                                                                                                                                                      Net position                                   -201.7                                           -26.4                                            -228.0
  Adjustments




                   6                           -201.7                                              -26.4                                                     -228.0         1                            AFD              Direct investment
                   7                           -201.7                                              -26.4                                                     -228.0         1.1                          AF5D                 Equity
                   8                                                                                                                                                        1.2                          AF3D                 Debt instruments


                   9                                                                                                                                                                                                      Net position                            1,104.1                                                            74.8         -587.1                       591.8
  Adjusted




                 10                       6,919.0                                              312.5                       -270.2                       6,961.3             1                            AFD              Direct investment                       5,814.9                                             237.7                            316.9              6,369.5
                 11                       5,852.6                                              304.0                       -344.5                       5,812.1             1.1                          AF5D                 Equity                              4,443.2                                             146.4                            306.1              4,895.7
                 12                       1,066.5                                                               8.5                       74.3          1,149.2             1.2                          AF3D                 Debt instruments                    1,371.7                                                            91.2                        10.8     1,473.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 31
Table 3.1: SNA Current Accounts for the U.S. - Uses
  Uses
                                                                                                          Rest of World                                                                                   Total Economy
                                                                                                          Adjustments                                                                                      Adjustments




                                                                                      Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                      Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                          Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                    Published




                                                                                                                                                                   Published
                                                                                                                                                Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Adjusted
                                                                                                               Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Earnings
  Line




                                                                    (1)               (2)                      (3)        (4)                   (5)                (6)                (7)                      (8)        (9)                 (10)
                          Production Account
          1   P7          Imports of goods and services
          2   P6          Exports of goods and services             2,373.6                255.5                                                2,629.1


          3   P1          Output
          4   P2          Intermediate consumption                                                                                                                13,606.4                                                                    13,606.4
          5   B1          GDP (expenditure-based)                                                                                                                 17,427.6              255.5                                                 17,683.1
          6   B11         External balance of goods and services         509.5        -255.5                                                        254.0


                          Generation of Income Account
          7               Statistical discrepancy (GDPI - GDPE)
          8   B1          GDP (income-based)
          9   D1          Compensation of employees                                                                                                                9,267.0                                                                     9,267.0
         10   D2          Taxes on production and imports                                                                                                          1,221.6                                                                     1,221.6
         11   D3          Subsidies (-)                                                                                                                                    -58.1                                                                      -58.1
         12   B2          Operating surplus, gross                                                                                                                 7,227.0              255.5                                                  7,482.5


                          Allocation of Primary Income Account
         13   B2          Operating surplus, gross
         14   D1          Compensation of employees                             6.5                                                                         6.5
         15   D2          Taxes on production
         16   D3          Subsides on production (-)
         17   D4          Property income                                840.7                                 -273.1                    -8.7       558.9          6,236.3                                                                     6,236.3
         18   D41           Interest                                     154.4                                                           -8.7       145.7          3,228.9                                                                     3,228.9
         19   D42           Distributed income of corporations           341.7                                                                      341.7          2,888.9                                                                     2,888.9
         20   D43           Reinvested earnings on FDI                   344.6                                 -273.1                                      71.5                95.0                                                                       95.0
         21   D4            Rent                                                                                                                                               23.5                                                                       23.5
         22   B5          Gross national income                                                                                                                   17,892.1              255.5                   -273.1          -8.7          17,865.7


                          Secondary Distrib. of Income Account
         23   B5          Gross national income
         24               Current transfers                              145.3                                                                      145.3          6,827.2                                                                     6,827.2
         25   D5            Current taxes on income, wealth, etc.                                                                                                  2,290.9                                                                     2,290.9
         26   D61           Net social contributions                                                                                                               1,155.3                                                                     1,155.3
         27   D62           Social benefits other than STiK                                                                                                        2,518.1                                                                     2,518.1
         28   D7            Other current transfers                                                                                                                      862.9                                                                       862.9
         29   B6          Disposable income, gross                                                                                                                17,783.1              255.5                   -273.1          -8.7          17,756.7


                          Use of Disposable Income Account
         30   B6          Disposable income, gross
         31   P3          Final consumption expenditure                                                                                                           14,426.4                                                                    14,426.4
         32   B8g         Saving, gross                                                                                                                            3,356.7              255.5                   -273.1          -8.7           3,330.3
         33   P51c        Consumption of fixed capital                                                                                                            -2,748.0                                                                    -2,748.0
         34   B8n         Saving, net                                                                                                                                    608.7          255.5                   -273.1          -8.7                 582.3
         35   B12         Current external balance                       384.0        -255.5                      273.1                  8.7        410.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32
Table 3.1: SNA Current Accounts for the U.S. - Resources
  Resources
                                                                                                           Rest of World                                                                            Total Economy
                                                                                                           Adjustments                                                                              Adjustments




                                                                                       Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                           Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                    Published




                                                                                                                                                             Published
                                                                                                                                          Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Adjusted
                                                                                                                Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Earnings
  Line




                                                                    (1)                (2)                      (3)        (4)            (5)                (6)                (7)                      (8)        (9)                 (10)
                          Production Account
          1   P7          Imports of goods and services             2,883.1                                                               2,883.1
          2   P6          Exports of goods and services


          3   P1          Output                                                                                                                            31,034.0              255.5                                                 31,289.5
          4   P2          Intermediate consumption
          5   B1          GDP (expenditure-based)
          6   B11         External balance of goods and services


                          Generation of Income Account
          7               Statistical discrepancy (GDPI - GDPE)                                                                                                    229.9                                                                       229.9
          8   B1          GDP (income-based)                                                                                                                17,657.5              255.5                                                 17,913.0
          9   D1          Compensation of employees
         10   D2          Taxes on production and imports
         11   D3          Subsidies (-)
         12   B2          Operating surplus, gross


                          Allocation of Primary Income Account
         13   B2          Operating surplus, gross                                                                                                           7,227.0              255.5                                                  7,482.5
         14   D1          Compensation of employees                             17.1                                                                 17.1    9,256.5                                                                     9,256.5
         15   D2          Taxes on production                                                                                                                1,221.6                                                                     1,221.6
         16   D3          Subsides on production (-)                                                                                                                -58.1                                                                           -58.1
         17   D4          Property income                                595.5                                                                595.5          6,481.4                                     -273.1          -8.7            6,199.6
         18   D41           Interest                                     306.6                                                                306.6          3,076.5                                                     -8.7            3,067.8
         19   D42           Distributed income of corporations           193.9                                                                193.9          3,036.8                                                                     3,036.8
         20   D43           Reinvested earnings on FDI                          95.0                                                                 95.0          344.6                                 -273.1                                     71.5
         21   D4            Rent                                                                                                                                         23.5                                                                       23.5
         22   B5          Gross national income


                          Secondary Distrib. of Income Account
         23   B5          Gross national income                                                                                                             17,892.1              255.5                  -273.1          -8.7           17,865.7
         24               Current transfers                              254.4                                                                254.4          6,718.2                                                                     6,718.2
         25   D5            Current taxes on income, wealth, etc.                                                                                            2,300.5                                                                     2,300.5
         26   D61           Net social contributions                                                                                                         1,160.5                                                                     1,160.5
         27   D62           Social benefits other than STiK                                                                                                  2,498.8                                                                     2,498.8
         28   D7            Other current transfers                                                                                                                758.4                                                                       758.4
         29   B6          Disposable income, gross


                          Use of Disposable Income Account
         30   B6          Disposable income, gross                                                                                                          17,783.1              255.5                  -273.1          -8.7           17,756.7
         31   P3          Final consumption expenditure
         32   B8g         Saving, gross
         33   P51c        Consumption of fixed capital
         34   B8n         Saving, net
         35   B12         Current external balance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   33
Table 3.2: SNA Accumulation Accounts for the U.S. – Changes in Assets
  Changes in Assets
                                                                                                                   Rest of World                                                                                  Total Economy
                                                                                                                   Adjustments                                                                                     Adjustments




                                                                                               Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                              Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                                   Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                            Published




                                                                                                                                                                           Published
                                                                                                                                                        Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Adjusted
                                                                                                                        Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Earnings
  Line




                                                                            (1)                (2)                      (3)        (4)                  (5)                (6)                (7)                      (8)        (9)                 (10)
                          Capital Account
         36   B8          Saving, net
         37   B12         Current external balance
         38   P5g         Gross capital formation                                                                                                                         3,510.8                                                                     3,510.8
         39   P5n         Net capital formation                                                                                                                                  762.8                                                                      762.8
         40   P51g          Gross fixed capital formation                                                                                                                 3,432.8                                                                     3,432.8
         41   P52           Changes in inventories                                                                                                                                     78.0                                                                      78.0
         42   P51c        Consumption of fixed capital                                                                                                                    -2,748.0                                                                    -2,748.0
         43   D9r         Capital transfers, receivable
         44   D9p         Capital transfers, payable
         45   B101        Changes in net worth due to saving and
                          capital transfers
         46               Reverse stat. disc. (GDPI - GDPE)
         47   B9          Net lending / borrowing (capital account)              384.4         -255.5                      273.1                  8.7       410.8             -384.4            255.5                   -273.1          -8.7             -410.8


                          Financial Account
         48               Stat. disc. (capital-financial account)
         49   B9          Net lending / borrowing (financial account)
         50               Net acquisition of financial assets/liabilities   1,150.6                                                                     1,150.6           5,465.5               255.5                   -273.1          -8.7          5,439.1
         51   F1            Monetary gold and SDRs                                       0.0                                                                        0.0                 0.0                                                                       0.0
         52   F2            Currency and deposits                                101.1                                                                      101.1                843.7                                                                      843.7
         53   F3            Debt securities                                      533.6                                                                      533.6                802.5                                                                      802.5
         54   F4            Loans                                                136.7                                                                      136.7                964.3                                                                      964.3
         55   F51           Equity                                               331.9                                                                      331.9                805.0          255.5                   -273.1          -8.7                778.6
         56   F52           Investment fund shares                                      34.7                                                                       34.7          282.0                                                                      282.0
         57   F6            Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                     0.0                                                                        0.0          651.4                                                                      651.4
         58   F8            Other receivables/payables                                  12.6                                                                       12.6   1,116.6                                                                     1,116.6


                          Other Changes in Vol. of Assets Account
         59   B102        Changes in net worth due to OCVA


                          Revaluation Account
         60   AN          Non-financial assets                                                                                                                            3,064.5                                                                     3,064.5
         61   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                           680.7                                                                      680.7         4,183.5                                                                     4,183.5
         62   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                      -3.2                                                                       -3.2                -3.3                                                                      -3.3
         63   AF2           Currency and deposits                                       -0.2                                                                       -0.2                -1.7                                                                      -1.7
         64   AF3           Debt securities                                             53.3                                                                       53.3          311.7                                                                      311.7
         65   AF4           Loans                                                        0.0                                                                        0.0                 0.0                                                                       0.0
         66   AF5           Equity                                               608.0                                                                      608.0         3,308.7                                                                     3,308.7
         67   AF5           Investment fund shares                                      23.1                                                                       23.1          480.2                                                                      480.2
         68   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                     0.0                                                                        0.0                87.9                                                                      87.9
         69   AF8           Other receivables/payables                                  -0.3                                                                       -0.3                 0.0                                                                       0.0
         70   B103        Changes in net worth due to nominal holding
                          gains and losses




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 34
Table 3.2: SNA Accumulation Accounts for the U.S. – Changes in Liabilities or Net Worth
  Changes in Liabilities or Net Worth
                                                                                                                   Rest of World                                                                                  Total Economy
                                                                                                                   Adjustments                                                                                     Adjustments




                                                                                               Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                              Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                                   Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                            Published




                                                                                                                                                                           Published
                                                                                                                                                         Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Adjusted
                                                                                                                        Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Earnings
  Line




                                                                            (1)                (2)                      (3)        (4)                   (5)               (6)                (7)                      (8)        (9)                 (10)
                          Capital Account
         36   B8          Saving, net                                                                                                                                            608.7          255.5                   -273.1          -8.7                582.3
         37   B12         Current external balance                               384.0         -255.5                      273.1                  8.7        410.4
         38   P5g         Gross capital formation
         39   P5n         Net capital formation
         40   P51g          Gross fixed capital formation
         41   P52           Changes in inventories
         42   P51c        Consumption of fixed capital
         43   D9r         Capital transfers, receivable                                  0.4                                                                         0.4         110.6                                                                      110.6
         44   D9p         Capital transfers, payable                                     0.0                                                                         0.0      -111.0                                                                     -111.0
         45   B101        Changes in net worth due to saving and
                          capital transfers                                      384.4         -255.5                      273.1                  8.7        410.8               608.3          255.5                   -273.1          -8.7                581.9
         46               Reverse stat. disc. (GDPI - GDPE)                                                                                                                   -229.9                                                                     -229.9
         47   B9          Net lending / borrowing (capital account)


                          Financial Account
         48               Stat. disc. (capital-financial account)                       50.3                                                                        50.3           -45.4                                                                     -45.4
         49   B9          Net lending / borrowing (financial account)            334.1         -255.5                      273.1                  8.7        360.5            -339.0            255.5                   -273.1          -8.7             -365.4
         50               Net acquisition of financial assets/liabilities        816.5              255.5               -273.1                    -8.7       790.1         5,804.5                                                                    5,804.5
         51   F1            Monetary gold and SDRs                                       0.0                                                                         0.0               0.0                                                                       0.0
         52   F2            Currency and deposits                            -122.6                                                                       -122.6                 924.9                                                                      924.9
         53   F3            Debt securities                                      162.8                                                                       162.8         1,173.3                                                                    1,173.3
         54   F4            Loans                                                       49.2                                                                        49.2         946.6                                                                      946.6
         55   F51           Equity                                               732.9              255.5               -273.1                    -8.7       706.5               404.1                                                                      404.1
         56   F52           Investment fund shares                                       0.0                                                                         0.0         316.5                                                                      316.5
         57   F6            Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                     0.0                                                                         0.0         651.3                                                                      651.3
         58   F8            Other receivables/payables                                  -5.8                                                                        -5.8   1,387.8                                                                    1,387.8


                          Other Changes in Vol. of Assets Account
         59   B102        Changes in net worth due to OCVA                        -50.2                                                                        -50.2             339.6                                                                      339.6


                          Revaluation Account
         60   AN          Non-financial assets
         61   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                            -72.8                                                                        -72.8       3,837.7                                                                    3,837.7
         62   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                      -3.3                                                                        -3.3               -3.2                                                                      -3.2
         63   AF2           Currency and deposits                                 -12.9                                                                        -12.9                   0.0                                                                       0.0
         64   AF3           Debt securities                                             54.6                                                                        54.6               0.0                                                                       0.0
         65   AF4           Loans                                                        0.0                                                                         0.0               0.0                                                                       0.0
         66   AF5           Equity                                           -110.7                                                                       -110.7           3,245.2                                                                    3,245.2
         67   AF5           Investment fund shares                                       0.0                                                                         0.0         507.9                                                                      507.9
         68   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                     0.0                                                                         0.0         244.5                                                                      244.5
         69   AF8           Other receivables/payables                                  -0.5                                                                        -0.5      -156.7                                                                     -156.7
         70   B103        Changes in net worth due to nominal holding
                          gains and losses                                       753.5                                                                       753.5         3,410.3                                                                    3,410.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
Table 3.3: SNA Balance Sheets for the U.S. – Stocks and Changes in Assets
  Stocks and Changes in Assets
                                                                                                               Rest of World                                                                               Total Economy
                                                                                                               Adjustments                                                                                 Adjustments




                                                                                           Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                       Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                               Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                        Published




                                                                                                                                                                   Published
                                                                                                                                               Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Adjusted
                                                                                                                    Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Earnings
  Line




                                                                        (1)                (2)                      (3)        (4)             (5)                 (6)                 (7)                      (8)         (9)                  (10)
                          Opening balance sheet
         71   AN          Non-financial assets                                                                                                                    70,352.4                                                                       70,352.4
         72   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                 21,238.9                                                               21,238.9           173,474.4            3,196.0                  -3,313.9    -136.7               173,219.8
         73   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  54.4                                                                  54.4                 66.2                                                                          66.2
         74   AF2           Currency and deposits                       1,418.9                                                                1,418.9            14,694.2                                                                       14,694.2
         75   AF3           Debt securities                             9,586.9                                                                9,586.9            27,793.4                                                                       27,793.4
         76   AF4           Loans                                            845.1                                                                 845.1          24,570.9                                                                       24,570.9
         77   AF5           Equity                                      8,526.3                                                                8,526.3            46,778.3            3,196.0                  -3,313.9    -136.7                46,523.7
         78   AF5           Investment fund shares                           659.3                                                                 659.3          14,391.5                                                                       14,391.5
         79   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                   0.0    26,914.4                                                                       26,914.4
         80   AF8           Other receivables/payables                       148.0                                                                 148.0          18,265.5                                                                       18,265.5
         81   B90         Net worth


                          Total changes in assets/liabilities
         82   AN          Non-financial assets                                                                                                                     4,014.8                                                                        4,014.8
         83   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                  1,831.2                                                                1,831.2             9,424.5               255.5                  -273.1           -8.7             9,398.1
         84   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  -3.2                                                                  -3.2                 -3.3                                                                          -3.3
         85   AF2           Currency and deposits                            100.9                                                                 100.9                 901.8                                                                          901.8
         86   AF3           Debt securities                                  586.9                                                                 586.9                 776.1                                                                          776.1
         87   AF4           Loans                                            136.7                                                                 136.7                 924.8                                                                          924.8
         88   AF5           Equity                                           939.9                                                                 939.9           4,111.8               255.5                  -273.1           -8.7             4,085.4
         89   AF5           Investment fund shares                                  57.7                                                                  57.7           766.5                                                                          766.5
         90   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                   0.0           834.7                                                                          834.7
         91   AF8           Other receivables/payables                              12.3                                                                  12.3     1,112.1                                                                        1,112.1
         92   B10         Changes in net worth
         93   B101        Saving and capital transfers
         94   B102        Other changes in the volume of assets
         95   B103        Nominal holding gains and losses


                          Closing balance sheet
         96   AN          Non-financial assets                                                                                                                    74,367.2                                                                       74,367.2
         97   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                 23,070.1                                                               23,070.1           182,898.9            3,451.5                  -3,587.0    -145.4               182,618.0
         98   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  51.2                                                                  51.2                 62.9                                                                          62.9
         99   AF2           Currency and deposits                       1,519.8                                                                1,519.8            15,596.0                                                                       15,596.0
   100        AF3           Debt securities                            10,173.8                                                               10,173.8            28,569.5                                                                       28,569.5
   101        AF4           Loans                                            981.8                                                                 981.8          25,495.7                                                                       25,495.7
   102        AF5           Equity                                      9,466.2                                                                9,466.2            50,890.1            3,451.5                  -3,587.0    -145.4                50,609.2
   103        AF5           Investment fund shares                           717.0                                                                 717.0          15,158.0                                                                       15,158.0
   104        AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                   0.0    27,749.1                                                                       27,749.1
   105        AF8           Other receivables/payables                       160.3                                                                 160.3          19,377.6                                                                       19,377.6
   106        B90         Net worth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           36
Table 3.3: SNA Balance Sheets for the U.S. – Stocks and Changes in Liabilities and Net Worth
  Stocks and Changes in Liabilities and Net Worth
                                                                                                                Rest of World                                                                                      Total Economy
                                                                                                                Adjustments                                                                                        Adjustments




                                                                                            Operating Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                               Operating Surplus
                                                                                                                                Net Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net Interest
               SNA Code




                                                                        Published




                                                                                                                                                                           Published
                                                                                                                                                       Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Adjusted
                                                                                                                     Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Earnings
  Line




                                                                        (1)                 (2)                      (3)        (4)                    (5)                 (6)                 (7)                      (8)         (9)             (10)
                          Opening balance sheet
         71   AN          Non-financial assets
         72   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                 16,717.5            3,196.0                 -3,313.9     -136.7                16,462.9           161,476.6                                                                 161,476.6
         73   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  55.2                                                                          55.2                 54.4                                                                     54.4
         74   AF2           Currency and deposits                       1,031.4                                                                        1,031.4            15,929.6                                                                  15,929.6
         75   AF3           Debt securities                             2,649.5                                                                        2,649.5            34,730.8                                                                  34,730.8
         76   AF4           Loans                                       1,000.8                                                                        1,000.8            24,737.1                                                                  24,737.1
         77   AF5           Equity                                     11,927.2            3,196.0                 -3,313.9     -136.7                11,672.6            34,208.8                                                                  34,208.8
         78   AF5           Investment fund shares                                   0.0                                                                           0.0    15,050.8                                                                  15,050.8
         79   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                           0.0    26,914.3                                                                  26,914.3
         80   AF8           Other receivables/payables                              53.4                                                                          53.4     9,850.8                                                                   9,850.8
         81   B90         Net worth                                     4,521.4            -3,196.0                 3,313.9        136.7               4,776.0            82,350.2            3,196.0                  -3,313.9    -136.7           82,095.6


                          Total changes in assets/liabilities
         82   AN          Non-financial assets
         83   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                       743.5               255.5               -273.1                    -8.7        717.1           9,081.7                                                                   9,081.7
         84   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  -3.3                                                                          -3.3                 -3.2                                                                     -3.2
         85   AF2           Currency and deposits                        -135.5                                                                         -135.5                   924.8                                                                     924.8
         86   AF3           Debt securities                                  217.4                                                                         217.4           1,145.9                                                                   1,145.9
         87   AF4           Loans                                                   49.1                                                                          49.1           907.2                                                                     907.2
         88   AF5           Equity                                           622.2               255.5               -273.1                    -8.7        595.8           3,508.3                                                                   3,508.3
         89   AF5           Investment fund shares                                   0.0                                                                           0.0           824.4                                                                     824.4
         90   AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                           0.0           834.7                                                                     834.7
         91   AF8           Other receivables/payables                              -6.4                                                                          -6.4           939.6                                                                     939.6
         92   B10         Changes in net worth                          1,087.7             -255.5                      273.1                  8.7     1,114.1             4,357.6               255.5                  -273.1           -8.7        4,331.2
         93   B101        Saving and capital transfers                       384.4          -255.5                      273.1                  8.7         410.8                 608.3           255.5                  -273.1           -8.7              581.9
         94   B102        Other changes in the volume of assets               -50.2                                                                          -50.2               339.6                                                                     339.6
         95   B103        Nominal holding gains and losses                   753.5                                                                         753.5           3,410.3                                                                   3,410.3


                          Closing balance sheet
         96   AN          Non-financial assets
         97   AF          Financial assets/liabilities                 17,461.0            3,451.5                 -3,587.0     -145.4                17,180.1           170,558.3                                                                 170,558.3
         98   AF1           Monetary gold and SDRs                                  51.9                                                                          51.9                 51.2                                                                     51.2
         99   AF2           Currency and deposits                            895.9                                                                         895.9          16,854.4                                                                  16,854.4
   100        AF3           Debt securities                             2,866.9                                                                        2,866.9            35,876.7                                                                  35,876.7
   101        AF4           Loans                                       1,049.9                                                                        1,049.9            25,644.3                                                                  25,644.3
   102        AF5           Equity                                     12,549.4            3,451.5                 -3,587.0     -145.4                12,268.5            37,717.1                                                                  37,717.1
   103        AF5           Investment fund shares                                   0.0                                                                           0.0    15,875.2                                                                  15,875.2
   104        AF6           Insurance, pension and stand. guar. sch.                 0.0                                                                           0.0    27,749.0                                                                  27,749.0
   105        AF8           Other receivables/payables                              47.0                                                                          47.0    10,790.4                                                                  10,790.4
   106        B90         Net worth                                     5,609.1            -3,451.5                 3,587.0        145.4               5,890.0            86,707.8            3,451.5                  -3,587.0    -145.4           86,426.9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                37
Figure 1: Overview of the SNA and BPM Frameworks

                                                     Transactions / Balance of Payments:                Other Flows:


                                                                    Goods and Services Account

                                                                        Production Account

                                                                        Value-Added/GDP


                                                                   Generation of Income Account

                                                                        Operating Surplus

                                                              Primary Distribution of Income Account

                                                                         National Income


                                                             Secondary Distribution of Income Account

                                                                        Disposable Income


                                                                      Use of Income Account

                                                                              Saving


                     Opening Balance Sheet                            Accumulation Accounts:                                                                       Closing Balance Sheet

                      Non-Financial Assets                                Capital Account                       Other Changes in Non-Financial Assets              Non-Financial Assets

                                                                      Net lending / borrowing


                  Financial Assets and Liabilities                       Financial Account                 Other Changes in Financial Assets and Liabilities   Financial Assets and Liabilities
 Integrated IIP
    Account
                            Net Worth                                 Net lending / borrowing                            Net Other Changes                               Net Worth

Note: The figure is adapted from BPM, sixth edition, figure 2.1. Account names are shown in bold, and SNA balancing items are shown in italics. Shaded areas
do not appear in the BPM framework.




                                                                                                                                                                                              38
Figure 2: U.S. Labor Share of Income for 1975 and 2014



                                                                                    Unadjusted 62.9%
                1975
                                                                                    Adjusted 62.5%
 Gross




                                                                             Unadjusted 56.5%
                2014
                                                                            Adjusted 55.1%


                                                                                              Unadjusted 71.3%
                1975
                                                                                              Adjusted 70.7%
 Net




                                                                                       Unadjusted 66.2%
                2014
                                                                                      Adjusted 64.3%


                                                                                                  Unadjusted 80.0%
                1975
 Net less Tax




                                                                                                    Adjusted 79.3%


                                                                                                Unadjusted 74.1%
                2014
                                                                                              Adjusted 71.7%


                       0%   10%   20%        30%        40%        50%        60%       70%        80%        90%
Note: Shares are calculated as a percentage of value-added for corporate business. Gross refers to gross value-added
in the denominator, net refers to net value-added in the denominator, and net less tax refers to net value-added minus
taxes less subsidies on production and imports in the denominator. See appendix A for a description of calculations.




                                                                                                                  39
Figure 3: U.S. National Saving Rates for 2014

 20%                                                                     Unadjusted       Adjusted
                                                                           18.8%           18.6%
 18%


 16%


 14%


 12%


 10%


  8%


  6%
                     Unadjusted      Adjusted
  4%                   3.4%           3.3%

  2%


  0%
                     Net National Saving Rate                            Gross National Saving Rate
Note: Saving rates are calculated as a percentage of GNI. See appendix A for a description of calculations.




                                                                                                              40
Figure 4: Return on U.S. Domestic Non-Financial Business for 2014

 12%                                                                 Adjusted
                                                                      11.4%
                                       Unadjusted
                                         10.1%
 10%




  8%




  6%




  4%




  2%




  0%
Note: Returns are calculated by dividing net operating surplus by the net stock of produced assets. See appendix A
for a description of calculations.




                                                                                                               41
Figure 5: Return on U.S. Direct Investment Abroad for 2014

 9%                                   Unadjusted
                                        8.5%

 8%


 7%


 6%


 5%

                                                                    Adjusted
 4%
                                                                     3.5%

 3%


 2%


 1%


 0%
Note: Returns are calculated by dividing direct investment income at current cost by the average of beginning and
ending direct investment asset positions at current cost. See appendix A for a description of calculations.




                                                                                                              42
Figure 6: U.S. External Balances for 2014

  4%
                                                                           Adjusted
                                                                            2.9%
  3%

                                                              Unadjusted
  2%                                                                                  Unadjusted
                                                                1.5%
                                                                                        1.2%
  1%


  0%

                                                                                             Adjusted
 ‐1%                                                                                          ‐0.4%
                                     Adjusted
 ‐2%                                  ‐1.3%
       Unadjusted Adjusted
         ‐2.1%     ‐2.2%
 ‐3%
                             Unadjusted
                               ‐2.8%
 ‐4%

                                            Unadjusted Adjusted
 ‐5%                                          ‐4.3%       ‐4.2%
         Current Account      Trade Balance     Goods Balance   Services Balance        Primary Income
             Balance                                                                        Balance
Note: Trade balances are shown as a percentage of expenditure-based GDP. Current account and primary income
balances are shown as a percentage of GNI. See appendix A for a description of calculations.




                                                                                                         43
Appendix Table A1: BPM Direct Investment Position Reconciliation for the U.S.
                                            Assets                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                            Asset-Liability Basis at Market Value




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Asset-Liability Basis at Market Value
                                                                                                                              Adjustment to Asset-Liability Basis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Adjustment to Asset-Liability Basis
                                                Current Cost Directional Basis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Current Cost Directional Basis
                                                                                         Adjustment to Market Value




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Adjustment to Market Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BPM Code


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SNA Code
                                     Line




                                                 (1)                                     (2)                                   (3)                                           (4)                                                                                       (5)                                     (6)                           (7)                                           (8)
                                        1                                                                                                                                                                                                   Net position                   1,975.5                                             -669.8                                                           1,305.8
                       Published




                                        2            5,296.4                                                          957.8                                         866.5         7,120.7                           1           AFD         Direct investment              3,320.9                                 1,627.6                                                        866.5         5,814.9
                                        3            5,096.4                                                          957.8                                                       6,054.2                           1.1         AF5D          Equity                       2,815.7                                 1,627.6                                                                      4,443.2
                                        4                                        199.9                                                                              866.5         1,066.5                           1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments                                         505.2                                                                      866.5         1,371.7
   Beginning of Year




                                        5                                                                                                                                                                                                   Net position                                 -263.6                                                                                                                  -263.6
                       Adjustments




                                        6                          -263.6                                                                                                                          -263.6           1           AFD         Direct investment
                                        7                          -263.6                                                                                                                          -263.6           1.1         AF5D          Equity
                                        8                                                                                                                                                                           1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments


                                        9                                                                                                                                                                                                   Net position                   1,711.9                                             -669.8                                                           1,042.1
                       Adjusted




                                      10             5,032.8                                                          957.8                                         866.5         6,857.1                           1           AFD         Direct investment              3,320.9                                 1,627.6                                                        866.5         5,814.9
                                      11             4,832.8                                                          957.8                                                       5,790.6                           1.1         AF5D          Equity                       2,815.7                                 1,627.6                                                                      4,443.2
                                      12                                         199.9                                                                              866.5         1,066.5                           1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments                                         505.2                                                                      866.5         1,371.7



                                      13                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net position                   2,092.5                             -1,272.6                                                                                                           819.9
                       Published




                                      14             5,633.1                                                          643.7                                         912.6         7,189.4                           1           AFD         Direct investment              3,540.7                                 1,916.2                                                        912.6         6,369.5
                                      15             5,396.5                                                          643.7                                                       6,040.1                           1.1         AF5D          Equity                       2,979.5                                 1,916.2                                                                      4,895.8
                                      16                                         236.7                                                                              912.6         1,149.3                           1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments                                         561.1                                                                      912.6         1,473.8
   End of Year




                                      17                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net position                                 -290.0                                                                                                                  -290.0
                       Adjustments




                                      18                           -290.0                                                                                                                          -290.0           1           AFD         Direct investment
                                      19                           -290.0                                                                                                                          -290.0           1.1         AF5D          Equity
                                      20                                                                                                                                                                            1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments


                                      21                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net position                   1,802.5                             -1,272.6                                                                                                           529.9
                       Adjusted




                                      22             5,343.2                                                          643.7                                         912.6         6,899.4                           1           AFD         Direct investment              3,540.7                                 1,916.2                                                        912.6         6,369.5
                                      23             5,106.5                                                          643.7                                                       5,750.2                           1.1         AF5D          Equity                       2,979.5                                 1,916.2                                                                      4,895.8
                                      24                                         236.7                                                                              912.6         1,149.3                           1.2         AF3D          Debt instruments                                         561.1                                                                      912.6         1,473.8
Note: BEA presents direct investment statistics on two bases: the directional basis and the asset-liability basis. On a directional basis,
direct investment claims and liabilities are classified according to whether the direct investor is a U.S. resident or a foreign resident. On
this basis, U.S. direct investment abroad is the net claims of a U.S. parent on its foreign affiliates. On the asset-liability basis, direct
investment claims and liabilities are classified according to whether the direct investment enterprise that receives the funds is resident
in the U.S. or abroad. A direct investment asset is created when a U.S. parent or a U.S. affiliate establishes a claim on a related foreign
person. Similarly, a direct investment liability is established when a foreign person establishes a claim on a related direct investment
enterprise in the United States. Furthermore, BEA publishes direct investment statistics based on three valuation methods: historical
cost, current cost, and market value. Historical cost is the basis on which BEA’s direct investment surveys collect direct investment
position data because that is the primary valuation method used in company accounting records. Current cost estimates revalue parents’
historical cost equity claims in their affiliates’ plant and equipment, land, and inventory stocks to a replacement value of tangible assets.
The market value estimates are featured in BEA’s international investment position accounts because market valuation is used for other
functional categories in these accounts.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   44
Appendix A: Calculations for Analytic Uses
       This appendix provides details on calculations for each of the five analytic uses of the U.S.
economic accounts presented in section 5.3.
Labor Share of Income
       Calculations are based on data from NIPA tables 1.14 and 7.5 for corporate business. We
calculate the 2014 unadjusted gross labor share by dividing compensation by gross value-added
(GVA) as follows:
                                                                 ,           .
                                                                                             56.5%.                                  (A1)
                                                                     ,           .

Gross value-added is the sum of compensation, taxes less subsidies on production and imports, net
operating surplus, and consumption of fixed capital. We calculate the 2014 unadjusted net labor
share by dividing compensation by net value-added (NVA) as follows:
                                                         ,           .
                                                                                     66.2% .                                         (A2)
                                                         ,           .

Net value-added excludes consumption of fixed capital. We calculate the 2014 unadjusted net
labor share less taxes by dividing compensation by net value-added minus taxes less subsidies on
production and imports minus current business transfer payments (NVAT) as follows:
                                                                                                 ,       .
                                                                                                                      74.1%.         (A3)
                                                                                                 ,       .

We calculate the adjusted shares by adding the $255.5 billion adjustment for operating surplus
(OS) to the denominator in each calculation as follows:
                                                                                     ,       .
                                                                                                                  55.1%,             (A4)
                                                                         ,               .           .
                                                                         ,               .
                                                                                                             64.3%,                  (A5)
                                                                 ,           .               .

and
                                                                                                              ,        .
                                                                                                                               71.7%. (A6)
                                                                                                         ,        .        .

We calculate the 1975 shares in the same manner. Capital shares of income can also be calculated
and would be equal to one minus the labor share.
National Saving Rates
       Calculations are based on data from table 3.1. We calculate the 2014 unadjusted net
national saving rate by dividing net national saving (line 34) by GNI (line 22) as follows:
                                                         .
                                                                         3.4%.                                                       (A7)
                                                     ,       .



                                                                                                                                       45
We calculate the unadjusted gross national saving rate by dividing gross national saving (line 32)
by GNI (line 22) as follows:
                                                           ,                   .
                                                                                                           18.8%.                             (A8)
                                                               ,                   .

We calculate the adjusted rates by substituting the adjusted measures from table 3.1 as follows:
                                                                                       .
  A                                                                                                            3.3%                           (A9)
                                                                       ,                       .

and
                                                                                   ,                   .
                                                                                                                        18.6%.               (A10)
                                                                                           ,               .

Return on U.S. Domestic Non-Financial Business
       Calculations are based on data from Osborne and Retus (2017). We calculate the 2014
unadjusted return by dividing net operating surplus (NOS) for non-financial business available in
the U.S. NIPAs by the net stock of produced assets for non-financial business available in the U.S.
Fixed Assets Accounts as follows:
                                                               ,                   .
                                                                                                               10.1%.                        (A11)
                                                                   ,                   .

We calculate the adjusted return by adding the adjustment of $255.5 billion (less $38.1.0 billion
for financial industries) on operating surplus (OS) for non-financial industries to the numerator as
follows:
                                                       ,       .                                   .            .
                                                                                                                          11.4%.             (A12)
                                                                           ,                       .

The denominator includes capital measures of intellectual property products, which we do not
adjust as explained in section 5.2.
Return on U.S. Direct Investment Abroad
       Calculations are based on data from table 1.1 and appendix table A1. We calculate the
2014 unadjusted return by dividing income on USDIA at current cost presented in table 1.1 (line
22) by the average of beginning and ending direct investment asset positions at current cost
presented in appendix table A1 (lines 2 and 14) as follows:
                                                                                                                             .
           .                                                                                                                         8.5%.   (A13)
                           .    .             .    .                                                       ,        .    ,       .

We calculate the adjusted return using the income on USDIA reported in table 1.1 (line 22) and
the adjusted beginning and ending direct investment asset positions reported in appendix table A1
(lines 10 and 22) as follows:


                                                                                                                                               46
                                                                                                              .
      .                                                                                                                                     3.5%.               (A14)
                       .    .          .   .                              ,               .                   ,            .

U.S. External Balances
          Calculations are based on data from tables 1.1 and 3.1. We calculate the 2014 unadjusted
balances from table 1.1 as a percentage of unadjusted expenditure-based GDP or GNI from table
3.1 as follows:
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                        2.1%,                   (A15)
                                                                                                          ,            .
                                                                              .
                                                                                                                  2.8%,                                         (A16)
                                                                  ,               .
                                                                              .
                                                                                                                  4.3%,                                         (A17)
                                                                  ,               .
                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                           1.5%,                                (A18)
                                                                                      ,               .

and
                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                          1.2%. (A19)
                                                                                                                                            ,       .

We calculate the adjusted balances from table 1.1 as a percentage of adjusted expenditure-based
GDP or GNI from table 3.1 as follows:
                                                                                              .
 A                                                                                                                             2.2%,                            (A20)
                                                                                  ,               .
                                                      .
                                                                                      1.3%,                                                                     (A21)
                                                  ,       .
                                                      .
                                                                                      4.2%,                                                                     (A22)
                                                  ,       .
                                                                      .
                                                                                                  2.9%,                                                         (A23)
                                                              ,               .

and
                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                        0.4%.   (A24)
                                                                                                                                ,       .




                                                                                                                                                                   47
