NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WELFARE STATE BESIDES GLOBALIZATION FORCES
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 24919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24919

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

We thank Alan Auerbach and Elhanan Helpman for comments, and Alexander Schwemmer for
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Welfare State besides Globalization Forces
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 24919
August 2018
JEL No. F0,F15,F22,H2
ABSTRACT
In this paper we review of literature and offer historical, empirical and analytical explanation for
the interactions between the welfare state and globalization driving forces. Globalization – a
widespread contemporaneous phenomenon – generates international tax competition. The
consequent erosion in the tax base, especially on capital, is another blow to the finances of the
welfare state. Financial globalization facilitates reallocation of capital across borders. The
increased mobility of capital may likely to trigger a race-to-the-bottom tax competition. The
consequent erosion in the tax base, especially on capital, is potentially a blow to the fiscal finance
backing up the far-reaching redistribution of income by the typical welfare state. Another major
aspect of globalization, low skill migration, attracted to the welfare state may put additional strain
on it. An aging welfare-state – a common contemporary phenomenon in many industrial
countries calls for young and high skill immigrants for its survival.

Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il

2

1. Introduction
The modern welfare state redistributes income from the working young to the retired old, from the
rich to the poor, etc. Globalization generates international tax competition. The consequent erosion
in the tax base, especially on capital, is another blow to the finances of the welfare state. Both the
ease with each capital can move across national borders, and the implied tax competition which
inhibits taxation of domestic capital income, have undesirable effects on the provision of social
benefits. The welfare state cannot avoid the tough task of downscaling its size by resorting to
capital taxes,
Immigration enriches the workforce, allowing for a more finely graded specialization that raises
average productivity and living standards. Diverse workforces are likely to be more productive,
especially in industries where success depends on specific knowledge, such as computing,
healthcare and finance. Low skill migration attracted to the welfare state may put additional strain
on it. An aging welfare-state - a common contemporary phenomenon in many industrial countries
calls for young and high skill immigrants for its survival.
There are several problems with the argument that migration is a boon to all. One is that almost
any major economic event like a large-scale immigration has far-reaching distributional effects,
just like a large cut in trade barriers. The second is the short-term fiscal burden from low-skillpoor immigrants; or the fiscal gain from high-skill immigrants. The fourth is the enlargement of
the labor force that helps finance an aging welfare state system.
The paper addresses the effects of two globalization forces, capital-market and migration, on the
scope and size of the welfare state.

3

We organize the paper as follows. Section 2 analyzes the redistributive effects of globalization
and international tax completion on the welfare state system. Section 3 provides historical
background on migration and the welfare state development. Section 4 addresses welfare magnet
and fiscal burden hypotheses, regarding interactions between skill composition of migration and
the generosity of the welfare state. Section 5 analyze the ways migration’s skill mix and the taxtransfer system are determined by intra- and inter-generational political economic forces. Section
6 concludes.

1. Globalization Forces and the welfare state

The modern welfare state redistributes income from the working young to the retired old, from the
rich to the poor, and from the healthy to the sick. Globalization in the form of trade, migration,
and financial flows have implications for the endurance of the welfare state and income inequality.
Globalization and income distribution has been studied mostly from the

international- trade

paradigm perspective. While the role of demography, and migration in supporting fiscal pillars
on which the welfare state of an aging economy is positioned has been explored rigorously in the
literature, the impact of financial globalization has not been similarly explored.
Stolper and Samuelson (1941), early on, explained how increased trade in the world economy, in
capital-intensive good and labor-intensive goods, among countries which are different in their
labor and capital abundance, should reduce the relative wage, and raise the return on capital, for
the capital-abundant country. Hence, international trade widens the income gaps between capital
and labor. However, Krugman (2008) points that while standard economic analysis predicts that
increased U.S. trade with unskilled labor–abundant countries should reduce the relative wages of
U.S. unskilled labor, a slew of empirical studies in the 1990s found only a modest effect.

4

Much of international trade is however intra-industry, and intra-(multinational) firms. In this
context, Yeaple (2005) demonstrates that a reduction in variable trade costs prompts more firms
to adopt the better technology in the differentiated product sector. The most-able workers among
those who operate the inferior technology switch employment to firms who operate the more
advanced technology, As a result, the least able workers among those who operated the inferior
technology switch employment to the traditional sector. Hence, the wage gap between able and
less able workers rises.

Import competition from China, which surged after 2000, was a major force behind both
reductions in US manufacturing employment and—through input-output linkages and other
general equilibrium channels—weak overall job growth.2 Although it certainly had substantially
different employment repercussions in different commuting zones, import competition from
China did not have large aggregative effects in the United States; the relative reductions of e
Helpman (2018), however, , concludes that the effects of international trade on skilled-unskilled
wage gap are rather limited .employment were regionally concentrated.

However, in general trade globalization interacts weakly with redistributive policies. In contrast,
financial globalization directly impacts on the welfare state system (see section 3).

2

Author et al (2013) analyze the effect of rising Chinese import competition between 1990 and 2007 on US local
labor markets, exploiting cross‐market variation in import exposure stemming from initial differences in industry
specialization and instrumenting for US imports using changes in Chinese imports by other high‐income countries.
They demonstrated that the rising imports cause higher unemployment, lower labor force participation, and
reduced wages in local labor markets that house import‐competing manufacturing industries.

5

Recent events changed the globalization patterns that emerged forcefully at the end of World
War II. The recent wave of financial globalization in the world economy got started in earnest in
the 1990s, with rising cross-border financial flows among industrial economies and between
industrial and developing economies. This was spurred by easing capital controls in many of
these countries. Open-door policies in East Asia transformed the world capital market. .By 2017
China is one of the most important FDI source, and destination, among the economically more
advanced economies, such as the US, EU, Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.
Chinese inward FDI as percentage of GDP has been: 13.7 in 2014, 10.9 in 2015, 12.1 in 2016,
and 12.6 in 2017. Chinese outward FDI as percentage of GDP has been: 2.4 in 2014, 9.8 in
2015, 12.1 in 2016, and 12.6 in 2017 (see UNCTAD (2017))
The recent cross-country convergence in rates of returns are illustrated in Figure 1. The figure
shows vividly that in the late 1990s and early 2000s the real interest rates, adjusted for the real
exchange rate, of Canada, Germany, Israel, and the United Kingdom converged towards the US
real interest rate; implying that their financial markets integrated significantly into the world
financial markets.

Figure 1: Gross Real Interest Rate Adjusted for Real Exchange Rate Changes (US =1.00)

6

Note: Series are HP-filtered. Monthly data are shown in the background.
Sources: Razin (2017), Stats Bureau, FERD, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-month
government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields on three-month US
government bonds.

Financial globalization triggers tax competition among countries, and the possibility of “race to
the bottom”. The 2017 US Tax Bill, centered on corporate tax cut, enhances competitive
pressure that could result in an erosion of foreign countries’ tax bases and an associated loss in
tax revenue triggering a new wave of international tax competition.3

3

The Economist (1997) put this succinctly:

“Globalization is a tax problem for three reasons. First, firms have more freedom over
where to locate. This will make it harder for a country to tax [a business] much more
heavily than its competitors. Second, globalization makes it hard to decide where a
company should pay tax, regardless of where it is based. This gives them [the
companies] plenty of scope to reduce tax bills by shifting operations around or by
crafting transfer-pricing.[Third], globalization... nibbles away at the edges of taxes on
Individuals. It is harder to tax personal income because skilled professional workers are
more mobile than they were two decades ago."

7
The creation of a single financial market in Europe triggered intensive tax competition.4 Figure 2
detects a downward breakpoint at the end of the 1980s in the wake of the single market launch
in mid 1990s. Overall, the mean EU effective corporate tax rate went down from 42% in 1975 to
32% in 2000, and the standard deviation went down from 8% in 1975 to 5.8% in 2000.
A striking example of financial integration is the 1990s creation of single market in Europe; it is a
rare “Natural Experiment” for identifying effects of international capital market integration on
capital income taxation. Evidently, globalization seems to be a catalyst to a major cut in the
taxes on corporate income. Both statutory tax rates and effective tax rates converged to a great
extent because of tax competition. The statutory tax rates have indeed declined between the
1970s and the 2000s by 11 percentage points (Germany) to 26 percentage points (Ireland). This
a rare example of international tax competition paralleling swift capital market integration.
Figure 2 demonstrates the cross-country tax convergence that took place before and after the
launch of the EU.
Figure 2: Hall-Jorgenson Effective Tax Rates on Corporate Income: Selected EU Countries5

4

Michael Devereux, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2002) analyze the development of taxes on
corporate income in EU and G7 countries over the 1980s and the 1990s. They establish that tax revenues
on profitable investments had fallen. In particular, taxes on income earned by multinational firms are
subject to tax competition forces. Additional empirical analysis bring evidence pertaining to

international tax competition for relatively mobile portfolio investments, so that a
country with more mobility has lower capital tax rates, is abundant; see empirical
support for the hypothesis in Hines (1999), Sorensen (2002), Besley, Griffith and Klemm
(2001), Devereux and Griffith (2002), and Lassen and Sorensen (2002), Razin, Sadka,
and Nam (2004), and Krautheim and Schmidt-Eisenhor (2011).
See Auerbach (1983) and King and Fullerton (1984) for comprehensive empirical application of effective
corporate taxation to data.

5

8

Notes:

1) Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Assumptions: Equity finance, borrowing rate = 4 %, inflation rate  = 4 %,

depreciation rate = 20 %, Normal tax life = 10 years
2) Countries (from top to bottom): Finland, Sweden, Germany, Austria, UK, Belgium Denmark, France, Italy,
Luxemburg, Spain, Portugal, Netherlands, Ireland. Source: Razin et al (2005).

The effects of the establishment of the EU on the welfare state system are particularly
significant. Caminada et al (2010) explored EU welfare-state indicators. They employed a
variety of indicators of social protection: social expenditures, both at the macro and at the
program level, replacement rates of unemployment, and social assistance benefits and poverty
indicators.6 Together, these indicators indicate a relatively broad picture of the evolution of

6

They linearly regress the annual growth rate of several social protection indicators on the initial level of
the social protection indicator at the beginning of the period. The coefficient for absolute β‐convergence
is estimated using an ordinary least square regression model of cross‐sectional data. If the coefficient β

9
social protection in the EU. Convergence regressions in Table 1 demonstrates that the initial
level of public social expenditure prior to the creation of the EU has a negative effect on the on
EU provision of public social services well after EU has been established. We conjecture that
these patterns may have to do, among other things, with the globalization forces that were
unleashed by the integration of Europe.

is negative (positive), we say that there is absolute convergence (divergence) in social protection levels
across countries. The higher the value of β, the faster the social protection indicator in the poor region
converges toward the level of the rich one. The null hypothesis of the test is that coefficient β is
negative.

10
Table 1. Convergence of Public Social Expenditures in EU-15 Controlled for Cyclical and
Demographic Effects, 1985–2003

Public Social Expenditures

Initial level public social expenditure 1985 (β)

−0.035**

(−3.67)

Unemployment rate

0.460*

(2.95)

Intercept

0.942**

(4.23)

adj. R2

0.534

Source: Caminada, Goudswaard, and Van Vliet (2010).
Notes: OLS-regression; t-statistics in parentheses. ** Significant at the 0.01 level;* significant at 0.05 level.

2.1 Globalization with Redistribution: Theory
To put together financial globalization, tax competition and the welfare state redistributive
system in a coherent analytical framework, and examine interactions among them, Razin and

11
Sadka (2018) develop a two-period, one-good, and small-open-economy model. The economy
responds to exogenously given world interest rate, taxes, an imperfect accessibility to
international capital markets and source-based taxation. There are two income groups: lowskilled-poor individuals and the high- skilled-rich individuals. The welfare state policy variables
(taxes and social benefits) are determined through majority voting. The welfare state provides a
uniform social benefit, financed by taxes on labor and capital income. The social benefit
variable captures the various ingredients that the welfare state accords, such as: health
services, education, in-kind transfers, etc. Domestic taxes on labor income and capital income
are proportional. The degree of globalization is captured by a measure of ease of moving capital
abroad. Specifically, we assume that there is some cost, 𝛿, per unit of investment abroad.
Raising the cost parameter, would raise or lower the intensity of globalization. Incentives for tax
competition are triggered by lowering the foreign tax on capital.
The model predicts, as intuition suggests, that financial globalization shifts capital from home
abroad. Naturally, both capital invested at home and abroad, are higher when the high-skill form
the majority, than when the low-skill form the majority. In addition, triggered by financial
globalization, the stock of domestic capital shrinks, the rate of return of domestic capital rises,
and the wage rate falls. Furthermore, financial globalization shifts the tax burden away from the
mobile factor, domestic capital to the immobile factor, labor. However, the total tax burden
becomes smaller, and consequently, the provision of the social benefits per capita (b) are
reduced. These results obtain regardless of which skill type form the majority. Naturally, the tax
rates on capital and labor are higher when a low-skill type form the majority, than when the highskill type forms the majority. In what follows we focus on the model’s predictions regarding
individual utility levels.

1.1.1

A Benchmark where the welfare state system does not exists

12

To highlight the key role of the welfare state in spreading the economy-wide globalization gains
to all income groups (the unskilled-poor individuals and the skilled-rich individuals), we consider
in this sub-section the extreme case where the welfare state does not exist (that is, 𝑡 , 𝑡 and b are
all set equal to zero).

Figure 3: Financial Globalization without welfare state: utility of the high skill type

13

Figure 4: Financial Globalization without welfare state: utility of the low high skill type

Figure 5: Financial Globalization without welfare state: consumption-based Gini coefficient

14

Figures 3-5 demonstrate that in the absence of redistribution, the consequences of the financial
globalization are: (i) high skill-rich individual gain; (ii) low-skill poor lose. Consequently, real
income inequality worsens.

2.1,2 A Rising Tide Lifts All Boats?

15

We now bring back the welfare state into the analysis. The welfare state tax-and-transfer policy is
politically controlled by the self-interest majority. That is, 𝑡 , 𝑡 and b (the labor and capital
income tax rates, and the social benefit, respectively) are all endogenously determined. The major
issue is how the economy-wide globalization gains spread to all income groups (the low-skilledpoor individuals and the high-skilled-rich individuals) when the tax-transfer system is determined
by the majority.

Figure 6:

Social Benefits per capita

16
Comparing the levels of the social benefit under the two regimes in Figure 6, there are two
forces at play. On the one hand, the tax rate is higher under a low-skill majority. On the other
hand, the economy is less productive when the low-skill labor is the larger component of the
labor force. This force reduces the total tax revenues. In our simulations, the second effect
dominates. As a result, the social benefit (b) is lower under the low-skill regime.
Does a rising tide lifts all boats? Note that for financial globalization to generate a Pareto
improvement in a multi-consumer economy it is essential to have a specific way for the
redistribution policy, so as to compensate the losers by taxing the winners. However, our
model’s redistribution system is constrained by who is the majority, low-skilled or high-skilled.
Figure 7:

Utility Level of High-Skill Individuals

Figure 8: Utility Level of Low-Skill Individuals

17

Nevertheless, as Figures 4 and 5 indicate, financial globalization is indeed a Paretoimprovement change. Both skill types, regardless of who form the majority, benefit from financial
globalization. Strictly speaking, the gains-to-all result depends crucially on the saving capacity of
the poor-unskilled. In an extreme case where there is no capital income, and the rich-skilled
group is in majority, the relatively poor group will lose. However, without the presence of the
welfare state system it will lose more.

We have shown that the social benefits decline as delta decreases (globalization increases).
Note that with high-skilled-rich group in the majority, the low skill utility gains do not change
monotonically with access to the world markets. What are the gains are for the low-skilled
workers that offset the reduction in benefits? It is essentially that they are getting a higher rate of
return on their savings, due to greater access to world markets. That is, there are two conflicting
forces at play: one hand the return to their savings rises with the globalization; on the hand,

18
wages and social benefits fall. If their initial endowment (wealth) is sufficiently low, and if the
low-skilled have preferences that lead them to save much less relative to their endowments than
the high-skilled, then the gains-to-all result might not hold.

Nevertheless, the welfare state system, either under the high-skilled regime or under the lowskilled regime, acts as a device that compensates the loser at the expense of the winner in a
way that financial globalization generates in effect Pareto improving changes.

2. Migration cum redistribution forces in history
Migrants from Europe (the Old World) formed the United States (the New World). Naturally,
migration to this new world was not restricted. Note that at this point the redistribution by the
federal and state governments was almost nil.7 Mass migration to the United States accelerated
starting in 1840 and peaked in the eve of World War 1. Migration amounted to about 300,000
migrants a year in the mid-19th century. It peaked to about 3 millions a year in the years before
WWI. WWI signaled the end of free migration worldwide. The League of Nations formed after
WWI failed to provide any support for international migration. Many countries, especially the
British Empire, insisted on their rights to limit migration, against the desire of countries such
China, Japan, and India who were all in favor of labor mobility. The 19th Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution granted American women the right to vote, a right known as women's suffrage, and
was ratified on August 18, 1920. In general, changes in institutional arrangements regarding
voting rights can produce sudden and significant changes in the relative income position of the

Milton Friedman is widely quoted for having stated that free immigration is simply incompatible with a
welfare state

7

19
decisive voter.8 A series of migration restricting Acts in the U.S. introduced after WWI. Migration

in the U.S. fell to mere 50,000 a year in the 1930’s; during the Great Depression. The 1917
Immigration Act excluded Asian immigration. The 1921 Emergency Quota Act limited migration
to 350,000 a year. The 1924 Johnson-Reed Act cut the quota to 150,000 a year. Following the
Great Depression the US gradually cut the quota to 50,000; see Goldin et al (2011). More recently,
the United States tilted its migration policy in favor of skilled migrants. The 1990 U.S.
Immigration Act inversed the number of temporary visas to highly skilled workers.9 In addition,
the United States universities and research centers significantly funded directly and indirectly by
the U.S. federal and state governments, attracted talented researchers from all over the world.
Many of them remained in the U.S. after completing their original term of education, training or
research. Most of them became citizens. By the mid -1990s, 30% of documented immigrants to
the U.S. were highly skilled.
Comparing the differences between Europe and the US regarding the evolving path of creating the
welfare state redistribution policy is instructive. Recall that the birth of the welfare state in Europe
goes back to Bismarck Germany in the late 19th century. Later, following the 20th century’s two
world wars, the European countries provided the world with their own model of the welfare state.
Forming the European economic union, the EU, allows for free migration with the union. The
removal of barriers to the mobility within the EU, in the framework of the European Single Market,
coincided with increased restrictions applied to the immigration from non-EU countries. EU

8

Meltzer and Richard (1983), using U.S. time‐series data for the periods 1937 and 1946–76, reported evidence that
growth in governmental outlays for many redistribution policy items was due, at least in part, to a decline in
median income relative to mean income.

9

Blau and Mackie (2017) write: “More than 40 million people living the United States were born in other
countries, and almost an equal number have at least one foreign‐born parent. Together, the first generation
(foreign born) and second generation (children of the foreign born) comprise almost one in four Americans.”

20

member states retained their sovereignty on non-EU immigration policy. The U.S. formed its
economic union as early as the late 18th century.
Social expenditure per capita are 7583 USD in Germany, 8040 USD in France, 8668 USD in
Sweden, but only 5838 USD in the U.S. (all figures are expressed in Purchasing Power Parity 2000
USD). These differences vary across the years but the pattern (i) and (ii) above remain. The
generosity of the European welfare stes exceed that of the US; see Figure 9.

Figure 9: Social Expenditures per capita in the U.S. and selected EU countries, 1980-2010
12000

10000

8000

Austria
Belgium

6000

Denmark
France
Germany

4000

Italy
Netherlands

2000

0

Notes:
(1) Constant PPP 2000 prices

21

(2) Public and mandatory private social expenditures
(3) Source: OECD library

3. Migration by skill types

The removal of barriers to the mobility within the EU, in the framework of the European Single
Market, coincided with increased restrictions to the immigration from non-EU countries. EU
member states were the ones who invoke the latter restrictions, as they retained their sovereignty
on non-EU immigration policy. The collapse of the Soviet Bloc and the following enlargement of
the EU to include Central and East European states brought additional migrants to the core-EU
countries. Overall, and unlike the U.S. migration, the European migration exhibit significant bias
toward low-skill migrants (see Boeri et al (2002) and Boeri (2010)).
The core EU member states have remarkably more generous welfare state than their counterparts
in the US. See Figure 1.

Table 2 compares the stocks of migrants, by educational attendance, between the EU 15 and the
U.S. Indeed, we can see that more than 40% of the stock of migrants in the U.S. are with tertiary
education, whereas the corresponding figure for the EU-15 is less than 25%. Similarly, about 48-

22

59% of the stock of migrants in the EU-15 have only primary education, whereas the corresponding
figures for the U.S. are only 22-26%.10

Table 2: The Stocks of Migrants, by Education- Level, Attendance, U.S. and the EU 15, 1990 and
2000.

Education-Level

EU-15

U.S.

(By Percentage of Total)

1990 2000

1990 2000

Primary

59

48

26

22

Secondary

24

28

31

36

Tertiary

18

24

43

24

100

100

100

100

Source: International Organization for Migration (IOM) and OECD.

10

See Razin and Sadka (2016) for a comparison of the US and the EU migration‐redistributive policies, based on
differences in the federal‐fiscal systems.

23

Data from the European Household Survey Panel reveals that in EU countries with high education
and income levels, such as Denmark, France, Germany, and the Netherlands, education levels of
non-EU foreigners is significantly below that of the native-born. The average skill-composition of
non-EU foreigners is well below that EU individual who moved from one EU-country to reside
in another EU country. United States universities and research centers significantly funded
directly and indirectly by the U.S. federal and state governments, attracted talented researchers
from all over the world. Many of them remained in the U.S. after completing their original term
of education, training or research. Most of them became citizens. By the mid of 1990s, 30% of
documented immigrants to the U.S. were highly skilled.

4.1 Policy-regulated migration vs. free migration
Today’s Western societies are sharply divided on migration policies—a reflection of deep social
divisions that are accentuated by large-scale migration flows. This is not a fertile ground for
populism, but rather nativism. Jeff Sachs (2017) put this succinctly when he said: “If people
were told that they could move, no questions asked, probably a billion would shift around the
planet within five years, with many coming to Europe and the US. No society would tolerate
even a fraction of that flow. Any politician who says, ‘let’s be generous,’ without saying—‘we’re
not going to let the doors wide open’ will lose.” Rational and generous policy that also resonates
politically will not eliminate national borders altogether. Rather, it will set calls for limits on flow
of migrants. 11

11

See however, Razin (2018b) for a unique case of free migration (albeit only Jews) and exceptional robust
assimilation of immigrants..

24

While immigration from poor countries often invokes images of large masses of unskilled
laborers, in reality it has been quite skill intensive. Immigration into high-income countries, even
if from countries with lower income per person, tends to be more concentrated among highly
educated than among less educated, relative to the population of the country of destination (see
Peri [2016]). The explanation for the concentration of rich-country immigrants among the highly
educated is the screening and selection migration policies by the destination countries.
In this context, Razin and Wahba (2015) examine two hypotheses associated with migration skill
mix: the fiscal burden hypothesis and the magnet hypothesis. The former asserts that under hostcountry migration policies the rise in the generosity of the welfare state will skew the skill mix
toward skilled migrants because they can ease fiscal burden. The other hypothesis asserts that
under free migration would-be low-skilled migrants will be more attracted to the welfare state, so
that a more generous welfare state will have its skill mix skewed toward the low-skilled
migrants. Accordingly, they investigate the effect of welfare state generosity on the difference
between skilled and unskilled migration rates, and the role of mobility restriction in shaping this
effect. They utilize the free labor movement within the European Union plus Norway and
Switzerland (henceforth referred to as EUROPE, or EUR) and the restricted movement from
outside EUROPE in order to compare the free-migration regime to the controlled-migration
regime. Using bilateral migration movements, and splitting the sample among flows within
EUROPE and flows from outside EUROPE, they identify the migration regime effect. In Table
8.1 the dependent variable is the share of skilled migrants in the migrant population, and the
main explanatory variable is “benefits per capita”—a measure of the generosity of the welfare
state. The hypothesis is that under free migration the coefficient of this variable is negative,
whereas under controlled migration the coefficient of “benefits per capita multiplied by R” is

25

positive. The indicator X is a dummy variable: R = 1 if migration is controlled, whereas R = 0 if
migration is free. Recall that the bilateral migration flows within EUROPE (EUR) are referred
to as free migration, whereas bilateral migration flows where the source is outside and the
destination is inside EUROPE are referred to as controlled migration.
Table 3: Skill composition of immigration: OLS estimates (Dependent variable: skill difference in

migration rates in 2000)

EUR & DC

EUR & LDC

to EUR

to EUR

Social benefits
per capita

–0.110

–0.112

–0.116

–0.115

–0.136

–0.131

(0.057)*

(0.056)**

(0.047)**

(0.056)**

(0.053)**

(0.047)***

0.113

0.137

0.132

0.102

0.101

0.110

(0.053)**

(0.064)**

(0.055)**

(0.065)

(0.079)

(0.066)*

–0.719

–0.719

–0.710

–0.612

–0.611

–0.609

(logs)
1974–1990
(host)
Social benefits
per capita
(logs)
1974–1990
(host) X R

low-skilled
migration rate
1990

(0.133)*** (0.129)*** (0.140)*** (0.128)*** (0.129)*** (0.137)***

26

low-skilled
migration rate
1990 x R
high-skilled
migration rate
1990
high-skilled
migration rate
1990 x R

1.723

1.751

0.560

0.552

(0.173)*** (0.169)*** (0.171)*** (0.196)

(0.234)**

(0.226)**

1.062

0.959

0.957

1.061

1.049

0.278

0.963

(0.150)*** (0.147)*** (0.155)*** (0.145)*** (0.146)*** (0.153)***
–0.725

–0.726

–0.712

–0.481

–0.627

–0.623

(0.149)*** (0.144)*** (0.151)*** (0.157)*** (0.170)*** (0.173)***

high-low labor
ratio in
1990 (host)
high-low labor
ratio in

–0.484

0.309

(0.237)**

(0.326)

0.309

0.019

high-low wage diff.
in
1995 (host)
high-low wage diff.
in
1995 (host) X R
Gini in 1990

1.723

0.012

0.003

0.001

(0.002)

(0.003)

–0.007

–0.005

(0.003)**

(0.003)*

0.013

0.011

0.011

27

(source)

Gini in 1990
(source) X R

High-low unemp.

(0.004)*** (0.004)***

(0.004)**

(0.005)**

–0.012

–0.010

–0.010

(0.005)*** (0.005)***

(0.005)**

(0.005)*

0.002

0.001

0.003

0.006

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

–0.002

–0.004

–0.005

–0.008

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.005)*

–0.002

–0.002

–0.014

rate diff.
in 1990 (host)
High-low unemp.
rate diff.
in 1990 (host) X R

Total migrant stock

–0.001

–0.001

–0.001

–0.002

in 1990

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)*** (0.001)**

(0.001)**

–2.079

–1.023

–3.904

–0.238

–1.945

–1.297

(2.803)

(3.237)

(3.403)

(2.145)

(2.477)

(3.007)

Observations

384

384

360

601

570

534

R-squared

0.864

0.870

0.874

0.832

0.809

0.814

Share of refugees
in 1990

Notes: F = free migration; R= restricted migration. Regressions include log distance, dummy for
same language in host and source, strong dummy between host and source, and real GDP per

28

capita in host and in source countries. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

4. Aging Welfare State and Migration
The modern welfare state typically redistributes income from from the young to the old either by
cash or in-kind transfers. With the aging of the population, the proportion of voters receiving
social security has increased, and these pensions are by far the largest component of transfers in
all industrial economies. Oeppen and Vaupel (2002) pose the question that lies at the heart of the
aging process: “is life expectancy approaching its limit?" Their answer: “Many... believe it is.
The evidence suggests otherwise. For 160 years, best-performance life expectancy has steadily
increased by a quarter of a year per annum, an extraordinary constancy of human achievement."
Indeed, the median age in Europe is forecasted to rise from 37.7 now to 52.7 in 2050 (The
Economist, August 24th, 2002, p. 22). Similarly, the ratio of the elderly (aged 60 years and over)
to the working-age population (aged 15-59 years) in West Europe is expected to double from 20
percent in the year 2000 to 40 percent in the year 2050 (op. cit, p. 22). These demographic trends
are driven by declining fertility rates: “At present, West European countries are following what
seems to be a normal demographic path: As they became richer after the 1950s, so their fertility
rates fell sharply. The average number of children borne by each woman during her lifetime fell
from well above the “replacement rate" of 2.1 - the rate at which the population remains stable to less than 1.4 now" (op. cit. p. 11).
TThe U.S. Census Bureau projects the ratio of the elderly population (aged 60 years and over) to
the working-age population (aged 15-59 years) to rise from a little over 15 percent in the year

29

2003 to almost 25 percent in the year 2050. The aging process is much more rapid in Western
Europe, where this ratio is projected to at least double from about 20% in the year 2000 to over
40% in the year 2050. The aging of the population has far-reaching implications for national
pension systems. Indeed, pensions policy will come under increasing strain everywhere. In
mainland Europe, where benefits are generous and pensions are not funded, governments will
find it difficult to raise enough taxation to fulfill pension promises. The O.E.C.D. predicts that
France, for example, will have to spend 33 percent more as a share of gross domestic product
than it does now.

Population growth has been shrinking in the G7 countries; especially in Germany and Japan.

30
Not only population shrinking, but it is also aging:

.

In many other countries, the simulated tax contribution rates that would balance the old-age
social security systems are significantly higher than the statutory rates. To put these staggering
figures in a proper perspective, recall that the Stability and Growth Pact of the EU puts a 60
percent target ceiling on public debt as a percentage of national income! A comprehensive study
conducted recently by Jagadeesh Gokhale and Kent Smetters (2003) takes into account all
current liabilities and projected future expenditures of the U.S. government and compares them
with all the revenues the government can expect to collect in the future. The difference (in
present value) is a staggering deficit of 44 trillion dollars, an almost quadruple of GNP. Major
contributing factors to this deficit are old-age social security and Medicare. Similarly, the
widespread low-skill migration also puts a strain on the public finances of the welfare state.
Being relatively low earners, migrants are typically net beneficiaries of the welfare state, that is,
they are expected to receive benefits in excess of the taxes (contributions) they pay. For instance,
a recent study, initiated by the U.S. National Research Council, estimates the overall net fiscal

31

burden of migrants (aged 20-40 years, with less than high school education on arrival) at about
$60,000-$150,000, over their own lifetime; see Smith and Edmonston (1997) and Blau and
Mackie 2017). One would naturally expect that as the share of the elderly in the population rises
when the population ages, their political clout would strengthen the pro welfare-state coalition.
Similarly, one would expect this coalition to gain more political power as more low-skill
migrants are naturalized. Thus, aging and migration seem to tilt the political power balance in the
direction of boosting the welfare state, imposing a growing burden on the existing workforce.
But this political-balance force conflicts with the fiscal-burden force if aging comes together
with low-skill migration which increases the share of net recipients of the generous welfare state.
But what if the welfare state tries to rely more heavily on capital taxes in order to finance the
social benefits it provides? Recall that the old derive most of their income from capital because
they retired from work. So, at first thought, it may seem that as the share of the old in an aging
population rises, then an attempt to rely more heavily on capital taxes would face a stiffer
political resistance. However, after a careful scrutiny of this hypothesis we come to an
unconventional conclusion: Aging plausibly tilts the political power balance in favor of larger
capital-financed welfare state. Literature cited provides also supportive empirical evidence from
the EU for this conclusion. Is the latter conclusion relevant? After all, aging is not the only
process witnessed nowadays.
The income redistributive feature of the welfare state makes it an attractive destination,
particularly for low-skill immigrants. For example, a study by Borjas (1994) indicates that
foreign-born households in the U.S. accounted for 10% of households receiving public assistance
in 1990, and for 13% of total cash assistance distributed, even though they constituted only 8%
of all households in the U.S.

32

5. Modelling the intra- and inter-generational conflicts
Most advanced economies face a generational distribution problem that migration might help
with, but migration affects young and old, rich and poor, differently. The welfare state of these
advanced economies is also a magnet for migrants, especially the low-skill. On the one hand, the
native-born older population need young immigrants to support the welfare state; on the other
hand these immigrants may increase the fiscal burden on the native-born young. How these
tensions are to be resolved in the political economy context? To highlight the intrinsic dynamics
of coalition formation in the context of a welfare state and in the presence of migration. 12
There are three distinct voting groups: skilled workers, unskilled workers, and old retirees. The
essence of inter- and intra-generational redistribution of a typical welfare system is captured with
a proportional tax on labor income to finance a transfer in a balanced-budget manner. Our recent
research analyses the political-economic equilibrium policy rules consisting of the tax rate, the
skill composition of migrants, and the total number of migrants. When none of these groups
enjoy a majority (50% of the voters or more), political coalitions will form. With overlapping
generations and policy-determined influx of immigrants, the formation of the political coalitions
changes over time. With forward-looking voters, the future changes are strategically taken into
account when policies are shaped. A common feature among models with Markov-perfect
equilibrium, as in the Razin et al (2014) model, is the idea that today’s voters have the power to
influence the identity of future policymakers. We built a dynamic political-economic model
featuring three distinct voting groups: skilled workers, unskilled workers, and retirees, with both

12

Razin and Sadka (2014) and Razin et al. (2014)) help us think about the various sharp and seemingly inconsistent
reactions of different income and age groups to migration and welfare state policies.

33

inter- and intra-generational redistribution, resembling a typical welfare state. The skilled
workers are net contributors to the welfare state whereas the unskilled workers and old retirees
are net beneficiaries. They provide an analytical characterization for the policymaking coalitions,
which design the tax rate, immigrants’ skill composition, and the total number of immigrants.13
The model is designed to make a three-dimensional policy choice in such a way that there are a
clear ‘left’ group, a ‘center’ group, and a ‘right’ group. The left group consists of the old nativeborn and the old first-generation immigrants (both skilled and unskilled) who earn no income
and wish to extend as much as possible the generosity of the welfare state. They prefer to admit
as many skilled immigrants as possible to help finance the generosity of the welfare state. The
right group consists of the native-born skilled workers who bear the lion’s share of financing the
welfare state and wish therefore to downscale its generosity as much as possible. The attitude of
this group toward skilled immigrants is subject to two conflicting considerations. On the one
hand, they benefit from the contribution of the skilled immigrants to the financing of the welfare
state, which alleviates the burden on them. On the other hand, they are aware that the offspring
of the skilled immigrants will vote to downscale the generosity of the welfare state in the next
period, when the members of this right group turn older and benefit from the generosity of the
welfare state. The fact that the fertility rate of immigrants is larger than the native-born amplifies
this consideration.

13

The electoral system is that of Besley and Coate (1997), known as the citizen‐candidates model with strategic
voting behaviors (also similar to Osborne and Slivinski (1996), albeit under sincere‐voting behaviors). Each of the
three distinct voting groups presents a candidate who will implement the most preferred policy of his group, if
elected. When one of these groups enjoys a majority (that is, it constitutes more than 50% of the voters), then its
candidate automatically wins the election and implements his most preferred policy. Noteworthy is that the
current preferred policy (especially with respect to immigration) takes in to account how immigration may change
the composition of the voters in each group and, consequently, the policy that will be implemented in the future.
When no group enjoys the majority, there is effectively a ‘second round’ run‐off between two candidates
representing the two largest groups of voters. Despite having its representative candidate, the third group, the
smallest, will vote for the candidate of that one of the two largest groups whose most preferred policy is better for
the third group, even though this policy is not the preferred policy of the third group.

34

The center group consists of the native-born unskilled young. They do like the generous welfare
state, but not as much as the old do because they also pay for it. They like it more than the
native-born skilled young do, because they pay less for it –making them net beneficiaries. With
respect to immigration, they (like the native-born skilled young) face two conflicting effects. On
the one hand, they would like to admit skilled immigrants who contribute positively towards the
finances of the welfare state in the current period. But, on the other hand, they are concerned that
the skilled offspring of these skilled migrants will tilt the political balance of power in favor of
the skilled in the next period; and, consequently, against the generosity of the welfare state. The
center group is more pro-skilled immigrant than the left group, but similar in attitude to the right
group.
A common feature among models with Markov-perfect equilibrium is the idea that today’s
voters have the power to influence the identity of future policymakers.
The migration policy of either young group reflects the fact that they may want to make
themselves the largest group in the next period. Thus, instead of letting in too many migrants
(who will give birth to a large new generation of skilled workers) they will want to limit
immigration. The skilled are net contributors to the welfare state, while the other two groups are
net beneficiaries. The preferences of the old retirees are simple. If the old cohort is the largest, it
wants maximal welfare social benefits; that is, taxing up to the Laffer point. They also allow the
maximum number of skilled migrants into the economy in order to benefit from their tax
contributions.
The unskilled young are net beneficiaries of the welfare state. Clearly, the unskilled workers also
prefer a migration policy that lets in skilled immigrants (due to their contribution to the welfare
state). Nevertheless, the unskilled also pay taxes. Hence, the preferred tax rate of the unskilled

35

voters must be smaller than the Laffer point. How many they will let in depends on a simple
tradeoff. They weigh the future social security benefits against the tax burden in the present. If
the unskilled workers are not sufficiently forward-looking, it is in their best interest to let into the
economy as many skilled migrants as the economy is capable of absorbing. If, however, they are
not so myopic, such a large wave of migrants – who are more fertile then their native-born
counterparts – will lead to too little income redistribution in the next period, because the skilled
workers will be the largest voting group.
The skilled native-born young prefer more skilled migrants for a different reason than the other
two groups. Thanks to the higher fertility rate of migrants, this will create higher number of
skilled native workers in the next period when they retire, compared to the native-born. By being
forward-looking, the skilled native-born will also prefer to let in more skilled workers in their
retirement period. However, they prefer not to let in too many of them, because migrants’ high
birth rate may render the skilled young in the next period the largest group, who will then vote to
weaken the generosity of the welfare state.
Note that the current political debate in the US about the path to citizenship of the existing illegal
immigrants is significantly influenced by current expectations about how these new citizens may
affect the future composition of the voting population.
The evolution of coalition formation and the fiscal and immigration policies over time depends
naturally on the state in which the economy starts. Razin et al. (2014) model the problem at hand
so that the state variable of this stylized economy depends exclusively on the share of the nativeborn skilled young in the total native-born young population. We find that there are several
decisive ranges for this share that determine which one of the three groups’ preferred policies
prevails. The ranges are arranged from the lowest values of the state variable (starting from 0),

36

up to the largest value of the state variable (ending at 1). These ranges depend on the fertility
rates of the native-born and the first-generation immigrants. That is, the cut-off levels of the state
variable, which are the borderlines of the ranges, depend on the ageing of the population. When
the share of the native-born skilled young (in the total native-born young population) falls into
the lowest range, the policy that will be implemented is the preferred policy of the center group
(the native-born unskilled young). In this case, this group forms a majority and its candidate is
able to implement his most preferred policy – moderate welfare-state generosity with large, but
not extreme, influx of skilled immigrants only. Therefore, the share of the native-born skilled
grows over time. Eventually the share enters the next range.
When the share enters the next range, the center group is still the largest group, but does not
constitute a majority. The native-born skilled is the smallest group in this case. This latter group,
being on the right, always prefers the most preferred policy of the center group to the most
preferred policy of the left group (the old). Therefore, the most preferred policy of the center will
win, though by a coalition (with the right) in this case, rather than by a sheer majority of the
center group. Note that this policy increases over time the share of the native-born skilled, and
eventually the share of the native-born skilled young in the total native-born young population
enters the next range.
When the share of the native-born skilled young in the total native-born young population moves
into the next range, then the left group (the old) is the largest group, but does not constitute a
majority. The right group (the native-born skilled) is the smallest group. In this case, the center
group (the native-born unskilled) will join a coalition led by the left, provided that the preferred
tax rate of the left group is not excessive. The left group candidate wins and the most preferred
policy of the left will be implemented – an extreme generosity of the welfare state and an

37

extreme influx of skilled immigrants.
Consequently, the share of the native-born skilled young in the total native-born young
population continues to rise, and so on. Eventually, when the share of the native-born skilled
young in the total native-born young population becomes too large, the right group (the nativeborn skilled) becomes the largest group and its candidate will get to implement the group’s most
preferred policy – the generosity of the welfare state will be severely downscaled. All will be
concerned about admitting more skilled immigrants; it would render the skilled in the next period
an unbeatable majority, who would severely cut their benefits in the next period, when they grow
old. This future threat to the welfare state helps balance the dynamic forces to further changes in
the share of the native-born skilled young in the total native-born young population, and it stops
rising. Only limited skilled immigrants are to be allowed in. The share of skilled native born will
then converge to its steady state.
Naturally, a lower rate of population growth (that is, an ageing population) increases the political
influence of the old (the left group). However, as Razin et al. (2000) demonstrate the increased
share of old-age dependents in the population also raises the fiscal burden on the young
(particularly, the skilled). Thus, the effect of ageing of the native-born on the coalitions is subject
to two conflicting effects: the change in the political balance and the change in the fiscal burden
on the working-age population.

6. Conclusion
Many large industrialized economies have embarked in recent years on a track of trimming the

38

generosity of their pension and other welfare-state programs. The general rules are quite
straightforward: Raise retirement age and curtail benefits. Following the report of the Greenspan
Committee (January, 1983), the U.S. has gradually raised the retirement age to reach 67 in the
year 2027. Similarly, but much later France, in July 2003 decided to require public sector
workers (about one-fourth of the French workforce) to contribute to the state pension system for
40 years, instead of 37.5 years. Also, Germany, which already raised its retirement age from 63
to 65, is currently contemplating raising it further to 67 between 2011 and 2035. With respect to
curtailing benefits, this is usually accomplished by abandoning wage-indexation in favor of
price-indexation. Naturally, as real wages rise over time (due mostly to productivity increases),
price-indexation is less generous to pensioners than wage-indexation; see Cogan and Mitchell
(2003) for the U.S. and Thode (2003) for Europe. Financial globalization across various
economies is a universal phenomenon to reckon with today. Can the welfare state, financed
partly by high capital taxes survive international tax competition brought about by such
globalization? Evidently, the answer is in it can; and it seems to be crucial to spread the gains
from financial asset trade across various income groups. To demonstrate these points we apply a
political economy model where the pillars of the welfare state system are determined by the
majority group, poor-low skilled or rich-high skilled to assess the forces of globalization.
We have shown that the social benefits decline as financial globalization increases. What are the
gains are for the low-skilled workers that offset the reduction in benefits? It is essentially that
they are getting a higher rate of return on their savings due to greater access to world markets.
But in essence their well-being is subject to two conflicting forces that are at play: one hand the
return to their savings rises with the globalization; on the hand, wages and social benefits fall. If
their initial wealth is sufficiently low, and if the low-skilled have preferences that lead them to

39

save much less relative to their wealth than the high-skilled-rich, then the gains-to-all result
might not hold. However, even in this case they are better off having a welfare state system in
place rather than its absence, to compensate them from depressed wages and declining provision
of social benefits.
One would naturally expect that as the share of the elderly in the population rises when the
population ages, their political clout would strengthen the pro welfare-state coalition. Similarly,
one would expect this coalition to gain more political power as more low-skill migrants are
naturalized. Thus, aging and low-skilled migration seem to tilt the political power balance in the
direction of boosting the welfare state, imposing a growing burden on the existing workforce.
But this political-balance force conflicts with the fiscal-burden force if aging comes together
with low-skill migration which increases the share of net recipients of the generous welfare state.
But what if the welfare state tries to rely more heavily on capital taxes in order to finance the
social benefits it provides? Recall that the old derive most of their income from capital because
they retired from work. So, at first thought, it may seem that as the share of the old in an aging
population rises, then an attempt to rely more heavily on capital taxes would face a stiffer
political resistance. However, after a careful scrutiny of this hypothesis we come to an
unconventional conclusion: Aging plausibly tilts the political power balance in favor of larger
capital-financed welfare state. Literature cited provides also supportive empirical evidence from
the EU for this conclusion. Is the latter conclusion relevant? After all, aging is not the only
process witnessed nowadays.

References

40

Auerbach, Alan J. (1983). “Corporate Taxation in the United States." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2: 451-513.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), “The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic
Review 2013, 103(6): 2121–2168.
Besley, Tim, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2001). “Empirical Evidence
On Fiscal Interdependence in OECD Countries." Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997),”An Economic Model of Representative
Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), February, 85-114.
Boeri, Tito, Gordon Hanson and Barry McCormick (eds.) (2002) Immigration Policy and
the Welfare State System: A Report, Fondazione Rodolfo Debendetti.
Boeri, Tito (2010), Immigration to the Land of Redistribution,”

Economica, Volume77,

Issue308, October 2010, Pages 651-687.
Blau, Francine. and C. Mackie (eds.), 2016. The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of
Immigration, Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Caminada, Koen, Kees Goudswaard, and Olaf Van Vliet, (2010), “Patterns of Welfare
StateIndicators in the EU: Is there Convergence?” Journal of Common Market Studies,
Volume 48, Issue 3, June 2010, Pages 529-556.

41

Cogan, John F. and Olivia S. Mitchell (2003). “Perspectives from the President’s
Commission on Social Security Reform." Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(2). Spring.
Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith (2002). “The Impact of Corporate Taxation on
the Location of Capital: A Review." Swedish Economic Policy Review.
Devereux, Michael P., Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2002). “Corporate Income
Tax Reform and International Tax Competition." Economic Policy 35 (October): 451-488.
Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm (2002), “ Corporate
income tax reforms and international tax competition,”

Economic Policy, Volume 17,

Issue 35, 1 October 2002, Pages 449–495.
Goldin, I., G. Cameron, and M. Balarian (2011), Exceptional people: How migration
shaped our world and will define our future, Princeton University Press.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenseon (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior."
American Economic Review 57: 391-414.
Helpman, Elhanan (2018), Globalization and Inequality, Harvard University Press.
Hines, James R. (1999). “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation."
National Tax Journal 52: 304-322.
OECD (1998). Human Capital and Investment: An International Comparison. Paris,
OECD. OECD (1991). Taxing Profits in a Global Economy: Domestic and International
Issues. Paris.

42

Oeppen, Jim and Vaupel, James W. (2002). “Demography: Broken Limits to Life
Expectancy." Science 296 (May): 1029-1031.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, I. P., and Giovanni Peri (2012), "Rethinking the Effect of
Immigration on

Wages," Journal of the European Economic Association, Volume 10,

Issue 1, 1 February 2012, Pages 152–197.
Peri, Giovanni (2016), “Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets,”

Journal of

Economic Perspectives, Vol. 30, No. 4, Fall.
Osborn, Martin J. and Al Slivinski (1996),”A Model of Political Competition with CitizenCandidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1), 65-96.
King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton (1984) “Comparisons of Effective Tax Rates,” in
King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton (eds.) The Taxation of Income from Capital: A
Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Germany,
University of Chicago Press.
Krautheim, Sebastian, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenhor (2011), “Heterogeneous firms, ‘profit
Shifting’ FDI and international tax competition,” Journal of Public Economics
Volume 95, Issues 1–2, February, Pages 122-133.
Krugman, Paul (2008), “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2008, pp. 103-154.

43

Meltzer, A.H. and Richard, S.F. (1983). Tests of a rational theory of the size of
government. Public Choice 41: 403–418
Razin, Assaf (2018a), Israel and the World Economy: The Power of Globalization, MIT
Press.
Razin, Assaf (2018b), “Israel’s immigration story: Winners and Losers,” Israel Economic
Review Vol. 15, No. 1 (2018), 73-106.
Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka (2014), Migration States and Welfare States: Why is
America Different from Europe? Pelgrave Pivot Series, Pelgrave-MacMillan.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2018), “Financial Globalization and the Welfare State, “
NBER Working Paper 24754.
Razin, Assaf and Jackline Wahba (2015), “Welfare Magnet Hypothesis, Fiscal Burden,
And Immigration Skill Selectivity, “

The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,

Volume117, Issue2, April 2015, Pages 369-402.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Chang Woon Nam (2005), The Decline of the Welfare
State: Demography and Globalization, MIT Press.
Razin, Assaf , Efraim Sadka, and Benjarong Suwankiri (2014), Migration and the
Welfare State: Political-Economy Formation Policy, MIT Press.
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel (2002a), “The Aging Population and the
Size of the Welfare State”, Journal of Political Economy, 110, pp.910-918.

44

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel (2002b), “Tax burden and migration: a
Political economy theory and evidence”, Journal of Public Economics, 85 (2), 167–190.
Sorensen, Peter Birch (2002). “The Case for International Tax Coordination
Reconsidered." Economic Policy 31: 429-472.
Thode, Eric (2003). “Securing Pensions for the Next Fifty Years - Achievements of Recent
Reforms in Selected Countries." Dice Report: Journal of Institutional Comparisons, 1(1)
Spring: 3-10.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. (2016), “Toward an International Migration Regime,”

American

Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2016, 106(5): 451–455.
Smith, James P. and Barry Edmonston (eds.) (1977). The New American: Economic,
Demographic and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.
Stolper, Wolfgang W., and Paul A. Samuelson (1941),”Protection and Real Wages,”
Review of Economic Studies, 9, pp. 58-73.
Yeaple, Stephen R. (2005), “A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity and International
Trade, and Wages.” Journal of International Economics 65: 1–20.
UNCTAD (2018), Country Fact Sheets 2018,
http://unctad.org/sections/dite_dir/docs/wir2018/wir18_fs_cn_en.pdf

45

46

