                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ORGANIZATIONAL DECISION MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY SHOCKS

                                       Luis Ballesteros
                                      Howard Kunreuther

                                      Working Paper 24924
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24924


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




Support for this research comes from the Travelers-Wharton Risk Management and Leadership
project; the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (G-2018-11100 / SUB18-04); and the Wharton Risk
Management and Decision Processes Center’s Extreme Events project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Luis Ballesteros and Howard Kunreuther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Organizational Decision Making Under Uncertainty Shocks
Luis Ballesteros and Howard Kunreuther
NBER Working Paper No. 24924
August 2018
JEL No. D01,D03,D81,F23,L2,L22

                                          ABSTRACT

In line with the fallacy of riskification of uncertainty by which decision makers believe that the
effects of unpredictable phenomena can be captured accurately by probability distributions,
organizational scholars commonly treat the organizational inefficiency in dealing with
uncertainty shocks—exogenous hazards whose welfare effects spread across industries and
markets, such as natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and financial crises—as a problem of risk
management. This is problematic because the consequences of uncertainty shocks outstrip the
predictability capacity for the average manager and entail a greater complexity of internal and
external factors. Moreover, their uniqueness makes translating experience into learning far more
difficult. We seek to address this inadequate approach with a theoretical framework that captures
the multidimensional complexity of organizations preparing for, coping with, and recovering
from exogenous uncertain disruption. We bring together the literatures on cognitive psychology
that suggest that biases and heuristics drive behavior under uncertainty, a Neo-Carnegie
perspective that indicates that organizational structure and strategy regulate these behavioral
factors, and institutional theory that points to stakeholder and institutional dynamics affecting
economic incentives to invest in prevention and business continuity. Taken together, this article
offers the foundation for a behaviorally plausible, decision-centered perspective on organizational
decision-making under uncertainty.


Luis Ballesteros
The George Washington University
2201 G Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20052
ballesteros@gwu.edu

Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
In the last 20 years, terrorist attacks, natural disasters, technological accidents, financial crises

and political coups have become the principal determinants of volatility affecting firm

performance and a major cause of firm insolvency or bankruptcy (Baker & Bloom, 2013;

Ballesteros, Wry, & Useem, 2018; Consultants, 2018). The Federal Emergency Management

Agency estimates that 40% of businesses in the United States do not reopen after being hit by a

natural disaster and 90% fail within a year if they have not resumed operations in less than a

week (FEMA, 2015). The disruption is pervasive even among the largest and oldest firms that

have been enduring uncertainty shocks for decades. There is evidence, for instance, that the 9/11

terrorist attacks reduced 5.6% of the overall value of the largest 100 companies worldwide and

some firms have not recovered the loss value six years after the attacks (Suder, Chailan, &

Suder, 2008).


    The growing scholarship studying the consequences of these shocks on organizations has

traditionally approached the problem as one of risk management. Scholars refer to these

phenomena as “discontinuous risk” (Oetzel & Oh, 2014), and argue that catastrophes such as

9/11, Hurricane Katrina, the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan, the 2007-09

financial crisis and the 2017 trifecta (Hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria) have solidified the

public discourse of the risk society: a world concerned with identifying and managing risks

(Beck, 2006). This is in line with the fallacy of riskification of uncertainty by which decision

makers believe that probability distributions can capture unpredictability (Hardy & Maguire,

2016).


    This approach, however, entails an important functional inaccuracy: the consequences of

these shocks outstrip the dimension of predictability for the average manager. To illustrate this

point, most firms in the Houston area were not aware that urban planning and policymaking

would fuel flooding that led to a 1-in-1000-years economic destruction (Ballesteros & Gatignon,

n.d.). Prior to the Tōhoku disaster, scientists calculated a close-to-zero probability that the


                                                                                                        2
Fukushima Daiichi plant could be affected by a hundred-foot wave tsunami (Ferris & Solis,

2013). When Katrina hit New Orleans and became the worst natural disaster in U.S. history, the

magnitude of the storm refuted experts’ accounts that the city’s levees would contain the water

surge (Cutter, 2006). Similarly, the widespread 2007-09 economic meltdown surprised analysts

and regulators regarding the resilience of international financial markets (Jin, Kanagaretnam, &

Lobo, 2011).


   The dynamic nature of these shocks is rarely captured by the static measurements, such as the

gross domestic product (GDP), used to calculate disaster vulnerability, design emergency

preparedness plans, and allocate relief (Ballesteros, Useem, & Wry, 2017; Bloom, 2009) After

Japan experienced a 9.0-magnitude earthquake in 2011, many firms with operations in the

country believed that the third largest economy worldwide would be barely affected and that the

potential market disruption would be minimal (Cavallo, Cavallo, & Rigobon, 2013). At the time,

public debt was twice Japan’s s GDP so the government had limited liquid resources to quickly

mobilize for relief. The economic impact of the earthquake would become the costliest disaster

in history (Ballesteros & Useem, 2015).


   The decision-making processes associated with uncertain shocks are far more complex than

when the firm deals with more predictable risks. In fact, several of the actions implemented by

managers when coping with the consequences of these disruptions s are ad-hoc and deviate from

well-established routines. (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018). Given the uniqueness of each disaster,

organizational change, such as employee turnover (Knyazeva, Knyazeva, & Stiglitz, 2013), and

environmental change, such as urbanization (Kousky, 2013), experience rarely makes impacts

predictable and responses generalizable (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018; Lampel, Shamsie, &

Shapira, 2009).


   With this article, we seek to address the inadequate approach in the study of how firms deal

with what we call uncertainty shocks: exogenous and unpredictable disruptions whose welfare

                                                                                                   3
effects spread across geographies, industries, and markets. We offer a theoretical synthesis of

organizational decision making that captures the multidimensional complexity of preparing for,

coping with, and recovering from uncertain disruption. We illustrate cases of how individual-,

firm-, and context-specific factors determine the functioning of the organization before, during,

and after disruption.


   More generally, we aim to redress the lack of systematic attention to the role of uncertainty

shocks in organizational performance. Arguably, this neglect is due, in part, to the tendency to

treat rare shocks as outliers in organizational life, “accidental manifestations of underlying

organizational processes” (Lampel et al., 2009: 835). Management and organizational scholars

have concentrated their attention on individual or idiosyncratic risks affecting a single firm—

such as the risk of technological obsolescence (Tripsas, 2009), the risk of bad relationships with

key stakeholders (Bitektine, 2011), the risk of imitative competition (Lieberman & Montgomery,

2013), and the risk associated with foreign expansion (Zaheer, 1995).


   Extrapolating from what we know about how firms deal with individual risks to uncertain

shocks is inappropriate because dealing with these broad-based, correlated, or systemic

phenomena entail different mechanisms and levels of organizational resources (Altay &

Ramirez, 2010; Baker & Bloom, 2013; Kunreuther, 1996; Teece & Leih, 2016). For instance,

when a corporation suffers an individual shock like a factory fire, it can draw resources from

other subsidiaries and mitigate its impact. In some cases, the temporary changes in performance

associated with individual shocks are fully concentrated at the corporate level. In the context of

uncertainty shocks, the efficiency of pooling disappears because financial losses are often larger

than the available firm resources.


   More importantly, the decision-making process for dealing with uncertainty shocks is far

more complex than for idiosyncratic risks because it involves a diversity of employees at distinct

levels in the organization whose choices are affected by three dimensions. First, individuals

                                                                                                     4
combine intuitive with deliberative thinking when making decisions under uncertainty (Meyer &

Kunreuther, 2017). Intuitive thinking operates automatically and quickly guided by emotions and

rules of thumb acquired by personal experience. Deliberative thinking allocates attention to

effortful and intentional mental activities where individuals undertake trade-offs, recognize

relevant interdependencies and the need for coordination (Kahneman, 2011). This micro

dimension thus focuses on how managers and other employees attend to external phenomena,

perceive them as threats, communicate those perceptions, and follow actions and coordinate with

others to address them (Lampel et al., 2009).


   Second, a meso dimension builds on the tradition of the Carnegie School literature by

illuminating how organizational structures and strategies are impacted by intuitive and

deliberative thinking via authority, communication, and incentive systems (Gavetti, 2012;

Gavetti, Levinthal, & Ocasio, 2007). More specifically, the way information plays a role in

choosing a course of action during disruption depends not only on how the C-suite level

transforms and disseminates information, but also on how other levels of the organization

interpret and value this information (Gavetti, Greve, Kaplan, Nadkarni, & Rerup, 2017; Hoffman

& Ocasio, 2001; March & Shapira, 1992). In turn, the effectiveness of organizational procedures

to implement courses of action by teams across the organization will impact the ability to avoid

major performance losses (Beck & Plowman, 2009; Starbuck, 2009; Zollo, 2009).


   Finally, a macro dimension draws upon institutional theory to analyze the external

determinants of exposure to, management of, and learning from uncertainty shocks. Local norms,

rules, and customs and stakeholder dynamics influence a firm’s decisions on preparing for a

disaster (Aghion, Bloom, & Lucking, 2016; Bloom & Reenen, 2007; Bloom, Sadun, & Reenen,

2012). For instance, public subsidies and post-disaster aid may foster commercial expansion into

disaster-prone areas (Cummins & Mahul, 2009; Wenzel & Wolf, 2013). In turn, the firm’s

investment in preventive infrastructure may affect how much nearby organizations will be


                                                                                                   5
investing in prevention regardless of their own level of hazard exposure (Kunreuther, Meyer, &

Michel-Kerjan, 2013).


    These three dimensions have not been integrated into a theoretical argumentation in the

literature on organizational decision making. Scholars have noted that a micro focus centering on

routines, or a macro focus focusing on the social context in which firms operate, has supplanted

an organizational component (Gavetti et al., 2007). Studies on the microfoundations of

organizational behavior often do not integrate communication, incentives, and authority

structures that influence how employees behave (Bingham & Eisenhardt, 2014; Gavetti, 2012;

Helfat & Peteraf, 2015). Analyses of the institutional factors affecting organizational choices

have oversimplified behavioral processes that impact decision making within the firm (Felin,

Foss, & Ployhart, 2015; Lampel et al., 2009; Teece, 2007). This is hard to reconcile with the

consensus among management and organizational scholars that firms are not monolithic entities

and there is no such thing as organizational preferences (Argote & Greve, 2007; March & Olsen,

1975). As a result, the literature lacks a single theory covering the causal path characterizing how

organizations manage and learn from uncertainty shocks.


    To tackle this gap, we propose a theoretical framework in which a firm’s capability to

manage uncertainty shocks is a dynamic system where organizational strategy and structure

interact with institutional and stakeholder forces in ways that determine how biases and

heuristics affect incentives to prevent rare disruptions and deal with their impacts should they

occur. We build on interviews with managers with over 100 firms in the Standards & Poor’s 500

Index to connect insights from the cognitive psychology, Neo-Carnegie, and institutional

literatures. 1 Caselets, quotes and anecdotes from this qualitative study illustrate the complexity


1
  Over a five-year period, a research team from the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center and
Wharton Leadership Center at the University of Pennsylvania conducted interviews with chief financial officers, risk
managers, and other employees on their teams, units, and firms’ actions before, during, and after severe adverse
events. The firms differ by industry sector and size, with annual revenues ranging from $1 billion to over $400
billion (median revenue: $12 billion average revenue: $29 billion). Their work forces range from a few thousand

                                                                                                                  6
of achieving collective action when the firm faces environmental unpredictability and causal

ambiguity. Our theoretical framework thus presents a behaviorally plausible perspective on

organizational processes under uncertainty and responds to calls for refocusing attention to

organizational decision-making (Gavetti et al., 2007).


    In what follows, we characterize the implications of uncertainty shocks for managerial

practice and then develop the three dimensions of our theoretical framework. We hope that

future empirical studies will refine our model to generate a more nuanced understanding of the

mechanisms and conditions under which organizations avoid major performance disruptions and

learn appropriately from external shocks. We discuss these potential avenues of research in the

concluding section.


                    MANAGING IN THE ERA OF UNCERTAINTY SHOCKS


A well accepted idea among management and organizational scholars is that uncertainty is the

essence of entrepreneurship and firm performance (Alvarez & Barney, 2005; Baker & Nelson,

2005; Kaplan, 2008; March & Shapira, 1987; Milliken, 1987; Sarasvathy, 2001; Teece & Leih,

2016). Remarkably, this consensus has rarely translated into an explicit and systematic study of

organizational decision making under exogenous uncertainty (Teece & Leih, 2016). This is

puzzling because the relationship between environmental turbulence and organizational

operation and performance volatility are central tenets in strategy and management (Aghion et

al., 2016; Ahuja & Yayavaram, 2011; Gaba & Terlaak, 2013; Maitland & Sammartino, 2014;

Ryall, 2009). When studied, the literature treat natural disasters, financial crises, terrorist attacks

and other uncertainty shocks as risks (Oetzel & Oh, 2014) and the pervasive failure of

organizations to deal with them as a “failure to effectively manage risks” (Hardy & Maguire,

2016: 80).


employees to over two million (median number of employees: 20,000; average number of employees: 70,000). For
more details see Kunreuther and Useem (2018).

                                                                                                               7
   On the other hand, managerial attention to uncertainty shocks has grown considerably. Once

thought of as a technical subject for specialist attention, uncertainty is now far more central in

organizational decision making today. Publicly-listed firms, for instance, discuss the topic of

uncertainty shocks at most board meetings as they relate to adverse shocks that they and other

firms experienced (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018). For instance, a 2017 report shows that

interviewed managers considered natural disasters 1.89, 3.5, and 4.4 times more disruptive than

the individual-risk incidents of cyber, product-quality, and internal supply-chain disruption,

respectively (Allianz Global Corporate & Speciality, 2017).


   This trend in practitioner attention reflects the rise in the associated financial toll on business

performance. Every year, uncertainty shocks disrupt supply chains (Boehm, 2014; Cavallo et al.,

2013), trigger temporal or permanent institutional changes such as more stringent building codes

or liquidity limits for market operation (Klinenberg, 2003; Useem, Kunreuther, & Michel-

Kerjan, 2015) inflict direct damages on the firm, such as injuring employees or destroying plants

(Whiteman, Muller, & Voort, 2005). Consider the cases associated with the 2010 floods in

Thailand. This disaster caused a major setback to Apple in its production of computers, a

quarterly loss and production drop for months to Western Digital (the world’s largest maker of

hard-disk drives), and suspension of automobile production for Toyota and Ford. The 2011

Tōhoku disaster affected massive conglomerates such as Sony which had to shut down

operations in six plants, and Panasonic, which closed its two biggest plants in Japan, reported a

quarterly revenue loss of 11% associated with the disaster, and eventually had to sell part of its

appliance business (Ballesteros, 2017). In summary, the average firm in 2016 was estimated to

be 25 times more likely to face disaster losses than a similar organization 20 years before and

the disruption is widespread across firm sizes (Ballesteros, 2017; SwissRe, 2018).




The Riskification of Uncertainty Shocks

                                                                                                     8
Historically, and in line with the predominant discourse on risk, the pervasive inefficiency in

dealing with uncertainty shocks has been approached empirically and theoretically as a risk-

management problem (Hardy & Maguire, 2016; Lampel et al., 2009). Popular and expert media

thus identifies firms failing to deal after these phenomena as those that tried but did not have

adequate hedging mechanisms or those that could have hedged their risk, for instance by buying

insurance, but opted not to.


   This narrative creates several fallacies. The first one is the riskification of uncertainty: the

idea that, at some point, decision makers will transform exogenous uncertainty into risk by

generating probability distributions of its threats (Hardy & Maguire, 2016). However, despite

progress in measuring the consequences of catastrophes, reliable information on their effects

takes months or years to be produced and released (Kousky, 2013). Firms are rarely provided

with a description of the damage to infrastructure and other public goods, the resources and time

needed for recovery. Hence, organizations often utilize data that are not associated with the

disaster in making emergency decisions. For example, when allocating resources to rebuilding

economic infrastructure, firms often use the expenditures following significantly different past

disasters (Ballesteros et al., 2018). Additionally, the riskification of uncertainty leads to the

delusion that increasing formal insurance take-up is a sufficient mechanism to reduce

vulnerability against uncertainty shocks. This fails to consider that sophisticated risk transfer

instruments, such as parametric insurance, weather derivatives, and catastrophe bonds have been

available for firms for over 25 years (Ballesteros, 2010), while the average economic loss has

skyrocketed. Moreover, because a cost-benefit assessment is often infeasible, biases and

heuristics play a preponderant part in hedging choices not only among naïve decision-makers but

also among users of logic and probability (Kunreuther, Meyer, et al., 2013).


   More problematic is the fallacy that learning from high-consequence shocks is a temporal,

finite process (Rerup, 2009). Managers focus their attention on shocks that were particularly


                                                                                                      9
consequential for the organization and repeat or avoid choices that proved successful or

unsuccessful in dealing with these disruptions. They believe that experiencing the consequences

of shocks have prepared the organization for dealing with future disruption without considering

the uniqueness of these shocks, which leads to a false sense of control. For example, a large

retailer reacted to the H5N1 (avian flu) outbreak by preparing for an H5 type virus. But when the

next influenza outbreak hit a couple of years later, it took the form of the H1 strain, and thus the

plan was not applicable. A manager of this company told us that “A lesson coming out of

disasters is that, number one, you can spend a lot of time building out intricate plans for

different scenarios, but the odds are what you’re actually going to face is not going to be exact.

So, you’re planning …to have generic strategies… that are often hard to adapt.”


   Another fallacy is that firms will be better off by centralizing the functions of analyzing and

managing shocks in specialized risk-management units to formalize routines for business

continuity and recovery (Dong & Tomlin, 2012). In practice, after major recent disasters such as

the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the 2004 Asian tsunami, and the 2007-09 financial crisis, firms have

made systematic efforts to formalize and increase risk assessment and management. For instance,

more than 75% of the firms interviewed noted the existence of routines for threat identification

and prioritization. Most of these firms have standardized manuals to deal with major disruptions

with a few using ad-hoc strategies. Therefore, the rise in the costs of uncertainty shocks have

occurred despite an exponential growth in human capital devoted to overseeing firm-wide risk

management with the creation of new functions, such as chief risk officers and enterprise risk-

management teams (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   Although standardization and centralization are important when dealing with uncertainty

shocks, as we discuss below, their prominence often negatively affects sensemaking (i.e., the

interpretation of information) and sensegiving (i.e., the influence on how others interpret

information). When the firms faces pervasive uncertainty, flexibility and delegation are valuable


                                                                                                   10
assets because they facilitate employees across the organization becoming information nodes for

identifying threats whose signals are ambiguous or novel (Beck & Plowman, 2009).


   Our interactions with S&P 500 firms suggest that formalization and centralization do exist.

However, rather than emphasizing rigid top-down routines that yield a false sense of control,

firms focus on strategies to prepare for dealing with abnormal conditions with the participation

of employees across the organization. Such firms often have annual training programs with the

goal of mitigating the role that behavioral biases play when faced with causal ambiguity. An

executive of a computer technology organization provided the following insights regarding his

firm’s navigation of the disruption caused by the 2011 disaster in Japan: “We had made some

conscious decisions with parts of our business to have multiple points of failure for business

operations. When the earthquake and tsunami happened, the units impacted were businesses that

we knew would be at risk. We had prepared crisis management processes so representatives of

different areas would be in communication and would be working together to deal with its

impact on our employees, to our facilities and then to ongoing business operations.”


   In addition, we found that these companies take a preemptive approach to the potential role

of the public sector in dealing with large catastrophes. Instead of looking to government agencies

for disaster relief, these firms strive to reduce their dependency on external sources of funding by

investing in their own resources to reduce the impact of disruptions on their operations. As a

manager of a technology company indicated: “In the macro sense of shock

management…learning with each disaster has also been talking to the government to help us

decide where to invest going forward.”


   We now elaborate on these individual-level, firm-level, and environmental forces affecting

organizational decision making under uncertainty shocks by linking empirical research in

cognitive psychology, a Neo-Carnegie perspective of organizational behavior, and institutional



                                                                                                   11
theory. We draw upon the primary-data collection with S&P 500 firms to bridge these three

dimensions that comprise our theoretical framework.


         A FRAMEWORK OF ORGANIZATIONAL DECISION MAKING UNDER

                                    UNCERTAINTY SHOCKS


More than 70 years ago, Herbert Simon contended that organizational decision making must be

derived from the logic and psychology of human choice (Simon, 1947: xlvi). Employees,

managers, board members and shareholders vary in their ability to anticipate external threats,

interpret and communicate them, respond with coping mechanisms, and transform experience

into resilience (Christianson, Farkas, Sutcliffe, & Weick, 2009; March & Shapira, 1987;

Nikolaeva, 2014; Starbuck, 2009). Given the correlated nature and duration of the consequences

of uncertainty shocks, the choices that the organization makes may be highly consequential for

its performance and long-term sustainability.


   Our framework, represented in Figure 1, outlines the microfoundations (biases and heuristics

or simplified decision rules), the organizational determinants (structure and strategy), and the

macro determinants (external stakeholders and institutional dynamics) that determine

organizational decision making under uncertainty shocks.


                   -------------------Insert Figure 1 about here---------------------------


Micro Dimension


We have learned from cognitive psychology that individuals make decisions under uncertainty

by using a combination of intuition and deliberative thinking (Kahneman, 2011). When faced

with unpredicted disruption, System 1 (intuitive thinking) triggers the rapid reactions by a

production-line employee in escalating data on potential external threats, of supervisors in

reallocating the responsibilities of their personnel and assigning them new tasks, and of the CEO


                                                                                                   12
in issuing emergency protocols. System 2 (deliberative thinking) guides the choice of coping and

recovery strategies. It drives employees to share relevant information with the appropriate

personnel, leads the supervisor to assess what activities to prioritize and assign them to the most

suitable team, and spurs the CEO to implement a cost-effective emergency plan.


   The combination of System 1 and 2 generally results in reasonably good choices when

decision makers have considerable experience as a basis for their actions (Kahneman, 2011). A

chemical company, for instance, applied deliberative thinking to specific events in post-mortems

or after-action reviews, which enhanced its capability to respond intuitively to subsequent

storms. An executive describes these actions: “We did a postmortem after Katrina and talked

about what worked and what we should have done beforehand. When we see hurricanes coming

now we proactively stage equipment within proximity but not in the strike zone, so that we can

get generators, water and other supplies and equipment much more quickly. We work with local

authorities to be able to get these trucks through any police barricades or roadblocks that have

been set up in the natural-disaster zone.”


   Another case in point is Morgan Stanley’s evacuation of nearly 3,000 employees from one of

the World Trade Center (WTC) towers during the 9/11 attacks. Morgan Stanley’s Director of

Security, Richard Rescorla had little information about what had just happened, but he had lived

through the 1993 Al Qaeda bombing of the WTC. Appreciating how many people might have

perished if that assault had succeeded in collapsing the towers, Rescorla had instituted quarterly

evacuation drills ever since, making sure new employees were trained and veteran workers did

not become complacent. Eight years later, Rescorla’s experience with a previous shock proved

critical. In determining whether to order the evacuation, Rescorla had no time to perform a cost-

benefit analysis. He relied on his gut feeling (intuition) and on institutional evacuation training

conducted in previous years (deliberation). Both were essential.




                                                                                                      13
   However, experience is often unavailable or even misleading given the uniqueness and

ambiguity of uncertainty shocks. Managers and other employees often exhibit the following

behavioral biases and heuristics in their decision-making processes:


   Availability. There is a tendency to estimate the likelihood of an uncertain event by the ease

with which instances of its occurrence can be brought to mind, leading to an underestimation of

the likelihood of a shock prior to an adverse event, and overestimation following its occurrence

(Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). We found in our investigation that many major preventive

strategies were adopted only after experiencing a severe disaster. For instance, several

interviewed managers reported that they had not considered how devastating an earthquake

would be to their operations worldwide until the 2011 Tohoku disaster in Japan. However, when

managers succumb to the availability bias following an adverse event by overestimating its

likelihood, they may decide to invest in protective measures that would not be justified if they

had undertaken a systematic analysis via a deliberative process.


   Misestimation. Attributing positive outcomes to one’s ability rather than luck often leads

individuals to assume that a shock has a drastically different probability of occurrence than it

actually has. As an example of the riskification of uncertainty, this misestimation is generally

coupled with the inaccurate perception of the expected return of investments in prevention and

mitigation. Managers’ underestimation of the hardship of the 2007-09 financial crisis highlights

this point as illustrated by the following comment by the CEO of a chemical company:“We saw

some signs as early as June that there was a real storm coming economically. We got together

all of our leaders in July and we had them work through our traditional scenario evalution on

what they would do if volumes fell 5%, 10%, 20%,… Now, when it hit, it turned out to be a lot

worse than the 20% for some of our businesses.”


   Overconfidence. The tendency for decision makers to focus only on readily available data

can lead to overconfidence in one’s choices because relevant factors are not considered. This

                                                                                                   14
bias was highlighted by the chief risk officer of a bank. He noted that his organization learned

the hard way because he was overconfident about the firm’s retrospective risk models, which led

him to neglect the chance of inaccurate predictions due to lack of relevant data. The director of

risk management of an information technology company described that dealing effectively with a

series of negative individual disruptions early in their company’s history impacted the

organizational culture when dealing with shocks noting that: “After surviving fairly well different

events, I get the sense we were confident that we could handle it again and deal with events like

that in the future. Probably overconfidence to a certain degree…When we dealt with a risk that

we were not expecting, we again followed our risk model, but barely survived.”


   Short time horizons. Employees are susceptible to different types of myopia or short-

sightedness when deciding not to invest in prevention and mitigation. There is a tendency by

managers to discount the future very sharply so there is a reluctance to incur high upfront costs

of investments unless the payoffs from them can be accrued over the next few years. For

instance, British Petroleum suffered a string of accidents from 2005 to 2010 culminating in the

massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. An independent panel that had reviewed an

earlier BP refinery explosion that resulted in the loss of fifteen lives concluded that short-term

management incentives had been a key contributor to the company’s underinvestment in process

safety: “The performance system has a decidedly short-term emphasis, with performance

contracts typically focused on short-term goals [. . .] Decisions and events impacting process

safety or human capability may not have a discernible impact for many years. For example, a

decision to reduce spending on inspections, testing, or maintenance may have no apparent

negative impact on process safety performance for a lengthy period.” (Baker et al., 2007: 90–

91). This tendency to prioritize the short-term is not exclusive to BP. Many companies similarly

underprepare for rare events because they focus on the next period (e.g., quarter or year) when

determining the likelihood of the event occurring (Garicano & Rayo, 2016).



                                                                                                     15
   Thresholds. Managers often ignore extreme events because they perceive the likelihood of

their occurrence (p) to be below their threshold level of concern (p*). Suppose that p* is defined

as a one percent chance that the adverse event will occur next year. If the firm believes that p is

lower than p*, it will ignore the potential consequences of the event occurring (Slovic, Fischhoff,

& Lichtenstein, 1977; Slovic, Fischoff, & Lichtenstein, 1982). An enterprise risk manager from

an oil company highlighted the role that threshold rules play in justifying taking action: “We’ve

done a rough job, I’ll say, of trying to define certain thresholds at which risks are elevated for

review. So for example, a $100 million loss event is one that typically is elevated to regional

leadership. Anything that could, we believe, plausibly result in a fatality has to be explicitly

elevated to the overall leadership team.”


   Survival points. Firms are concerned with determining when their surplus liquidity would

not be able to cover the costs of an accident or disaster. They often construct scenarios depicting

extreme events where the losses exceed their current surplus and assign likelihoods of each of

these scenarios occurring. The decision as to which of these scenarios to consider depends on the

managers’ attitude toward risk or their risk appetite—i.e., how much risk they deem acceptable

(March & Shapira, 1987). If the firm has not suffered severe losses in recent years, then the key

decision makers may determine that these scenarios are below the firm’s threshold level of

concern. Only after suffering a significant reduction in their surplus are they likely to change

their behavior.


   Following the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, another integrated oil

company made a decision to get out of deep water drilling. The director of risk management

indicated that the company felt that it would not have the liquidity to withstand an event similar

to the BP accident: “Although that oil spill didn’t impact us directly it probably has had the

single largest impact on the industry I’ve seen in ten years. We quickly came to the conclusion

that we really wouldn’t survive an event of that magnitude. It is our view that there is always the


                                                                                                     16
potential for something to happen like that. So we spent a lot of time asking, ‘Is that the type of a

business we’d like to be in?’”


   Status quo. This heuristic is based on the relevant reference point that distinguishes

outcomes perceived as losses from those perceived as gains. The potential negative

consequences of moving away from the current state of affairs are weighted much more heavily

than the potential gains, often leading the decision maker not to take action (Kahneman &

Tversky, 1979). This behavior is reinforced because movements away from the current plan are

viewed as performance failures. Employees who have a vested interest in the current state of

affairs may use their power to block change. Hence, it often takes a severe adverse event for the

organization to consider challenging the status quo (Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988).


   After the Tōhoku disaster in 2011, a publishing firm in East Japan began thinking about what

could happen to the nearby nuclear power plant if an earthquake occurred. The director of

business continuity recognized that the probability of having an earthquake at this location was

less than 1-in-10,000, but felt it was something that could happen and indicated that “After any

catastrophe the firm needs to take a look and ask itself, am I okay with the status quo? I know

what’s happening with this. What do I need to look at differently?”


   A medical technology firm behaved in a similar fashion even though they had not suffered

any damage. The director of corporate risk management noted: “There were some people who

asked, ‘Could this happen some place else and result in exactly the same sort of exposure to

another part of the company?’ And we said this was an earthquake event, which had a tsunami

associated with it, which doused the nuclear plant that went into meltdown. Extraordinary set of

circumstances. Where else could this possibly happen to our company?”


Meso Dimension




                                                                                                   17
A cornerstone of Simon’s (1947) seminal Administrative Behavior is that the influence of firm-

level factors is necessary to understand the choice process of employees. Drawing upon this

argument, we now characterize how the organizational structure deals with biases and heuristics

that influence employees’ decision processes. An organization, as a system of collective action

among individuals and teams with different preferences and information (March & Simon, 1993)

that operates under institutional contexts (March & Simon, 1958), faces comparatively high

behavioral complexity when managing and learning from uncertainty shocks.


   The organizational and management literatures have overemphasized the role of top

managers in the performance of organizations in the context of adversity or emergency (Eggers

& Kaplan, 2009; Helfat & Peteraf, 2015). In practice, employees at different levels of the

organization are key actors in discovering threats, transmitting tacit information, and designing

and implementing continuity and recovery plans. Transforming past experience into more

resilient organizations by learning from earlier disasters and disruptive events normally entails

diverse and often conflicting cognitive factors (Lampel et al., 2009). Strategy—the

organizational goals and initiatives—and structure—the formal mechanisms of communication

and authority—trigger or control biases and heuristics, thus affecting collective action when

dealing with disruption (Oliver & Marwell, 1988). We review these determinants in the

following subsections.


   Strategy


   A recurrent question emanating from Simon (1947) is what defines the limits of rationality

among business decision makers and how they relate to intuitive (System 1) and deliberative

(System 2) thinking under uncertainty. With respect to organizational strategy, the answer relates


                                                                                                    18
to how the goals and initiatives of the firm shape the biases and heuristics utilized by managers

and other employees in their decision-making process.


   We found that the goals of the unit and/or company tend to connect strongly with managers’

threshold heuristics. For instance, firms with a long-term orientation that prioritized survival

were much more likely to invest in disaster preparation than firms with a short-term focus on

profitability because the latter were more likely to be affected by myopia and the status quo bias.

Some managers use their risk appetite as a guideline for their unit’s or firm’s strategic planning.

When they conclude that no exogenous disruptions are likely to affect their performance targets,

they tend to be overly conservative in their market behavior. When they feel there is a reasonable

chance of disruptive events that will lead the firm to not meet its performance target, managers

will often engage in risk taking in the hope of still meeting their goals and targets (Bowman,

1982).


   We observed that the firms that were best able to deal with uncertainty shocks were those

whose strategy facilitated adaptation of functions and reconfiguration of resources. A flexible

strategy not only helped control the individual biases of key decision makers, but also avoided

the fallacy of riskification of uncertainty. That is, managers of these firms were generally aware

that actions taken in response to one disaster may not enable the firm to deal with a catastrophe

that takes a different form.


   Conversely, firms suffering significant losses from exogenous crises tended to have well-

established routines that allowed little consideration to abnormal situations. For instance, only

after their building in downtown Bangkok was burnt to the ground in the context of political

unrest in Thailand, did a service industry invest heavily in a business-continuity procedure by


                                                                                                    19
which employees could use IT systems installed in their own homes. A manager of this

corporation narrated his visceral memories of the 2011 Thailand floods that rendered their

procedure inoperable because they did not have access to their office and their workers’ homes

were underwater.


   Structure


   There are three elements behind organizational structure that are critical for firms to manage

and learn from uncertainty shocks: hierarchy and authority, economic incentives and

communication systems.


   Hierarchy and authority. The organizational chart that defines the functional and

geographical location of employees and their role as informational nodes will determine their

ability and incentives to attend to and communicate threats and to facilitate business continuity

during disruptions (Cyert & March, 1963; Gavetti et al., 2017; March & Simon, 1958; Simon,

1947). The structure of work affects what biases and heuristics will be more likely to arise. For

instance, employees working in teams often underestimate signals of rare threats when several

team members are overconfident about the functioning of the operation (Rerup, 2009).


   The characteristics of authority will influence how individuals implement choices whose

outcomes are difficult to predict. For instance, the marketing department may undervalue

disruption when entering a politically turbulent, but commercially attractive market (Maitland &

Sammartino, 2014). Conversely, the risk-management department of an insurer may

overemphasize the probability of hazards in the aftermath of a catastrophe and order their

underwriters to cease providing insurance (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).



                                                                                                    20
   Leading and following orders or recommendations during turbulence are critical tasks in

managerial practice (Gavetti et al., 2007; Simon, 1947). When uncertainty is pervasive,

leadership at all levels is essential for interpreting ambiguous information and then collectively

responding to unpredictable phenomena. During disruption, managers must hastily respond to

new information and often deviate from established protocols. While dealing with their own

biases, leaders will be a strong influence for how much other employees will be using intuition

or deliberation.


   Moving from individual actions to team decisions and tiered leadership brings an additional

complexity to uncertainty management that is addressed in diverse ways by organizations. In

some firms, executives in the C-suite rely on their middle managers to identify external threats

and then both groups work together to prioritize threats. In other firms, tiered decision making is

viewed as introducing conflicts that could result in disastrous outcomes. A vice president of an

IT firm noted “I could not imagine more than two teams from different areas planning what to

do. That would be a very lengthy and conflictual process.”


   Economic incentives. Studies in the risk-management literature suggest that myopia often

dominates willingness to invest in preparation and mitigation unless there are short-term

economic incentives that encourage firms to think long-term (Dong & Tomlin, 2012;

Kunreuther, 1996; Kunreuther, Pauly, & McMorrow, 2013). For example, a CEO may avoid

costly mitigation investments if the assessed benefits do not materialize during her expected

tenure in the organization (Levinthal & March, 1993). Recent disasters have affected how

managers perceive the value of such investments as illustrated by the comments of an executive

of an IT firm: “Production lines going down in an earthquake was unbelievable so (we) didn’t

plan for what actually happened---all seven production lines in the plant not functioning. After

                                                                                                   21
the Japanese earthquake/tsunami, the firm invested $400 million in specialized equipment in

their manufacturing plants in Japan and did structural design work so that the plants could

withstand higher shocks.”


   Given the short-memory for shocks, the formalization of economic incentives into

procedures and plans in the aftermath of disasters varies as a function of the long-term

orientation of the compensation scheme in the organization (Flammer & Bansal, 2017). Firms

that tend to reward employees based on immediate goals (e.g., annual income) are likely to view

them as more preoccupied with day-to-day operations and less interested in assessing sources of

disruption and investing in improving business-continuity procedures. When managers in these

firms face uncertainty, they often compensate their units’ operation to maximize expected short-

term profits. Hence, these organizations tend to discount significantly the long-run survival of

the enterprise and underestimate the relevance of low-probability phenomena. Conversely,

managers whose compensation schemes have a longer-term orientation (e.g., a portion of income

is linked to share prices) have an additional reminder of the economic value of investments that

can last for many years (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   The relationship between managing uncertainty and economic incentives involves a paradox

on the use of deliberation vis-à-vis intuition. On the one hand, recognizing the value of preparing

against uncertainty shocks implies a greater influence of deliberative over intuitive thinking. Not

incurring the upfront costs now are likely to undercut the long-term returns of the firm (Meyer &

Kunreuther, 2017). The Global Head of operational risk of an investment bank mentioned that,

after seeing so many companies going out of business after the 9/11 attacks, the “firm became

more deliberative in tackling black swan events.”



                                                                                                   22
   On the other hand, when employees see a substantial amount of their income attached to

short-run organizational outcomes, through bonuses or job security, they neglect less proximate

and ambiguous goals. For instance, a piece-meal worker is likely to be unclear about the benefits

of stopping production to retrofitting the factory against hurricanes because the financial cost of

such interruption is immediate for such a worker. Behind this inclination, there is also

deliberation and rational choice as in the case of a manager investing in prevention.


   Given these considerations, compensation schemes may affect the performance of the

organization during disasters. A consideration to the role of biases such as myopia,

underestimation and overconfidence is necessary when organizations design economic incentives

across the organization.


   Communication systems. The choice of action depends not only on goals formulated at the

C-suite level but on how these are communicated and interpreted at lower levels of the

organization and vice versa. In fact, the literature offers several cases of organizations failing to

avoid disruption due to decision makers at the top of hierarchy disregarding warnings raised by

employees associated with the firm’s operations (Lampel et al., 2009; Rerup, 2009). For

instance, in the months running up to the financial disasters that struck AIG and Lehman in

September 2008, many of their front-line employees had feared that the rapid growth of sub-

prime mortgages that they held could prove catastrophic, but top-line managers did not absorb or

act on that upward provided information to avert disaster (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   The effectiveness of communication is instrumental to navigate the complexity that arises

during disruption. As a senior risk manager of a large bank reported: “Communication is of

critical importance following a disaster. We don’t need more information, but pertinent data.


                                                                                                    23
One of the unfortunate things during a crisis is somebody presses a button somewhere, and

suddenly you're presented with 10,000 pages of information you must wallow through to find

something critical. So, there must be some filtering so that critical information is presented to

the board, to the leadership, and to the managers on the ground. That's not a science; it's an art,

an evolving art.”


   As a general lesson from the study with S&P 500 firms, we found that organizations with

multi-tiered structures in which different levels play a role during shocks were comparatively

successful in having a more comprehensive understanding of the threat. This form of specialized

decision-making structures fostered reconciliation and integration of divergent perceptions and

were relatively able to reach cooperation during abnormal times. Most effective companies used

this architecture in harmony with an organizational culture that brings those distributed

leadership layers together to control biases and heuristics toward collective action.


Macro Dimension


In 2007, Gavetti et al., suggested that “the most important developments in organizational theory

in the last two decades…are the increasing understanding…about the environment and broader

social context under which organizations operate” (Gavetti et al., 2007: 524). As this pattern in

the literature has arguably continued for the past decade, scholars studying how organizations

deal with exogenous disruption have strived to generate statistical regularities across firms by

focusing on institutional and stakeholder dynamics (Ballesteros & Gatignon, n.d.; Ballesteros et

al., 2017; Luo, Zhang, & Marquis, 2016; Madsen & Rodgers, 2014; Muller & Kräussl, 2011;

Oetzel & Oh, 2014; Oh & Oetzel, 2016). The tradeoff of this focus has been a neglect of the

firm’s cognitive richness and idiosyncrasies whereby the organization is a “relatively vacuous”



                                                                                                    24
entity embedded in social structures and aligning to institutional referents (Gavetti et al., 2007:

524; Powell & Colyvas, 2008).


   Most work has assumed that organizational decision-making under uncertainty follows well-

known institutional logics, stable regulatory mechanisms, and clear stakeholder dynamics

(Pahnke, Katila, & Eisenhardt, 2015; Powell & Colyvas, 2008; Zhang & Luo, 2013).

Consequently, this literature has not considered the environmental instability that natural

disasters, political coups, terrorist attacks and similar phenomena often create (Alvarez &

Barney, 2005; Tilcsik & Marquis, 2013).


   Uncertainty shocks often change the macro status quo (Aghion et al., 2016; Cavallo et al.,

2013; Cavallo & Noy, 2011). They may lead to temporary or permanent institutional

arrangements, such as government agencies (Ballesteros & Gatignon, n.d.; Useem et al., 2015) or

bring prominence to societal dynamics that remain subtle or inconsequential in stable conditions

(Alessi, 1975; Douty, 1972). In this last dimension of our theoretical framework, we aim to

refocus on this turbulence by integrating the internal and external factors affecting how

organizations deal with unpredictability and ambiguity.


   Institutions


   As suggested above, the traditional approach of the literature studying the context-based

determinants of organizational behavior is to consider the institutional environment to be stable

(Kaplan, 2008; Powell & Colyvas, 2008; Tracey, Philips, & Jarvis, 2010). In practice,

uncertainty shocks often swiftly reshape norms, values, and rules, which otherwise change

incrementally (Bloom, 2009; North, 1990). They provide unique opportunities for rapid market

changes due to novel public policy or changes to the competitive landscape (Aghion et al., 2016;

Baker & Bloom, 2013; Cavallo et al., 2013; Kousky, 2013).




                                                                                                      25
   For instance, construction of factories and infrastructure must adhere to a host of new

regulations issued or reformed in the aftermath of disasters. This is illustrated by the enforcement

of construction codes after the 1999 earthquake in Turkey that changed the commercial

landscape in the Marmara region (Anbarci, Escaleras, & Register, 2005). Firms sometimes have

to adjust their geographical markets after human resettlement and gentrification that often follow

large disasters such as Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans (Cutter, 2006).


   Therefore, managers face not only the underlying uncertainty of the hazard, but also the

causal ambiguity resulting from institutional change. Under these conditions, the biases and

heuristics that managers traditionally use when coping with emergencies may become highly

inefficient when uncertainty shocks trigger substantial institutional change.


   In this sense, local governments often play an important part in shaping how managers use

existing organizational resources to deal with emergencies. Public policy is essential for

mitigating extreme shocks or recovering from catastrophic events but finding the balance

between uncertainty hedging and post-disaster economic dynamism is not trivial. In the U.S., for

instance, the federal government has responded to crises by adding new regulations to reduce

company risk, and while well intentioned, overregulation and the uncertainty of future regulation

have themselves become a concern for many firms (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   At the same time, tax credits or subsidies for real estate development sometimes increases

risk taking by managers because they perceive a lower financial cost at stake (Wenzel & Wolf,

2013). This has led to construction of production facilities in disaster-prone areas, such as San

Francisco Bay, the coast of Florida, and the seismic zones of Mexico City and the Italian

Abruzzo region (Ballesteros & Useem, 2015). In this regard, the short-sightedness of

policymakers, allowing urban sprawl in disaster areas, combined with the overoptimism of

business managers, who underestimate the possibility of a large shock, creates problems for

firms in the future should a serious disaster occur.

                                                                                                    26
   The regulation and policy instruments that countries use to deal with future large-scale

disasters may moderate the role that cognitive biases and heuristics play with respect to the

organization’s vulnerability to external disruption. As a case in point, a financial institution

recognized the importance of focusing on their survival point after being rescued by a stimulus

package by the U.S. government during the financial crisis of 2007-2009. Only then did they

take into account a set of low probability events that were not previously on their radar screen.

The firm’s director of risk management noted, “I think the amount of capital that we take, the

modeling that we use to anticipate these black swans and the resulting capital that we have to set

aside for these anticipated risks are taken far more seriously than they were before because of

the bailout.” Conversely, public financial assistance following a catastrophic event distorts

managerial incentives to prepare against disasters (Platt, 2012). This is a moral hazard associated

with public aid in the sense that firms perceive that there will always be a funding source in case

of calamity, and thus they underinvest in mitigation mechanisms.


   The role of institutional factors causing hardship to firms from uncertainty shocks is

exacerbated by economic interdependencies. As shown by disasters such as 9/11 and Hurricanes

Katrina and Sandy, the failure of infrastructure in one economic sector or industry can quickly

translate into a systematic disruption. And the internationalization of the supply chain has

diminished the role of geographical location as a condition for suffering the consequences of

shocks. For instance, U.S. auto-makers, for instance, had losses following the 2011 Tōhoku

disaster that were equivalent to the losses suffered by their supplier companies located in Japan

(Berlemann & Wenzel, 2018; Boehm, 2014). Economic interdependencies have thus increased

the complexity of preparing against uncertainty shocks.


   Stakeholders


   In an integrated economy, the magnitude of the hardship faced by firms depends not only on

its own managers’ decisions but also on those of others external to the organization, such as

                                                                                                    27
customers, competitors, and regulators. For instance, organizations often look to firms in the

same industry to obtain guidance for their own choices and to help determine their vulnerability

to correlated shocks (Ballesteros et al., 2018). Imitation helps managers legitimize measures

whose efficiency is ambiguous (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Mizruchi & Fein, 1999). This type

of social learning is widespread when organizations deal with uncertainty (Madsen, 2009) and

influences the diffusion of practices across firms (Gaba & Terlaak, 2013; Levitt & March, 1988).


   More specifically, the economic incentive of organizations to invest in preventive measures

against disasters often depends on how competitors behave. In the study with S&P 500 firms,

managers reported that they frequently consider what their counterparts in rival firms were doing

to protect themselves against catastrophic losses. For example, some firms revealed that the

decision by a division’s manager on whether to incur in costly investments to retrofit factories

would often follow the investment behavior of nearby competitors. Additionally, the biases and

heuristics of input suppliers are also a crucial factor when firms navigate uncertainty. When

managers in energy companies misestimate the likelihood of hurricanes and underinvest in the

resilience of power grids, these firms fail to allocate resources to prepare the grids against

disasters, such as trimming vegetation near distribution lines. In California they are then held

responsible for wildfires that are caused by sparks emanating from their power lines (Peloso &

Miller, 2018).


   Similarly, optimism, myopia, and other biases in financial sector firms may affect the ability

and incentives of managers in customer organizations to hedge against disasters. After Hurricane

Katrina, for instance, the demand for property insurance exceeded its supply since some insurers

ceased underwriting policies in the area due to fear that their portfolio risk would exceed the

company’s surplus. When many insurers resumed activity a year or more after the disaster,

insurance penetration did not reach pre-disaster levels (Zanetti, Schwarz, & Lindemuth, 2007).

Another example is the case of banks in California not requiring earthquake insurance as a


                                                                                                   28
condition for a mortgage because they believe that it will hamper their competitiveness given

that borrowing would become more expensive for the property owner. As a result, many

California-based companies are underinsured against earthquakes (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   Insurers’ behavior with respect to pricing terrorism coverage illustrates another heuristic used

by firms: threshold-like behavior. Prior to 9/11 insurers did not explicitly consider the likelihood

and potential costs of an terrrorist attack despite the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, the

Oklahoma City terrorist truck bombing attack in 1995 and other attacks around the world. The

decision by insurance firms not to charge a penny for losses due to terrorism before 9/11 could

be explained by the fact that they had never considered terrorism as a meaningful threat in

determining premiums for residential and commercial properties. Their claim payments from the

1993 World Trade Center disaster and the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing did not make a dent in

their balance sheets so they felt it was not necessary to consider terrorism in their premium

calculations. After 9/11 most insurers refused to offer terrorism coverage even though firms were

willing to pay extremely high premia, leading to the passage of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act

in 2002, a public-private partnership (Kunreuther, Michel-Kerjan, Lewis, Muir-Wood, & Woo,

2014).


   A final consideration regarding on how external actors affect managers’ decision-making

processes when dealing with uncertainty shocks is the role of mass media. Often, organizations

design their emergency plans around the specific feautures of shocks that have attracted

significant media coverage and, therefore, are likely to be enacted in the organizational discourse

on likely calamities (Eisensee & Strömberg, 2007; Hoffman & Ocasio, 2001; Lampel et al.,

2009). However, as discussed above, the unpredictability in the characteristics of disasters often

surprises managers, as it rarely resembles the disruption that the firm envisioned. This is

illustrated by the following comment from the vice president of risk management of a

pharmaceutical company: “Everything we read was about the bird flue in Asia. And we


                                                                                                  29
implemented pandemic planning in with all of the models indicating bird flu. When we had the

swine flu outbreak in Mexico […] A lot of things that were planned for around that bird flu and

the expected high level of acuity were inappropriate.”


   Often disasters magnify the influence of intermediaries in the value chain. In the aftermath of

Cyclone Enawo in Madagascar in 2017, firms that stood between farmers and food companies

took advantage of the high demand of vanilla to increase its scarcity, which propelled prices that

have lasted until today and affected the profit forecasts of the several food companies worldwide.

The vice president of supply chain of the Dunkin’ Brands Group that was impacted by the price

increase said that the firm was “Monitoring the situation with vanilla extract prices very closely,

and (is) working hard to mitigate the impact on our costs.” Other firms have changed their

structures to create special units dedicated to mitigating the role of intermediaries during

disasters and have engaged in negotiations with customers “to counter much of the headwinds

posed by certain rising ingredient costs, including vanilla extract” (Pavlova, 2018).


                                             DISCUSSION


“High dwellings are the peace and harmony of our descendants. Remember the calamity of the

great tsunamis. Do not build any homes below this point.” This is the inscription on one of the

many stone monuments abounding the city of Miyako in East Japan. Officials built them to

motivate preparation for events that are unpredictable. They were aware that undermanaging

uncertainty is part of the human condition (Meyer & Kunreuther, 2017). Despite numerous

disasters hitting the area over the years, each time its residents have rebuilt as if those calamities

never happened. The 2011 Tōhoku disaster killed 420 residents and destroyed over 4,000

buildings in Miyako.


   Unfortunately, similar behavior before, during, and after disasters are pervasive across the

organizations we interviewed. In fact, the statistics suggest that most firms fail in efficiently


                                                                                                    30
managing and learning from uncertainty shocks—i.e., exogenous and unpredictable disruptions,

whose welfare effects spread across geographies, industries, and markets (FEMA, 2015;

SwissRe, 2018). We have argued that a critical reason behind this failure is the riskification of

uncertainty: the fallacies that unpredictability is controllable, and experience is the same as

learning. When managers believe that the next disaster will be similar to the previous one, they

are likely to be ill-prepared for the next shock (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   Confounding uncertainty with risk is inadequate because hard data suggest that the

consequences of correlated shocks are difficult to translate into probability functions and most

firms approach managing these shocks as an unstructured activity that rarely is integrated into

annual financial projections. The mechanisms through which organizations learn from extreme

phenomena differ from learning from individual, more frequent accidents (Madsen, 2009).


   More generally, approaching the organizational inefficiency in dealing with uncertainty

shocks as a problem of risk management underestimates the institutional and stakeholder

complexity that decision makers face. Across societies, these phenomena can be a source of

creative destruction: the status quo is disrupted (Barro, 2007; Bloom, 2009), competition is

altered (Cavallo et al., 2013), technological, social, and economic change is frequent (Dong &

Tomlin, 2012; Kunreuther et al., 2002), and opportunities for rents are generated (Ballesteros et

al., 2018; Muller & Kräussl, 2011). Uncertainty shocks challenge established incumbents and

open opportunities for business creation and radical innovation (Seo, 2017). This is observed, for

instance, in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks (Aggarwal & Wu, 2014; Paruchuri & Ingram, 2012;

Seo, 2017), the earthquakes and tsunamis in Chile in 2010 (Useem et al., 2015) and in Japan in

2011 (Layne, 2011). On the flip side, uncertainty shocks are also associated with significant

business mortality. Hence, how managers choose to prepare for, cope with, and recover from

uncertainty shocks are, highly consequential decisions for firm performance and sustainability.




                                                                                                    31
   We believe that a large portion of the literature follows the erroneous approach of treating

uncertainty as risk (Hardy & Maguire, 2016). We suggest that one way to start correcting this

approach is by understanding the individual-, firm-, and context-specific factors that differentiate

firms that navigate sudden disruption more successfully from those do not. We believe that a few

lessons are suitable of generalization. First, scholars should consider that organizational structure

and strategy plays a critical role in mediating and moderating behavioral factors. Attention to

external threats by investing in protective measures and implementing business continuity and

recovery plans depends on the organizational architecture of communication that guides the flow

of data as an integral part of uncertainty management (Gavetti et al., 2007; Kunreuther & Useem,

2018).


   Second, in line with earlier research on organizational decision-making (Beck & Plowman,

2009; Rerup, 2009), dealing with uncertainty is not an exclusive task of the top management but

a collective-action problem. Everybody is responsible, which is often not the case when dealing

with individual risks (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018). For instance, the interviews with risk

managers revealed they were often more acutely aware of emerging hazards than those in the C-

suite who often were reluctant to make investments in loss reduction measures a priority.

Organizational procedures that ensure the engagement and alignment of different hierarchical

levels hasten the mobilization and deployment of resources during abnormal times. The benefits

of leadership at each level is likely to be strongest if it is shaped by guidance and collaboration

from the levels below and above. The value of tiered leadership increases as the degree of

ambiguity in the risk is higher and there is greater urgency in dealing with the disruption created

by the crisis or adverse event. In turn, authority and centralization affect the combination of

intuition and deliberation by determining the formal capacity of individuals to steer the

organization during disruption.




                                                                                                      32
   Third, incentive structures are a strong regulator of the behavioral factors affecting

organizational decision-making under uncertainty. The degree of long-run orientation of

economic-incentive schemes will affect the willingness of employees to invest in prevention and

mitigation. Our investigation suggests that most firms are not aware of this relationship. In this

respect, a promising avenue of study is the effect of different compensation schemes (e.g., piece-

meal versus fixed-wage) on the impact of disasters on financial performance.


   A final lesson is that learning from uncertainty shocks is an on-going process. Across the life

of the organization, managers will vary in their ability to prepare for, cope with, and recover

from crises. Firms should embrace this idea; the costliest losses frequently came after

organizations felt they had a sense of control, that they had riskified uncertainty and could

predict the consequences of shocks. It is at that stage that organizational learning stalled because

managers thought that they had enough information to deal with exogenous disasters. The

director of corporate risk management at a medical technology company summarized this nicely:

“How can I tell you what we don’t know, because we don’t know it? So I am looking at other

ways just to continually keep people thinking about events outside the organization that are at

least plausible and that we should take a look at.” In the context of organizational decision

making under uncertainty shocks, data are always incomplete and rationality is never full

(Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


                                           CONCLUSION


   The last two decades have witnessed a substantial rise in the managerial and organizational

attention to uncertainty shocks (Ballesteros et al., 2018). The World Economic Forum, which has

annually gathered business and government elites in Davos for 45 years to discuss global

challenges, provides a proxy in this regard. In 1997, only 5% of the sessions at the annual

meeting focused on uncertainty shocks; by the mid-2000s, about 35% of the sessions were



                                                                                                     33
devoted to this topic. In recent years, the discussion in Davos has moved from understanding

shocks to better managing them and building resilience (Kunreuther & Useem, 2018).


   The academic literature does not reflect this trend in managerial practice and continues to

treat the organizational complexity of dealing with uncertainty shocks as a problem in risk

management. Scholars that explicitly have studied organizational decision making under

conditions of causal ambiguity and environmental uncertainty have focused on well-defined

individual risks and explored short-run outcomes such as sales, market entry, or non-market

behavior (Ballesteros & Gatignon, n.d.; Hardy & Maguire, 2016; Oh & Oetzel, 2016). Uncertain

shocks need to be considered in a different light from these individual risks as they trigger

systematic biases and heuristics by decision makers that are modulated by firm-specific

variables.


   The framework proposed in this article offers opportunities for systematic analysis that

promise to increase our understanding of the relationship between uncertainty and organizational

performance, particularly when organizations seek to manage and learn from catastrophes. A

focus on the short run restricts the ability of firms to develop cost-effective strategies for dealing

with future crises and disruptions that requires the organization to behave in a more deliberative

manner. Given the relevance of uncertainty shocks on firm performance and sustainability

worldwide, future research on this relationship is likely to have significant managerial and

public-policy implications.




                                                                                                    34
                                               REFERENCES
Aggarwal, V. A., & Wu, B. 2014. Organizational constraints to adaptation: Intrafirm asymmetry in the locus of
      coordination. Organization Science, 26(1): 218–238.
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., & Lucking, B. 2016. Turbulence , Firm Decentralization and Growth in Bad Times.
Ahuja, G., & Yayavaram, S. 2011. PERSPECTIVE--Explaining Influence Rents: The Case for an Institutions-Based
      View of Strategy. Organization Science, 22(February 2015): 1631–1652.
Alessi, L. De. 1975. Toward an analysis of postdisaster cooperation. The American Economic Review.
      http://www.jstor.org/stable/1806401.
Allianz Global Corporate & Speciality. 2017. Allianz Risk Barometer: Top Business Risks 2017. Allianz Risk
      Pulse, 17(Jan): 1–14.
Altay, N., & Ramirez, A. 2010. Impact of disasters on firms in different sectors: implications for supply chains.
      Journal of Supply Chain Management, 46(4): 59–80.
Alvarez, S. A., & Barney, J. B. 2005. How do entrepreneurs organize firms under conditions of uncertainty?
      Journal of Management, 31(5): 776–793.
Anbarci, N., Escaleras, M., & Register, C. a. 2005. Earthquake fatalities: The interaction of nature and political
      economy. Journal of Public Economics, 89(9–10): 1907–1933.
Argote, L., & Greve, H. R. 2007. A behavioral theory of the firm-40 years and counting: Introduction and impact.
      Organization Science, 18(3): 337–349.
Baker, J., Bowman, F. L., Erwin, G., Gorton, S., Hendershot, D., et al. 2007. The report of the BP US refineries
      independent safety review panel. BP US Refineries Independent Safety Review Panel.
Baker, S., & Bloom, N. 2013. Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters as Natural Experiments. NBER
      Working Papers. https://doi.org/10.3386/w19475.
Baker, T., & Nelson, R. E. 2005. Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through entrepreneurial
      bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(3): 329–366.
Ballesteros, L. 2010. Financing Catastrophe Relief and Recovery in Developing Countries Are Global Financial
      Markets the Answer? The Case of Haiti.
Ballesteros, L. 2017. Firm’s Economic Reliance to National Markets and the Corporate Provision of Public Goods.
      The Wharton School Research Series, 2015(1): 56.
Ballesteros, L., & Gatignon, A. n.d. The Comparative Value of Firm and NPO Experience in Overcoming
      Institutional Challenges. Strategic Management Journal.
Ballesteros, L., & Useem, M. 2015. Black Swans and the Social Value of Corporate Disaster Giving. The Wharton
      School Research Paper, (84).
Ballesteros, L., Useem, M., & Wry, T. 2017. Masters of Disasters? An Empirical Analysis of how Societies benefit
      from Corporate Disaster Aid. Academy of Management Journal, 60(5): 1682–1708.
Ballesteros, L., Wry, T., & Useem, M. 2018. Halos or Horns?: Reputation and the Contingent Financial Returns
      to Non-Market Behavior.
Barro, R. J. 2007. Rare disasters, asset prices, and welfare costs. American Economic Review, 99(1): 243–264.
Beck, T. E., & Plowman, D. a. 2009. Experiencing Rare and Unusual Events Richly: The Role of Middle Managers
      in Animating and Guiding Organizational Interpretation. Organization Science, 20(5): 909–924.
Beck, U. 2006. Living in the world risk society: A Hobhouse Memorial Public Lecture given on Wednesday 15
      February 2006 at the London School of Economics. Economy and Society, 35(3): 329–345.
Berlemann, M., & Wenzel, D. 2018. Hurricanes, economic growth and transmission channels: Empirical evidence
      for countries on differing levels of development. World Development, 105: 231–247.
Bingham, C. B., & Eisenhardt, K. M. 2014. Response to Vuori and Vuori’s commentary on “Heuristics in the
      strategy context.” Strategic Management Journal, 35(11): 1698–1702.
Bitektine, A. 2011. Toward a Theory of Social Judgments of Organizations: the Case of Legitimacy, Reputation, and
      Status. Academy of Management Review, 36(1): 151–179.
Bloom, N. 2009. The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica, 77(3): 623–685.
Bloom, N., & Reenen, J. Van. 2007. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and Countries.
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXII(4): 1351–1408.
Bloom, N., Sadun, R., & Reenen, J. Van. 2012. The Organization of Firms across Countries. Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 1663–1705.
Boehm, C. 2014. Input Linkages and the Transmission of Shocks : Firm- Level Evidence from the 2011 Tō hoku
      Earthquake. 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference.

                                                                                                               35
Bowman, E. H. 1982. Risk seeking by troubled firms. Sloan Management Review, 23(4): 33.
Cavallo, A., Cavallo, E., & Rigobon, R. 2013. Prices and Supply Disruptions during Natural Disasters.
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w19474.
Cavallo, E., & Noy, I. 2011. Natural Disasters and the Economy — A Survey. International Review of
       Environmental and Resource Economics, 5(1): 63–102.
Christianson, M. K., Farkas, M. T., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Weick, K. E. 2009. Learning Through Rare Events:
       Significant Interruptions at the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Museum. Organization Science, 20(5): 846–860.
Consultants, G. R. 2018. Weathering the Storm Ensuring business resilience for natural disasters. The Daily
       Telegraph: Review.
Cummins, J. D., & Mahul, O. 2009. Catastrophe risk financing in developing countries: principles for public
       intervention. World Bank Publications.
Cutter, S. 2006. The geography of social vulnerability: Race, class, and catastrophe. Understanding Katrina:
       Perspectives from the Social Sciences, 120–122.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. 1963. A behavioral theory of the firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality
       in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 147–160.
Dong, L., & Tomlin, B. 2012. Managing disruption risk: The interplay between operations and insurance.
       Management Science, 58(10): 1898–1915.
Douty, C. M. 1972. Disasters and Charity: Some Aspects of Cooperative Economic Behavior. American Economic
       Review, 62(4): 580–590.
Eggers, J. P., & Kaplan, S. 2009. Cognition and renewal: Comparing CEO and organizational effects on incumbent
       adaptation to technical change. Organization Science, 20(2): 461–477.
Eisensee, T., & Strömberg, D. 2007. News droughts, news floods, and US disaster relief. The Quarterly Journal of
       …, (May). http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/122/2/693.short.
Felin, T., Foss, N. J., & Ployhart, R. E. 2015. The microfoundations movement in strategy and organization theory.
       Academy of Management Annals, 9(1): 575–632.
FEMA. 2015. Make Your Business Resilient.
Ferris, E., & Solis, M. 2013. Earthquake, Tsunami, Meltdown - The Triple Disaster’s Impact on Japan, Impact on
       the World. Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-front/posts/2013/03/11-japan-earthquake-ferris-
       solis.
Flammer, C., & Bansal, P. 2017. Does a long‐term orientation create value? Evidence from a regression
       discontinuity. Strategic Management Journal, 38(9): 1827–1847.
Gaba, V., & Terlaak, A. 2013. Decomposing Uncertainty and Its Effects on Imitation in Firm Exit Decisions.
       Organization Science, 24: 1847–1869.
Garicano, L., & Rayo, L. 2016. Why Organizations Fail: Models and Cases. Journal of Economic Literature,
       54(1): 137–192.
Gavetti, G. 2012. Toward a behavioral theory of strategy. Organization Science, 23(1): 267–285.
Gavetti, G., Greve, H., Kaplan, S., Nadkarni, S., & Rerup, C. 2017. The Attention-Based View at 20: Conjectures
       and Dialogue on the ABV’S Past, Present and Future. Academy of Management Proceedings, 2017(1):
       14709. Academy of Management Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510.
Gavetti, G., Levinthal, D., & Ocasio, W. 2007. Perspective--Neo-Carnegie: The Carnegie School’s Past, Present,
       and Reconstructing for the Future. Organization Science, 18(3): 523–536.
Hardy, C., & Maguire, S. 2016. Organizing risk: Discourse, power, and “riskification.” Academy of Management
       Review, 41(1): 80–108.
Helfat, C. E., & Peteraf, M. A. 2015. Managerial cognitive capabilities and the microfoundations of dynamic
       capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 36(6): 831–850.
Hoffman, A. J., & Ocasio, W. 2001. Not All Events Are Attended Equally: Toward a Middle-Range Theory of
       Industry Attention to External Events. Organization Science, 12(4): 414–434.
Jin, J. Y., Kanagaretnam, K., & Lobo, G. J. 2011. Ability of accounting and audit quality variables to predict bank
       failure during the financial crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, 35(11): 2811–2819.
Kahneman, D. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica: Journal of
       the Econometric Society, 263–291.
Kaplan, S. 2008. Framing Contests: Strategy Making Under Uncertainty. Organization Science, 19(5): 729–752.
Klinenberg, E. 2003. Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago. University of Chicago Press.
Knyazeva, A., Knyazeva, D., & Stiglitz, J. E. 2013. Ownership change, institutional development and performance.

                                                                                                                 36
      Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(7): 2605–2627.
Kousky, C. 2013. Informing climate adaptation: A review of the economic costs of natural disasters. Energy
      Economics, 46: 576–592.
Kunreuther, H. 1996. Mitigating disaster losses through insurance. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 12(2–3): 171–
      187.
Kunreuther, H., Meyer, R., & Michel-Kerjan, E. 2013. Overcoming Decision Biases to Reduce Losses from Natural
      Catastrophes. The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy, 536.
Kunreuther, H., Meyer, R., Zeckhauser, R., Slovic, P., Schwartz, B., et al. 2002. High stakes decision making:
      Normative, descriptive and prescriptive considerations. Marketing Letters, 13(3): 259–268.
Kunreuther, H., Michel-Kerjan, E., Lewis, C., Muir-Wood, R., & Woo, G. 2014. TRIA after 2014. Wharton Risk
      Management Center, University of Pennsylvania.
Kunreuther, H., Pauly, M., & McMorrow, S. 2013. Insurance and behavioral economics: improving decisions in
      the most misunderstood industry. Cambridge University Press.
Kunreuther, H., & Useem, M. 2018. Mastering Catastrophic Risk: How Companies Are Coping with Disruption.
      Oxford University Press.
Lampel, J., Shamsie, J., & Shapira, Z. 2009. Experiencing the improbable: Rare events and organizational learning.
      Organization Science, 20(5): 835–845.
Layne, N. 2011. Japan firms shut plants, quake to deal blow to economy. Reuters.
      http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/03/13/us-japan-quake-companies-idUSTRE72C28Z20110313.
Levinthal, D. a., & March, J. G. 1993. The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14: 95–112.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. 1988. Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 319–340.
Lieberman, M. B., & Montgomery, D. B. 2013. Conundra and Progress: Research on Entry Order and Performance.
      Long Range Planning, 46(4–5): 312–324.
Luo, X. R., Zhang, J., & Marquis, C. 2016. Mobilization in the Internet Age: Internet Activism and Corporate
      Response. Academy of Management Journal, amj-2015.
Madsen, P. M. 2009. These Lives Will Not Be Lost in Vain: Organizational Learning from Disaster in U.S. Coal
      Mining. Organization Science.
Madsen, P. M., & Rodgers, Z. J. 2014. Looking good by doing good: The antecedents and consequences of
      stakeholder attention to corporate disaster relief. Strategic Management Journal.
Maitland, E., & Sammartino, A. 2014. Decision making and uncertainty: The role of heuristics and experience in
      assessing a politically hazardous environment. Strategic Management Journal.
March, J. G., & Olsen, J. P. 1975. The uncertainty of the past: Organizational learning under ambiguity. European
      Journal of Political Research, 3(2): 147–171.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1987. Managerial Perspectives on Risk and Risk Taking. Management Science, 33(11):
      1404–1418.
March, J. G., & Shapira, Z. 1992. Variable risk preferences and the focus of attention. Psychological Review, 99(1):
      172.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1993. Organizations revisited. Industrial and Corporate Change, 2(1): 299–316.
Meyer, R., & Kunreuther, H. 2017. The Ostrich Paradox: Why We Underprepare for Disasters. Wharton Digital
      Press.
Milliken, F. J. 1987. Three types of perceived uncertainty about the environment: State, effect, and response
      uncertainty. Academy of Management Review, 12(1): 133–143.
Mizruchi, M. S., & Fein, L. C. 1999. The social construction of organizational knowledge: A study of the uses of
      coercive, mimetic, and normative isomorphism. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(4): 653–683.
Muller, A., & Kräussl, R. 2011. Doing good deeds in times of need: A strategic perspective on disaster donation.
      Strategic Management Journal, 32(January): 911–929.
Nikolaeva, R. 2014. Interorganizational imitation heuristics arising from cognitive frames. Journal of Business
      Research, 67(8): 1758–1765.
North, D. C. 1990. Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. Cambridge university press.
Oetzel, J. M., & Oh, C. H. 2014. Learning to Carry the Cat by the Tail: Firm Experience, Disasters, and
      Multinational Subsidiary Entry and Expansion. Organization Science, 25(3): 732–756.
Oh, C. H., & Oetzel, J. 2016. Once bitten twice shy? Experience managing violent conflict risk and MNC
      subsidiary‐level investment and expansion. Strategic Management Journal.
Oliver, P. E., & Marwell, G. 1988. The Paradox of Group Size in Collective Action: A Theory of the Critical Mass.
      II. American Sociological Review.

                                                                                                                 37
Pahnke, E. C., Katila, R., & Eisenhardt, K. M. 2015. Who Takes You to the Dance? How Partners’ Institutional
       Logics Influence Innovation in Young Firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 60(4): 596–633.
Paruchuri, S., & Ingram, P. 2012. Appetite for destruction: The impact of the September 11 attacks on business
       founding. Industrial and Corporate Change, 21(1): 127–149.
Pavlova, U. 2018, July 27. Vanilla Morphs From Plain to Premium as Prices Refuse to Go Down. Bloomberg.
       https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-07-29/asia-stocks-point-to-lower-start-yen-steadies-markets-
       wrap.
Peloso, M., & Miller, K. 2018. Unnatural disaster. The Environmental Forum, (May-June): 27–30.
Platt, R. H. 2012. Disasters and democracy: The politics of extreme natural events. Island Press.
Powell, W. W., & Colyvas, J. A. 2008. Microfoundations of institutional theory. The Sage Handbook of
       Organizational Institutionalism, 276: 298.
Rerup, C. 2009. Attentional triangulation: Learning from unexpected rare crises. Organization Science, 20(5): 876–
       893.
Ryall, M. D. 2009. Causal Ambiguity, Complexity, and Capability-Based Advantage. Management Science, 55(3):
       389–403.
Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. 1988. Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1(1):
       7–59.
Sarasvathy, S. D. 2001. Causation and Effectuation: Toward a Theoretical Shift from Economic Inevitability to
       Entrepreneurial Contingency. The Academy of Management Review, 26(2): 243–263.
Seo, H. 2017. Who Benefits From Destructive Creation?: Evidence from Firm Innovation after 9/11 Attack.
Simon, H. A. 1947. Administrative behavior, vol. 4. Cambridge Univ Press.
Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. 1977. Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28(1):
       1–39.
Slovic, P., Fischoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. 1982. Facts versus fears.
Starbuck, W. H. 2009. Perspective-cognitive reactions to rare events: perceptions, uncertainty, and learning.
       Organization Science, 20(5): 925–937.
Suder, G., Chailan, C., & Suder, D. 2008. Strategic megabrand management: Does global uncertainty affect brands?
       a post-9/11 us/non-us comparison of the 100 biggest brands. Journal of Product and Brand Management,
       17(7): 436–452.
SwissRe. 2018. Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2017: a year of widespread damages. Sigma, (2):
       36.
Teece, D. J. D. 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) enterprise
       performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13): 1319–1350.
Teece, D., & Leih, S. 2016. Uncertainty, Innovation, and Dynamic Capabilities: An Introduction. California
       Management Review, 58(4): 5–12.
Tilcsik, A., & Marquis, C. 2013. Punctuated Generosity How Mega-events and Natural Disasters Affect Corporate
       Philanthropy in U.S. Communities. Administrative Science Quarterly, 58: 111–148.
Tracey, P., Philips, N., & Jarvis, O. 2010. Bridging Institutional Entrepreneurship and the Creation of New
       Organizational Forms: A Multilevel Model. Organization Science, Articles i(1): 1–21.
Tripsas, M. 2009. Technology, Identity, and Inertia Through the Lens of “The Digital Photography Company.”
       Organization Science, 20(2): 441–460.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1973. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
       Psychology, 5(2): 207–232.
Useem, M., Kunreuther, H., & Michel-Kerjan, E. 2015. Leadership Dispatches: Chile’s Extraordinary Comeback
       from Disaster. Stanford University Press.
Wenzel, L., & Wolf, A. 2013. Protection against major catastrophes: An economic perspective. HWWI Research
       Paper.
Whiteman, G., Muller, A., & Voort, J. Van der. 2005. The tsunami’s CSR effect: MNEs and philanthropic
       responses to the disaster, 21(3): 199–222.
Zaheer, S. 1995. Overcoming the Liability of Foreignness. Academy of Management Journal, 38(2): 341–363.
Zanetti, A., Schwarz, S., & Lindemuth, A. 2007. Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2006: low insured
       losses. Sigma.
Zhang, J., & Luo, X. 2013. Dared to Care: Organizational Vulnerability, Institutional Logics, and MNCs’ Social
       Responsiveness in Emerging Markets. Organization Science, (June 2014).
       http://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/orsc.1120.0813.
Zollo, M. 2009. Superstitious Learning with Rare Strategic Decisions: Theory and Evidence from Corporate

                                                                                                                38
Acquisitions. Organization Science, 20(5): 894–908.




                                                      39
                        TABLES AND FIGURES

Figure 1. The three dimensions of organizational decision making under uncertainty shocks




                                                                                            40
