                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PER CAPITA INCOME, CONSUMPTION PATTERNS, AND CO2 EMISSIONS

                                         Justin Caron
                                        Thibault Fally

                                     Working Paper 24923
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24923


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2018




We thank Peter Berck, Larry Karp, Joe Shapiro, Mario Samano, Niven Winchester, Valerie
Karplus, conference and seminar participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Justin Caron and Thibault Fally. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Per Capita Income, Consumption Patterns, and CO2 Emissions
Justin Caron and Thibault Fally
NBER Working Paper No. 24923
August 2018
JEL No. F18,O10,Q47,Q56

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the role of income-driven differences in consumption patterns in
explaining and projecting energy demand and CO2 emissions. We develop and estimate a
general-equilibrium model with non-homothetic preferences across a large set of countries and
sectors, and trace embodied energy consumption through intermediate use and trade linkages.
Consumption of energy goods is less than proportional to income in rich countries, and more
income-elastic in low-income countries. While income effects are weaker for embodied energy,
we find a significant negative relationship between income elasticity and CO2 intensity across all
goods. These income-driven differences in consumption choices can partially explain the
observed inverted-U relationship between income and emissions across countries, the so-called
environmental Kuznet curve. Relative to standard models with homothetic preferences,
simulations suggest that income growth leads to lower emissions in high-income countries and
higher emissions in some low-income countries, with only modest reductions in world emissions
on aggregate.


Justin Caron
Department of Applied Economics
HEC Montreal
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
H3T 2A7
Montreal, QC
Canada
and Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
justin.caron@hec.ca

Thibault Fally
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
301 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
fally@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Energy consumption is associated with a number of negative externalities. Fossil fuel combustion,
in particular, leads to emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) a greenhouse gas responsible for global
climate change. World energy consumption and emissions have been increasing almost constantly,
and understanding the determinants behind emission levels is necessary to guide policy making and
improve forecasting. At the same time, demand for energy — like that of most goods — varies
significantly across income levels. There is for example widespread expectation of a rapid increase in
energy consumption in emerging economies as households approach middle-income levels (Wolfram et
al., 2012). On the other hand, empirical evidence from high- and middle-income countries tends to
point the other way: rich households spend a smaller share of their income on energy. However, most
studies on the role of per capita income focus on a single country and do not examine implications for
multiple countries in general equilibrium.
    This paper investigates how per capita income influences energy demand and CO2 emissions across
countries through differences in consumption patterns. We do so by introducing identical yet non-
homothetic (income-dependent) consumer preferences within a multi-regional, multi-sectoral general-
equilibrium model which accounts for differences in technologies, input-output linkages and trade.
Our first objective is to estimate the extent to which per capita income influences the average energy
and CO2 intensity of consumption by systematically shifting consumption patterns towards more or
less energy-intensive goods. We find that consumption patterns contribute to the observed inverted-
U relationship between income and CO2 intensity, a variant of the Environmental Kuznets Curve
(EKC). The second objective is to estimate whether and how we can expect further growth in per
capita income to affect changes in emissions. Results indicate little scope for shifts in consumption
choices to single-handedly reduce the CO2 intensity of world GDP in the short run: while income
growth leads to lower emissions in many countries once we account for non-homothetic consumption,
weaker income effects for embodied energy and higher emissions in some low-income countries imply
modest world average effects.
    Our framework allows a number of contributions. First, we paint an aggregate cross-country
picture of the relationship between income, consumption and emissions. A number of ’micro’ survey-
based studies find that the household demand for energy varies systematically with income, but
only provide scattered, country-specific evidence (typically from high-income countries). Conversely,
’macro’ studies of the relationship between income and CO2 emissions across countries, such as EKC
studies, have not focused on the importance of consumption patterns. Global or regional emissions
projections exercises also often do not model non-homothetic preferences, implicitly assuming an
income elasticity of one. The second contribution is accounting for global input-output linkages. The
demand for energy goes well beyond direct consumption and a large share of emissions is “embodied”
in the consumption of non-energy goods. As incomes rise, the evolution of emissions depends on
consumption shifts being biased towards more or less energy-intensive goods. Such bias includes,
for instance, the well documented shift away from industrial sectors to comparatively clean service



                                                  1
sectors. Third, our general equilibrium framework allows us to distinguish consumption effects from
production-driven differences in emission levels. While EKC studies have been criticized for lacking
structure or causal interpretation (Levinson and O’Brien, 2018), we identify the role of per capita
income in determining emissions through changes in consumption choices. This allows to pinpoint its
role in simulations.
    Our multi-regional general equilibrium model is an extension of Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014).
The identification strategy estimates sectoral income elasticities of consumption from cross-country
variations in consumption patterns while disentangling demand from supply-side effects. Failing to do
so, we might for example confound the fact that high-income countries consume less energy-intensive
goods not because their consumers are richer but because those goods are more expensive there.
Available consumer price data are hard to match to production, input-output and trade data, and
are also prone to endogeneity. We sidestep these issues by constructing price index proxies from
supply-side patterns of comparative advantage and trade costs estimated in a gravity model. In our
benchmark specification, non-homotheticity is modeled using Constant Relative Income Elasticity
(CRIE) preferences1 , but we test the sensitivity of results to alternative demand systems leading to
more flexible Engel curves. The supply-side structure is an extension of Costinot et al. (2012) and
Eaton and Kortum (2002) with multiple factors of production and an input-output structure as in
Caliendo and Parro (2015). Fossil fuel supply is determined through the supply of a specific factor.
    The model is estimated using the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP8) dataset — a collection
of consumption2 , input-output, production and trade data for 109 countries spanning most of the per
capita income spectrum and 57 sectors covering the whole economy. This dataset allows us to track
the direct CO2 content of consumption linked to the final consumption of CO2 -emitting energy goods
(coal, natural gas, electricity and refined oil). We also use the multi-regional input-output tables
to compute the indirect CO2 content of consumption: emissions caused by the production of goods
throughout their global supply chain.
    We present our results in stages: from sector-level to country-level partial-equilibrium evidence,
then to general-equilibrium simulations. We first look at the cross-sector relationship between total
(direct and indirect) CO2 intensities and the estimated income elasticities determined by the structure
of preferences. The income elasticity of CO2 -emitting energy goods is generally below one, including
that of electricity and refined oil. When including non-energy goods, we find an inverted-U relationship
in which goods of intermediate income elasticity (including transportation and manufacturing sectors)
have the highest total CO2 intensity on average. However, the relationship is negative overall, with
the highest income elasticity goods (mostly services) having the lowest CO2 intensity. The inverted-
U and negative relationship is significant within the set of non-energy goods as well. This findings
provide preliminary evidence for a demand-side explanation of the income-emissions link: consumers
   1
     We chose these preferences as they are practical to estimate, and provide a simple link between estimated coefficients
and income elasticities. CRIE preferences are also easily combined with CES preferences within industries to generate
gravity within industries.
   2
     Throughout, we use consumption to describe final demand. In our data and model, it includes household, government
and investment demand.



                                                            2
at different income levels consume baskets of different average CO2 intensity.
   We then investigate how this translates into differences in the average CO2 content of consumption
baskets (bundles) across countries, expressed in kg of CO2 per dollar of consumption — i.e. a measure
of CO2 intensity. The data exhibit considerable cross-country variation, but also reveal a distinct
asymmetric inverted-U and overall negative relationship between per capita income and both the
direct and total average CO2 contents of consumption: lower middle-income countries have the highest
emissions intensities; high-income countries the lowest. This is consistent with the EKC literature
which has identified an inverted-U pattern for the CO2 intensity of GDP (but not total emissions).
While, unsurprisingly, a large part of the observed decrease in emissions intensities with income is
to be attributed to technological differences (or within-sector shifts in consumption which we do not
observe), differences in consumption patterns play a substantial role: they explain 33% of the cross-
country variability in the total CO2 intensity of consumption and generate a relationship in which
intensities are lowest at high incomes.
   To identify the role of per capita income, we re-estimate average CO2 content of consumption
using fitted consumption patterns generated from identical but non-homothetic preferences. Results
confirm that income itself, through its influence on consumption patterns, explains a significant part
of the variability in CO2 contents across countries. While we find here that the influence of income-
driven consumption patterns on direct consumption emissions is stronger than on total consumption
emissions, it is still strong when non-energy goods are included: differences in income cause the
predicted average CO2 content to drop from an average of 0.733 kg/$ for low-income countries to
0.461 kg/$ for high-income countries. Interestingly, we find that the average CO2 embodied in each
dollar of imported consumption also decreases in per capita income (which runs contrary to the
pollution-heaven hypothesis) and that non-homothetic preferences can partially explain this negative
correlation.
   Having established per capita income as an important determinant of CO2 intensity, we then
investigate the potential for growth in income to shift consumption patterns in a way which affects
aggregate energy use and emissions, absent any improvements in technology. Using our general-
equilibrium model, we simulate a counterfactual increase in income and estimate resulting changes in
consumption emissions. While the equilibrium change in energy consumed ultimately also depends
on the supply of energy, we find, for plausible values of supply elasticity, a strong reduction in the
direct CO2 intensity of consumption. Accounting for general-equilibrium effects, we find that a 1%
increase in income increases direct consumption emissions by only 0.88% on average (compared to the
1% increase which we would obtain with homothetic preferences). More flexible demand specifications
and higher supply elasticity of fossil fuels lead to an even stronger negative effect. Income effects for
the total CO2 content of consumption baskets (including CO2 embodied in non-energy goods) are
considerably weaker on aggregate: our benchmark estimate for the income elasticity of the world’s
CO2 content of consumption (which equals that of production) is 0.97. However, the near-homothetic
world average effect hides significant heterogeneity. For both the direct and total CO2 content, low-
income countries have elasticities that are higher than one (that is, are still to the left of their intensity


                                                      3
peak such that their consumption patterns are predicted to change in way which increases emissions),
while most middle- and high-income countries have elasticities that are far below the world average.
       All of these results follow through when considering the secondary energy intensity of consumption
instead of its CO2 intensity. However, including other greenhouse gases (CH4 , N2 O and fluorinated
gases) changes the picture because goods with the lowest income elasticity (such as agriculture) are
responsible for the highest emissions of these gases. This leads to a negative cross-sectoral corre-
lation between total GHG-intensity and income elasticity which turns the inverted-U cross-country
relationship identified for CO2 strictly negative.
       The paper proceeds as follows. After an overview of related literature, Section 2 describes our
theoretical framework, including the equations describing counterfactual equilibria. Section 3 describes
implications of equilibrium outcomes (consumption, production) on CO2 emissions. Section 4 describes
the data and econometric estimation strategy. Section 5 describes all results including a decomposition
of CO2 contents and simulations outcomes. Section 6 presents extensions to the benchmark model.

Context and related literature
Our paper relates to at least three distinct lines of research: i) literature on the “Environmental
Kuznet Curve” (EKC) describing how aggregate emissions depend on GDP per capita and stages of
development; ii) studies of income effects in energy consumption based on household microdata; iii)
models of emissions forecasting.
       We focus on income-driven shifts in consumption patterns, which directly affect the energy intensity
of GDP, a critical ingredient in understanding cross-country differences in emission levels.3 This relates
to various studies documenting the link between GDP per capita and aggregate emissions. To our
knowledge, existing studies either focus on documenting aggregate outcomes, or if they link emissions
to sectoral composition, do not explicitly model and estimate income effects in consumption.
       Existing evidence suggests heterogeneous and complex relationships between per capita income
and the aggregate energy intensity of GDP. The energy intensity of most high-income countries, as
well as that of the world, has been declining for decades (Raupach et al., 2007), while most of the
developing world has a stable or increasing energy intensity of GDP.4 Although total CO2 , contrary
to a number of other pollutants, tends to increase with income, the literature has found evidence
for an inverted-U relationship between CO2 per capita or CO2 intensity (in kg/$) and income across
countries: see Schmalensee et al. (1998), Dietz and Rosa (1997), Roberts and Grimes (1997) for cross-
   3
      Cross-country differences in emissions, as well as their evolution, can be decomposed into differences in population,
GDP per capita, the energy intensity of GDP and the emissions intensity of energy. This is also known as the Kaya
identity (Yamaji et al., 1991), in which F = P × G  P
                                                       ×EG
                                                           ×E F
                                                                , where P refers to population, G is GDP and E is primary
energy consumption. Emissions are thus influenced by g = G/P , per capita GDP; e = E/G, the energy intensity of
GDP; and f = F/E, the carbon intensity of energy. We focus on the role of e and the degree to which it is determined
by consumption patterns.
    4
      Raupach et al. (2007) find that it has declined by about 15% between 1980 and 2005, or by more than 40% if GDP
is evaluated at purchasing power parity. See Figure 2 of Raupach et al. (2007) for world levels and Figure 4 for a country
decomposition. Evaluating GDP at purchasing power parity increases the weight put on developing economies. In the
present paper, GDP and income are evaluated at market exchange rates.




                                                            4
country studies or Aldy (2005) for a comparison across US states. This EKC suggests that countries
become comparatively cleaner, per dollar, after reaching a certain level of development. Most EKC
studies are based on aggregate energy and emissions data. Using sectorally-disaggregated datasets,
several papers in the multi-regional input-output literature have also identified evidence for both a
consumption and a production-based EKC (see Peters, 2008). Hertwich and Peters (2009) estimate a
cross-country elasticity of CO2 to income of 0.81 on average, and their results suggest an inverted-U
curve for emissions intensities.
       Economists, among others Grossman and Krueger (1995), have suggested decomposing the rela-
tionship between income and environmental quality between scale, technique and composition. Focus-
ing on local pollutants (not CO2 ), they have identified an EKC turning point at relatively low income
levels, and argued that it could be caused by composition effects. Only a limited number of studies
have focused specifically on the role of sectoral composition effects. Existing work tends to be reduced-
form in nature, without examining the structure of preferences and non-homotheticities driving these
composition effects. In a paper similar in spirit to ours, Medlock and Soligo (2001), using a three-
sector model, time series data and controlling for prices, have found that structural shifts between
agriculture, transportation and industrial sectors generate an EKC turning point. However, they do
not focus on consumption patterns specifically and do not distinguish production from consumption
effects.5

       A distinct but related strand of the literature investigates the relationship between income, con-
sumption patterns and CO2 emissions at the household level, typically based on single-country survey
data. There is unambiguous evidence of income-driven consumption effects: differences in income
significantly affect household energy use. Most studies which focus on industrialized countries find
direct energy consumption to be a necessity good (see Wier et al., 2001 or Munksgaard et al., 2001
among others), in line with our findings. Kerkhof et al. (2009) compare estimates across countries and
investigate how emissions from households in the UK, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden respond
to income. They find heterogeneous effects: in the UK and Netherlands, rising income means declining
emissions intensities. In Sweden and Norway, emission intensities are lower but increase with income.
They attribute these differences to housing and heating patterns across income levels.
       Also focusing on household behaviour but with a structural approach, Levinson and O’Brien (2018)
find strong evidence for consumption effects in the US. They estimate “Environmental Engel Curves”:
the relationship between income and the consumption of various pollutants (not including CO2 ).
These also identify demand-side effects by holding prices constant and include indirect emissions.
They find such Engel curves to be concave, with an income elasticity of energy that is lower than one.
Our approach, while focusing instead on energy and CO2 over a large number of countries, is similar.
       Much less is known about this relationship in the developing world, where most of the future
   5
    Also related is Shapiro and Walker (2014), who decompose the evolution of CO2 emissions in US manufacturing over
the last decades and report that consumer preferences have not changed in a way which substantially affects the level of
emissions. While they control for environmental stringency, trade costs and productivity improvements to come to this
conclusion, their data only cover manufacturing goods, do not include input-output linkages, and they do not attempt
to make economy-wide statements about the role of preferences.



                                                           5
growth in energy demand is expected to occur. Studies looking at the determinants behind energy
use (fossil fuels and electricity) include Farsi et al. (2007) for a survey of urban Indian households,
and Golley and Meng (2012) or Cao et al. (2016) for a survey of urban Chinese households. These
studies present a mixed picture regarding the relationship between energy intensities and income.
Others focus more directly on the relationship between income and the demand for energy-intensive
appliances. Davis and Gertler (2015), for example, point to large possible increases in the adoption
of air conditioning. Gertler et al. (2016) review the implications of growing demand for appliances
in the developing world, relying on survey data describing household appliance and vehicle purchases
collected in several large developing countries. In a simple reduced-form estimation based on country-
level data, they find that the income elasticity of energy demand displays an inverted-U pattern that
remains below one in all countries and peaks around 0.8. Exploiting randomized cash transfers, they
also identify an S-shaped relationship between expenditure levels and ownership of energy-intensive
appliances (such as refrigerators) in which ownership of these durables evolves from very low levels to
saturation levels at particular stages of development. Similar S-shape patterns have been identified in
the case of Chinese households by Zhao et al. (2011). These findings are in line with Wolfram et al.
(2012) who predicted large coming increases in developing-world energy demand, as large populations
are just at the beginning of the energy-intensive appliance purchase process.
   Our paper differs from the above in that, despite relying on aggregated consumption data, it covers
a wide range of countries across a broader income spectrum. Although we do not model the demand
for energy-consuming appliances directly, our dataset tracks the direct demand for secondary energy
which these appliances use (mainly electricity, oil and natural gas). It can thus implicitly pick up
S-shaped appliance adoption patterns. These can indeed lead to an inverted-U relationship between
aggregate energy intensity and per capita income, as households progress from purchasing energy-
consuming appliances (increasing energy intensity) to being saturated in these appliances (decreasing
energy intensity). Furthermore, our dataset allows the estimation of the indirect (embodied) usage
of energy — an element usually not considered in the literature — and allows us to examine general-
equilibrium implications by combining both the demand and supply sides.

   Finally, our paper also relates to an extended literature on energy and emissions projection mod-
eling. Despite the evidence that energy intensity varies systematically with income levels, the rela-
tionship has been given little attention in these exercises. This is surprising, given that a variety of
decision makers benefit from reliable projections, including climate impact and adaptation managers,
energy resource and technology managers, government officials, and others responsible for developing
regional and national policy related to energy use or climate change.
   The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which provides “Representative [emis-
sions] concentration pathways” for earth system modelers to use as inputs, does not attempt to
generate explicit predictions of future emission intensity. Instead, they favor a set of alternative sce-
narios in which changes in emissions intensity are implicitly considered but are not based on empirical
estimates. The International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook (IEA, 2013), one of the most
comprehensive energy demand forecasting exercises, allows for income elasticity of household demand


                                                   6
to deviate from unity for a limited number of residential demand components. These are limited
to residential buildings and include water heating, appliances, lighting, cooking and cooling. Their
elasticity estimates are also unpublished, and only cover a limited number of countries.
        Most of the computable general equilibrium models used for energy and emissions projections
(e.g. Paltsev et al., 2005) either rely on homothetic (generally constant elasticity of substitution)
demand systems, or when they do allow consumption patterns to vary with income, do so with crudely
calibrated elasticities. Dai et al. (2012) recognize the need to account for non-homothetic behavior
in such models. In attempting to improve the forecasts of emissions growth in China, they provide
non-parametric income elasticity estimates. However, they do not include these estimates within the
model and instead use arbitrary scenarios describing the growth paths of future expenditure shares.
        To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to consistently estimate income elasticity across
a wide range of sectors for a set of countries covering most of the world economy, and describe their
relationship with CO2 intensity across sectors. It is unique in pinpointing the role of per capita income
growth, through its influence on consumption patterns, in determining future worldwide emissions.6


2        Theoretical framework
We rely on the general equilibrium model of consumption, production and international trade in-
troduced in Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014), which we extend to track energy demand and CO2
emissions. The model’s supply-side is an extension of Costinot et al. (2012) and Eaton and Kortum
(2002) with treatment of intermediate inputs as in Caliendo and Parro (2015). The demand side for-
mulation allows for non-homothetic preferences. We use this general-equilibrium structure to estimate
all key parameters of interest and conduct counterfactual simulations.

2.1        Model setup
2.1.1       Demand

In our benchmark specification, we adopt a demand system derived from constant relative income
elasticity (CRIE) preferences, as in Fieler (2011) and Caron et al. (2014), with early analyses and
applications found in Hanoch (1975) and Chao and Manne (1982). In section 6.1, we examine the
sensitivity of our results to the use of non-homothetic CES preferences as in Comin et al. (2015).
        Consider a set of heterogeneous industries k, each of which is composed of a continuum of product
varieties indexed by jk ∈ [0, 1]. Preferences take the form:
                                                                  σk −1
                                                      X            σk
                                                U=          α1,k Qk
                                                        k
    6
    In an orthogonal approach, van Benthem (2015) uses long time series to estimate whether energy consumption
patterns in the developing world have converged to those of rich countries faster than their income. While he finds
limited evidence for such “energy leapfrogging” overall, there is evidence that the consumption patterns of countries of
similar levels of income have become more energy-intensive over time. That framework however doesn’t allow identifying
whether these shifts are due to changes in preferences or changes in technology.


                                                            7
where α1,k is a constant (for each industry k) and Qk is a CES aggregate:

                                                 Z    1               ξk −1
                                                                                      ξ ξ−1
                                                                                          k
                                                                                        k
                                          Qk =                q(jk )    ξk
                                                                               djk
                                                      jk =0

Preferences are identical across countries, but are non-homothetic if σk varies across industries. The
ratio of income elasticities of demand between goods i and j is given by σi /σj and is constant. The
                                                                 R                 1
                                                                    1                 1−ξk
CES price index of goods from industry k in country n, Pnk = 0 pnk (jk )1−ξk djk           , determine
individual expenditures (Pnk Qnk ) in country n for goods in industry k. These are:

                                              dnk = λ−σ
                                                     n α2,k (Pnk )
                                                        k          1−σk
                                                                                                                       (1)

where λn is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the budget constraint of individuals in country
n, and α2,k = (α1,k σkσ−1
                       k
                          )σk . The Lagrangian λn is determined by the budget constraint: total expen-
ditures must equal total income. The income elasticity of demand ηnk for goods in industry k and
country n equals:7
                                                              P
                                                                 0 dnk 0
                                                εnk   = σk . P k                                                       (2)
                                                              k0 σk0 dnk0

2.1.2      Production and trade in non-energy sectors

The focus of the analysis being on the demand-side, we formulate a flexible structure of supply which
will allow us to control for any pattern of comparative advantage forces at the sector level.
       Production of primary energy sectors (defined below) k ∈ P is distinguished from that of non-
energy sectors k ∈
                 / P in order to allow calibration of their supply elasticity, which is critical to
the general equilibrium response of emissions. For non-energy sectors, we assume Cobb-Douglas
production functions with constant returns to scale where production depends on factors and bundles of
intermediate goods from each industry (the production function of primary energy sectors is described
later).
       We assume that factors of production are perfectly mobile across sectors but immobile across
countries. We denote by wf n the price of factor f in country n. Factor intensities for each industry
k and factor f are denoted by βikf , and may vary across countries i. We denote by γihk the share
of the input bundles from industry h in total costs of industry k (direct input-output coefficient) in
country i, and each input bundle is a CES aggregate of all varieties available in this industry. For sake
of exposition we assume that the elasticity of substitution between varieties is the same as for final
goods (see discussion in footnote 9). Total factor productivity Zik (jk ) varies by country, industry and
variety. We assume iceberg transport costs dnik ≥ 1 from country i to country n in sector k. The unit
   7
    It is clear from Equation 2 that the ratio of the income elasticities of any pair of goods k and k0 equals the ratio of
their σ parameters: εεnk0 = σσk0 and is constant across countries.
                      nk     k




                                                                8
cost of supplying variety jk to country n from country i equals:

                                                 dnik Y              Y
                                 pnik (jk ) =             (wif )βikf   (Pih )γihk
                                                Zik (jk )
                                                         f             h

                                                                   P                P
where Pih is the price index of goods h in country i and               f   βikf +   h γihk   = 1 in each country i,
ensuring constant returns to scale.
      There is perfect competition for the supply of each variety jk . Hence, the price of variety jk
in country n in industry k equals pnk (jk ) = mini {pnik (jk )}. We follow Eaton and Kortum (2002)
and assume that productivity Zik (jk ) is a random variable with a Frechet distribution. This setting
generates gravity within each sector. Productivity is independently drawn in each country i and
industry k, with a cumulative distribution Fik (z) = exp −(z/zik )−θk where zik is a productivity
                                                                    

shifter reflecting average TFP of country i in sector k. Given the Frechet distribution, we obtain a
gravity equation for each industry. As in Eaton and Kortum (2002), θk is related to the inverse of
productivity dispersion across varieties within each sector k. Note that we also assume θk > ξk − 1
to ensure a well-defined CES price index within each industry. As in Costinot et al. (2012), we also
allow the shift parameter zik to vary across exporters and industries, controlling for any pattern of
Ricardian comparative advantage forces at the sector level. Each country i is populated by a number
Li of individuals. The total supply of factor f is fixed in each country and denoted by Vif . Each
individual is endowed by Vif /Li units of factor Vf i implying no within-country income inequality.8

2.1.3     Energy sectors and CO2 emissions

Primary and secondary energy sectors. Among energy sectors k ∈ E, we differentiate primary
sectors, P, and secondary sectors, S. Coal, natural gas and crude oil (as well as renewables and
nuclear, which we ignore here as they do not emit CO2 ) are considered to be “primary energy”
sectors. “Secondary energy” describes sectors which can directly be used as inputs to production
and/or in final demand. These include refined oil and electricity as well as coal and gas which can be
both primary and secondary. Most CO2 is emitted during the consumption (intermediate of final) of
secondary energy or the transformation of primary energy into electricity, while a smaller amount is
emitted during the refining of oil, gas and coal.

Production function.         The production of primary energy goods (the fossil fuel sectors) requires the
input of a “natural resource” factor of production that is specific to each sector. The endowments of
these factors are fixed, so the supply elasticity of these fossil fuel sectors depends on the possibility to
adjust factors that are mobile across sectors to complement natural resources (example: using capital
and labor to extract more oil out of the same resource).
      We assume that primary energy sectors combine their sector-specific natural resources with the
other mobile inputs in a CES upper-tier with elasticity of substitution νk . The mobile inputs enter
  8
    In a robustness check in Caron et al. (2014), we extend the model and estimation strategy to account for within-
country income inequality and find very similar estimates, if not slightly wider differences in income elasticities.


                                                          9
as a lower-tier Cobb-Douglas composite of capital, labor and intermediate goods with cost cik . We
denote by wR,ik the cost of natural resources that are specific to each energy sector k ∈ P and country
i. The overall cost of production is thus:

                                    dnik h                                     i βik Y
                                                    1−νik
                    pnik (jk ) =             µR,ik wR,ik  + (1 − µR,ik ) c1−ν
                                                                          ik
                                                                             ik 1−νik
                                                                                       (Pih )γihk                  (3)
                                   Zik (jk )
                                                                                       h

where Pih is the price index of goods h in country i and where cik is the cost of non-resource factors
in industry k in country i:
                                                              Y      βikf

                                                      cik =    (wif ) βik                                          (4)
                                                              f
       P                              P
with      f   βikf = βik and βik +         h γihk   = 1 in each country i to ensure constant returns to scale. The
parameter µR,ik reflects how much industry k ∈ P relies on natural resources.
   Given the limited supply of the fixed factor, the elasticity of supply of primary energy good k is
less than infinite:
                                           ∂ log Yik      νik (1 − ϕR,ik )    1
                                   ζik =             −1 =                  +     −1
                                           ∂ log pik         βik ϕR,ik       βik
as long as µR,ik > 0 (see derivation in Appendix). As we will discuss, this elasticity of supply
substantially influences the responses in equilibrium energy consumption (in quantities) to demand
shocks.
   The production of secondary energy goods k ∈ S is modeled in the same fashion as non-energy
sectors k ∈
          / E and can be seen as a special case where µR,ik = 0.

Emissions.         CO2 emissions occur during the consumption of fossil fuels. Emissions related to the
use of energy sector k ∈ E as an input to sector h in country i is assumed to depend linearly on
quantities of k consumed in h:
                                                                C
                                                      CO2ikh = ηikh Qikh                                           (5)
                        C are fixed and country-sector specific, and where Q                     γikh Yih
where the coefficients ηikh                                                 ikh ≡                  Pik      represents
absorption of energy good k, in terms of quantities, by industry h in country i. Emission coefficients
 C represent physical quantities of CO , in kilograms, and depends on energy good k being used (e.g.
ηikh                                  2
refined petroleum) and the buying industry h (e.g. chemicals or transportation). Coefficients may
vary according to industry depending on the share of fossil fuels combusted as opposed to transformed.
                                                          C coefficients are zero for that sector.
The consumption of electricity does not emit CO2 and the ηikh
   Some CO2 emissions are also directly related to final consumption of secondary energy goods
(again, except electricity):
                                                               C
                                                     CO2ikF = ηikF QikF                                            (6)
                   Dik
where QikF ≡       Pik   reflects the quantities of energy goods k ∈ S consumed as final goods.
   From the quantity-based coefficients η C , we can derive value-based coefficients (based on bench-
mark energy prices) to describe emissions from each dollar of production or consumption. We compute


                                                                  10
                                            1 X          X η C γihk
                                  C                         ihk
                                 βik =          CO2ihk =
                                           Yik                Pih
                                                  h                          h

as the amount (in kg) of CO2 emissions per dollar of output of sector k. Similarly,

                                           C          CO2ikF     ηC
                                          βikF =               = ikF
                                                      Pik QikF   Pik

corresponds to the emissions caused by a dollar of final consumption of fossil fuels.
   We refer to section 3 for further details on CO2 emissions accounting, linking emissions in upstream
industries (potentially from different producing countries) to the composition of final demand.

2.2   Equilibrium
We now define the equations which determine the equilibrium. On the demand side, total expenditures
Dnk of country n in final goods k simply equals population Ln times individual expenditures as
described by Equation 1. This gives:

                                     Dnk = Ln (λn )−σk α2,k (Pnk )1−σk                              (7)

where α2,k is the industry constant defined in equation 1. λn is the Lagrangian multiplier associated
with the budget constraint:
                                                              X
                                                Ln In =                Dnk                          (8)
                                                               k

where In denotes per-capita income.
   Total demand Xnk for goods k in country n is the sum of the demand for final consumption Dnk
and intermediate use:
                                                               X
                                          Xnk = Dnk +                  γnkh Ynh                     (9)
                                                                   h

where Ynh refers to total production in sector h.
   We denote by Xnik the value of trade from country i to country n, with:

                                                      Sik (dnik )−θk
                                          Xnik =                     Xnk                          (10)
                                                           Φnk

where Sik and Φnk are defined as follows. The “supplier effect”, Sik , is inversely related to the cost
of production in country i and industry k. It depends on the total factor productivity parameter zik
and the prices of intermediate goods and factors:
                                          Y                  −θk  Y           −θk
                                     θk
                              Sik = zik         (wf i )βikf           (Pih )γihk                  (11)
                                            f                                h


The parameter θk is inversely related to the dispersion of productivity within sectors, implying that


                                                         11
differences in productivity and factor prices across countries have a stronger impact on trade flows in
sectors with higher θk .
       For primary energy goods, the supplier effect also depends on fixed natural resources:

                                           h                                                i− βik θk                    −θk
                                      θk              1−νik
                                                                          µR,ik ) c1−ν
                                                                                                1−νik
                       Sik =         zik       µR,ik wR,ik    + (1 −               ik
                                                                                       ik
                                                                                                          Πh (Pih )γikh          (12)

                              βikf
               Q
with cik =         f (wif )
                               βik
                                      as described in the previous section.
       In turn, we define Φnk as the sum of exporter fixed effects deflated by trade costs:

                                                                      X
                                                              Φnk =           Sik (dnik )−θk                                     (13)
                                                                          i

This Φnk acts as an “inward multilateral trade resistance index” and is closely related to the price
index, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002):

                                                                                      − θ1
                                                               Pnk = α3,k (Φnk )            k                                    (14)

             h          i 1
                           ξk −1
with α3,k = Γ θk +1−ξ
                    θk
                       k
                                 where Γ denotes the gamma function.9
   Finally, two other market clearing conditions are required to determine factor prices and income
in general equilibrium. Given the Cobb-Douglas production function, total income from a particular
factor equals the sum of total production weighted by the factor intensity coefficient βikf . With factor
supply Vf i and factor price wf i for factor f in country i, factor market clearing implies:

                                                 X                  X                βikf (1−µR,ik )c1−ν
                                                                                                     ik
                                                                                                        ik
                              Vf i wf i =              βikf Yik +         Yik          1−νik                                     (15)
                                                 k∈P
                                                  /                 k∈P
                                                                                µR,ik wR,ik  + (1−µR,ik )c1−ν
                                                                                                          ik
                                                                                                             ik



                                 1−νik
               βikf (1−µR,ik )cik
where            1−ν                       1−νik   is the share of spending on factor f , and output equals the sum of
          µR,ik wR,ikik +(1−µR,ik )cik
                               P
outward flows Yik =                  n Xnik .
       For natural resources, in each primary energy sector k ∈ P and country i, market clearing yields:
                                                                                          1−νik
                                                                          βikf Yik µR,ik wR,ik
                                                Rik wR,ik =           1−νik                                                      (16)
                                                               µR,ik wR,ik  + (1−µR,ik )c1−ν
                                                                                         ik
                                                                                            ik




In turn, per-capita income is determined by:

                                                                      1 X
                                                               Ii =       V f i wf i                                             (17)
                                                                      Li
                                                                                f

   9
    This can be generalized by allowing the elasticity of substitution for intermediate use to differ from the elasticity of
substitution for final use, and depends on the parent industry. This does not affect the elasticity of the price index w.r.t.
Φk as long as θk does not depend on the final use. Differences in elasticities of substitution would be captured by the
industry fixed effect that we include in our estimation strategy and would not affect our estimates.




                                                                              12
By Walras’ Law, trade is balanced at equilibrium. Given the equilibrium Xnk and Pnk of energy
sectors, we can then back out emissions using equations 5 and 6.

2.3      Counterfactual equilibria
Following Dekle et al. (2007) and Caliendo and Parro (2015), the model lends itself naturally to
counterfactual simulations. Using a set of observed variables and a limited number of parameters to
estimate, the above equilibrium conditions can be reformulated to define a counterfactual equilibrium
relative to our baseline equilibrium.10 Specifically, using “exact hat algebra” where Zb = Z 0 /Z denotes
the relative change in variable Z, we obtain the following set of equilibrium conditions:

                   D
                   d      c −σk P
                     nk = λn
                                 d nk
                                      1−σk
                                                                                                               (18)
                          P d
                             k Dnk Dnk
                    Ibn =    P                                                                                 (19)
                               k Dnk
                          Dnk Dd nk
                                        X γnkh Ynh Y
                                                   dnh
                   X
                   d nk =            +                                                                         (20)
                            Xnk              Xnk
                                                    h

                  X
                  d       c d −θk P
                    nik = Sik dnik
                                      d   θk
                                        nk Xnk
                                              d                                                                (21)
                          "                      #− 1
                                                   θk
                            X                −θk
                   P
                   d nk =      πnik Sc
                                     ik dnik
                                        d                                                                      (22)
                                     i
                                 h                                          i− θk βik  Y     γhk θk
                                                                                                 
                              θk               1−νk                    1−νk    1−νk
                    Sik = zc
                    c      ik      βR,ik wd
                                          R,ik      + (1 − βR,ik ) cc
                                                                    ik                    Pc
                                                                                           ih                  (23)
                                                                                              h
                               Y             βf k

                     cc
                      ik =               w
                                         d    β
                                           f i ik                                                              (24)
                                f
                                     "                                                             #
                              1        X                     X                    1−νk     ν ik −1
                   w
                   d if =                    βikf Yik Ycik +     βikf Yik Yc
                                                                           ik cc
                                                                               ik      χc
                                                                                        ik                     (25)
                           Vif wif
                                       k∈P
                                        /                    k∈P
                                 cc νk −1
                                     ik
                  wd
                   R,ik = Yik
                           c                        for k ∈ P                                                  (26)
                                 wd R,ik
                           P                      P
                              f Vf i wf i w fi +           Rik wR,ik wd
                                                                      R,ik
                                                   Pk∈P
                                          d
                     Ibi =       P                                                                             (27)
                                    f V f i wf i +     k∈P Rik wR,ik

                               Y
                               dnk
               CO2
                dnhk =              for h ∈ E                                                                  (28)
                               P
                               d nh

                                            P                                                          Xnik
where production equals Ynk =                  i πink Xik   and trade shares are defined as πnik =     Xnk .
       As will be further discussed in Section 5.5, our counterfactual equilibria reflect the impact of
                                     0
                                    zik
productivity growth zc
                     ik =           zik    across sectors k and countries i. We simulate a uniform 1% (Hicks-
Neutral) productivity increase across all countries and sectors. Knowing the values of variables Dnk ,
  10
   This approach, sometimes described as the “calibrated share form”, has also been used in the Computable General
Equilibrium literature. See Rutherford (2002).




                                                                 13
In , Xnk , Xnik and Vf i wf i in the baseline equilibrium as well as parameters σk , θk , γhk and βf k , we
can solve for all changes D d nk , λn , In , Pnk , Snk and w
                                   c b d d                 d f n for any given change in productivity z
                                                                                                      cik .



3         Implications for CO2 emissions
3.1         CO2 content of consumption, production and imports
There are several ways to illustrate the link between income and CO2 emissions. While this paper
focuses on how consumption patterns affect consumption emissions both directly and indirectly, we
also show how they affect production emissions and emissions embodied in imported consumption.


Input-output linkages and total emission coefficients Being interested in the total impact of
consumption patterns on CO2 emissions, we need to track the production of goods across all source
countries and sectors generated by a dollar of final consumption in each sector and country. This
requires 1) import shares πnih to inform how total demand from country n leads to production in
country i; and 2) requirement coefficients γnhk (coefficients of the Cobb-Douglas production function)
to track the demand for inputs from industry h by the parent industry k in country n. The πnih γnhk
product provides the direct requirement coefficients of a multi-regional input-output matrix A. Pro-
duction of good h in country i must equal final demand plus intermediate demand by downstream
industries, such that we obtain:
                                                  X                X
                                         Yih =        πnih Dnh +         πnih γnhk Ynk                (29)
                                                  n                n,k

                                                                           tot coefficients of the
Building on this standard input-output accounting equality, we obtain the γnikh
(I − A)−1 π matrix (also called “total requirement coefficients” associated with the “Leontief inverse”).
These inform on the dollar amount of production in country i in industry h ultimately generated by
each dollar of final demand for product k in country n.11 These total requirement coefficients γnikh
                                                                                                tot

are used to define total CO2 coefficients:

                                                            X
                                                   Ctot             C tot
                                                  βik   =          βnh γinhk
                                                             n,h

i.e. the emissions embodied in each dollar of production of good k in country i. Summing across
                                                                                         Cindir =
all source countries, we can use these to define indirect CO2 consumption coefficients, βikF
           Ctot                                                          Ctot
P
   n πink βnk , which in turn define total CO2 consumption coefficients βikF :

                                             X
                                    Ctot                Ctot    C      Cindir    C
                                   βikF  =        πink βnk   + βikF = βikF    + βikF                  (30)
                                              n
    11
         In matrix form, we have: y = πD + Ay. Inverting, we obtain: y = (I − A)−1 πD.




                                                            14
i.e. the indirect (for all goods) and direct (for fossil fuels only) emissions associated with the con-
sumption of each dollar of good k in country i sourced from all countries n.
    Using these coefficients, we can easily compute measures of country-level CO2 contents. In order
to facilitate decompositions in Section 5.4, we take care to describe each as functions of final demand
Dnk .

Direct CO2 content of consumption                  We first examine direct consumption emissions, i.e. CO2
caused by the consumption of fossil fuels (refined oil, natural gas and coal) as final goods. As is
common in the literature, we also include the emissions embodied in electricity consumption even
though these emissions do not occur directly in final demand. We thus define, for each country n:
                               X                                        X
                    ECndir =                   Ctot
                                     CO2nkF + βn,ele,F Dn,ele =                C
                                                                              βnkF        Ctot
                                                                                   Dnk + βn,ele Dn,ele            (31)
                               k∈S                                      k∈S


Total CO2 content of consumption                  We then track indirect consumption emissions, i.e. CO2
caused by production in all countries to satisfy final demand in country n:
                                                          X
                                             ECnindir =             Cindir
                                                                   βnkF    Dnk                                    (32)
                                                              k


Such that total (direct and indirect) consumption-related emissions ECjtot are:
                                      X                  X                           X
                           ECntot =          C
                                            βnkF Dnk +             Cindir
                                                                  βnkF    Dnk =            Ctot
                                                                                          βnkF  Dnk               (33)
                                      k∈S                 k                           k


Note that in general, because of international trade, emissions (indirectly) embodied in consumption
differ from emissions from domestic production since domestic consumption may rely on imports and
domestic production may be consumed elsewhere.

Production emissions           Production emissions in country n are the sum of emissions occurring during
the production of all sectors k in n.12 As described above, production Ynk can be linked to the sector
and location of final demand using total requirement coefficients, such that:
                                      X                X                   X
                                                               C                          Ctot
                            EYn =           CO2nhk =          βnk Ynk =             πink βnk   Dik                (34)
                                       hk                k                    i,k


Total CO2 content of imported consumption We can also go a bit further and decompose the
indirect emissions content of consumption into its domestic and imported components. The emissions
embodied in country j’s imported final demand are given by13 :
  12
     We do not define production emissions as the emissions content of production, which would include the emissions
embodied in intermediate goods produced in other countries.
  13
     An alternative way of measuring importedP consumption
                                                        P emissions       would be to include all emissions which occur
abroad at all stages of production, ECnimp =    ik πnik
                                                                 C tot
                                                         h,j6=n βih γijhk Dnk . However, this would complicate the de-
composition exercise of section 5.4. We find that both measures have a similar relationship with per capita income.


                                                             15
                                                       X
                                          ECnImp =                   Ctot
                                                               πnik βik   Dnk                                    (35)
                                                      i6=n,k


3.2    Counterfactual changes in CO2 emissions
The above equations describing the emissions content of consumption inform only on the link between
emissions and observed demand patterns, all in partial equilibrium. In this section, we further explore
how a change in income affects emissions through consumption patterns, linking those more precisely to
the structure of preferences. We also account for changes in relative demand and substitution between
energy and other factors of production which may lead to different responses in CO2 emissions.
    In order to focus on the demand-side mechanism of shifting consumption patterns, we consider the
effect of a neutral increase in income caused by counterfactual uniform factor productivity growth, ẑ.
This counterfactual, increasing factor productivity uniformly across sectors and countries, is motivated
by two key points.
    First, it is a natural case to study the differences between homothetic and non-homothetic pref-
erences. If preferences are homothetic, it leads to a homogeneous increase in real income ẑ in all
countries and no change in consumption patterns, production and trade. CO2 emissions would in-
crease uniformly by ẑ in all countries. If preferences are non-homothetic, the ratio of income to prices
still increases by ẑ (as a first-order approximation) but income effects lead to a reallocation of expen-
ditures across goods (changes in consumption patterns). If income elasticity is correlated with CO2
intensity across goods, this will translate into aggregate changes in emissions that may understate or
exceed those with homothetic preferences.
    Second, a general-equilibrium implication of this counterfactual is that factor costs will change
homogeneously across countries as a first-order approximation, which leaves trade shares πnik un-
changed. Note also that input-output coefficients remain fixed thanks to the Cobb-Douglas upper
tier. This implies that we can continue to use some of the tools developed in the previous sub-section
to describe trade and input-output linkages.
   Our key variable of interest is the income elasticity of emissions. For each country, we thus
                                                                                      d dir and
compute the response of both the direct and total average CO2 content of consumption, EC                     n
d tot (combining EC
EC               d dir and EC
                           d indir ), as well as production emissions, EY
                                                                       d n , to a given proportional
   n                n         n
change in factor productivity (real per capita income) zb.14 Also of interest are the changes in the CO2
content of worldwide consumption caused by uniform productivity growth, EC         d dir        d tot
                                                                                      world and EC world ,
summing across all countries. Note that at the world level, emissions embodied in consumption equal
                              d indir
total production emissions so EC world = EY world . In our benchmark specification, the productivity
                                         d

Neither measures are equal to the total emissions embodied in imports, which would include imported intermediates not
necessarily consumed within the country — and are therefore not the focus of this study.
   14
      These are derived from a counterfactual equilibrium following a homogeneous factor productivity increase, which
is equivalent to a sectoral TFP increase zˆik = ẑ βik > 1 in all countries and sectors, where 1 − βik is the share of
intermediate goods in production. Note that the effect on emissions would be different if the economy were growing due
to the accumulation of certain factors or if technology growth was biased towards more or less CO2 -intensive sectors.




                                                         16
shock is applied to all sectors. In our simulations, we also test the sensitivity of results to the exclusion
of growth in fossil fuel resource productivity.

Partial equilibrium approximation                    While the computation of exact changes relies on numer-
ical methods and is delegated to our empirical section 5.5, we present here some intuition behind
counterfactual changes in emissions. We do so with first-order analytical approximations in partial
equilibrium, neglecting changes in relative factor prices for non-resource factors (e.g. returns to labor
relative to capital). Assuming that resource factors account for a negligible share of GDP, we can
normalize GDP to remain constant in each country.
    The homogeneous productivity increase zb leads, as a first approximation, to a homogeneous change
in prices P
          d      b−1 for non-energy goods k. In Appendix Section A.2, we show how equations 18
            nk ≈ z
and 27 can be used to obtain a simple expression for changes in demand as a function of productivity
growth and income elasticity εnk (as defined in equation 2):

                                                 log D nk ≈ (εnk − 1) log ẑ                                                             (36)
                                                     d

where εnk generally differs from unity if preferences are non-homothetic.
   As we have seen previously (equation 29) we can link production to changes in demand using the
                                  tot , with Y            tot
                                                    P
“total requirement coefficients” γnikh         ih =  n,k γnikh Dik . In this counterfactual where trade
shares remain constant as a first order approximation, these total requirement coefficients can also be
used to characterize changes in output as a function of the changes in consumption baskets and the
productivity shock log ẑ. We obtain:

                                              1 X tot
                              log Ybih =         γnikh Dnk log D̂nk = (εtot
                                                                        ih − 1) log ẑ                                                   (37)
                                             Yih
                                                  n,k
                                                                    1 X tot
                                             with:        εtot
                                                           ih =        γnikh Dnk εnk                                                     (38)
                                                                   Yjh
                                                                        n,k


In this equation, we define a sector’s “total income elasticity” εtot
                                                                  ih as the weighted-average of income
elasticity εik of all the final goods in which that sector’s output is embodied and in all destination
countries. This new tool helps describe income effects in production, including the effects of income
on both a good’s final demand and use as an intermediate good.
      Equation 37 is a good approximation for most sectors, but less so for energy goods given that
they require specific natural resources and thus have a finite supply elasticity ζih .15 To examine
counterfactual changes in emissions, we thus need to examine changes in energy prices, which depend
crucially on the supply elasticity. As a first-order approximation, accounting for the endogenous
change in natural resource prices, the change in the production cost of primary energy good k is given
by 1 log Ybik , where Ybik refers to the change in the value of production. From equations 13 and
      1+ζik
14, we obtain that the change in prices in (destination) country n is an average (weighted by import
                                                                                                                                               
 15                                                                                   θh                              log Ŷjh       log Ŷih
      For these goods, a first-order approximation is log Ŷih = (εtot
                                                                                            P
                                                                   ih − 1) log ẑ +   Yih   n,j   Xnh πnjh πnih        1+ζjh
                                                                                                                                 −    1+ζih




                                                              17
shares πnik ) of the change in production costs across source countries. Combining with equation 37 on
production, we can then also link the changes in energy prices to the change in consumption choices
and income elasticities:
                                          X πnik                                         πnik (εtot
                                                                                                ik −1)
                                                                                  P
             log Pnk = − log ẑ +                  log Ybik ≈        − log ẑ +                          log ẑ         (39)
                 d
                                                                                       i    1+ζik
                                           1 + ζik
                                           i

With these tools in hand, we can then derive expressions for the counterfactual changes in emissions
embodied in consumption, production and imports.

Direct CO2 content of consumption                       The changes in direct consumption emissions are determined
by the change in final consumption of energy minus, for primary energy goods, the change in energy
prices (see equation 28): log CO2           nk − log Pnk . Using expressions 37 and 39 and summing
                              d nkF = log Dd         d
over energy goods, we obtain the change in direct consumption emissions as a function of productivity
growth, log ẑ:
                            "                                                                              #
                                     X CO2nkF                       X CO2nkF X πnik (εtot −1)
                  ddir ≈                                                              ik
             log ECn            1+                       (εnk −1) −                                            log ẑ   (40)
                                               ECndir                  ECndir     1 + ζik
                                     k∈S                            k∈P            i

This approximation has an intuitive interpretation. First, it shows that growth in direct consumption
emissions is directly driven by productivity growth log ẑ. The middle term in the brackets reflects
the non-homothetic demand effect: if the income elasticity of secondary energy is on average below
one, it will pull direct emissions downwards (income elasticities are weighted by each good’s share of
direct consumption emissions in n, CO2nkF /ECndir ). The last term reflects the attenuating effect of
reductions in energy prices caused by lower-than-proportional demand for primary energy (again a
function of each sector’s share of direct emissions).16
       In Section 5.5 we compare these changes in emissions, expressed as elasticities to log ẑ, to exact
simulated changes to validate our approximations.

Indirect and total CO2 content of consumption                        For the indirect CO2 content of consumption,
we similarly obtain:
                                                                                                
                                     X β Cindir Dnk                   X β C γ tot Dnk (εtot − 1)
                 d indir
             log EC        ≈ 1 +              nkF
                                                           (εnk −1) −    ih nikh        ih        log ẑ               (41)
                    n
                                               ECnindir                    ECnindir    1 + ζih
                                      k                               k,h∈P,i

As above, this expression has a straightforward interpretation. The demand effect (middle term in
the brackets) is the sum of εnk (which drives growth in final demand for k) weighted by each sector’s
share of embodied consumption emissions (recall from equation 33 that ECnindir = k βnkF
                                                                                    P Cindir
                                                                                               Dnk ).
Thus growth in country n’s ECnindir will be larger if sectors with high CO2 intensity, and thus high
  16
    It cancels the non-homothetic demand effect if the supply elasticity is zero ζik and the direct income elasticity of
each energy good is the same as its weighted total income elasticity (this would be the case if there were no intermediate
use of energy, for instance).



                                                               18
                                     Cindir D
                                    βnkF      nk
shares of indirect emissions         ECn indir ,   have on average a high income elasticity εnk ; it will instead be
lower if if CO2 intensity is negatively correlated with income elasticity. From this term we deduct the
                                                                                           εtot
                                                                                            jf −1
weighted sum of the growth in prices in all the fossil fuels in all countries              1+ζjf    ultimately consumed
in country n, weighted their share of indirect consumption emissions in n.
         We then obtain the change in the total CO2 content of consumption as:

                                  d total      1 h      dir d dir      indir d indir
                                                                                     i
                                  EC n    ≈          ECn   EC n   + ECn     EC n                                   (42)
                                              ECntot

                                                                  total                                            total
Finally, changes in the worldwide total emissions, EC
                                                   d
                                                      w                   , can be approximated by the average EC
                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                  n        ,
weighted by each country n’s share of worldwide total emissions.

Emissions from production Changes in emissions from sector k in country n caused by burning
energy inputs h are given by: log CO2          ik − log Pih (equation 28). Summing across all energy
                                   dikh = log Yc        c
inputs, and using expressions 37 and 39 above for the changes in production and prices, we obtain:
                                                                           
                                                            π    (ε tot −1)
                                1   X              X          nih ih
                          dn ≈
                      log EY         CO2nkh εtot
                                              nk −   CO2nkh                  log ẑ                               (43)
                               EYn                              1 + ζih
                                           k,h                 k,h∈P,i


The first term reflects the growth of each industry k and its demand for energy input h, weighted
by the share CO2nkh /EYn of industry k and fuel h in total production emissions of country n (these
shares add up to unity). The second term reflects the change in energy prices given the growth in
demand and the finite supply elasticity.


4         Data and estimation Strategy
4.1         Data
The empirical analysis is based on the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) version 8 dataset
(Aguiar et al., 2012). This dataset is uniquely suited to our purposes, as it contains a consistent
and reconciled cross-section of production, input-output, consumption and trade data. It provides
considerable heterogeneity in energy and CO2 intensity as well as consumption patterns across 57
sectors which cover manufacturing, agriculture, transport and services. The 109 countries in the
dataset (composite regions are dropped) cover a wide range of per capita income levels and all stages
of economic development.17 All values represent the 2007 economy. The full list of sectors and
countries in the dataset can be found in Tables A.1 and A.2 of the Appendix.
         The dataset is complemented with physical energy use data from the International Energy Agency’s
(IEA) “Extended Energy Balances” . It comprises both primary and secondary energy use, expressed
    17
         In comparison, the WIOD dataset (www.wiod.org) covers 40 countries across 35 sectors.




                                                             19
in millions of tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe), for all countries and sectors.18 It also includes corre-
sponding carbon dioxide emission data by fossil fuel, expressed in million of tonnes (MtCO2 ), for both
intermediate demand and final consumption, simplifying the computation of CO2 intensity coefficients
by sector.19
       Data describing the emissions of other greenhouse gases, methane, nitrous oxides and fluorinated
greenhouse gases (CH4 , N2 O and F -gases), are compiled by Amer et al. (2014). These non-CO2
emissions are associated with the use of factors of production (capital, land), intermediate inputs
(energy, chemicals) or directly in production (chemical processes, for example). These have been
matched to GTAP sectors, by country, and converted into CO2 equivalents, making them directly
comparable (and additional) to CO2 in terms of global warming potential.20 These gases are primarily
associated with agricultural production, including livestock, but a non-negligible share is emitted
during other industrial processes and transport. As with CO2 emissions, the GTAP data allow us
to trace greenhouse gas emissions through the entire chain of production, accounting for trade and
input-output linkages.
       Despite the clear advantage of supplying harmonized consumption, production and trade data for
a wide range of countries, two weaknesses of the GTAP data should be recognized. First, not all values
in the dataset are directly observed in all countries for the same year. Some values are extrapolated
from previous years, and some missing sectors are shared out proportionally to world averages or to
similar countries. Second, the data have been adjusted to provide a balanced micro-consistent dataset
which can be used for computable general equilibrium analysis. This procedure modifies the raw data
by an undocumented amount.
       Throughout the analysis, we define final consumption as the sum of household and government
consumption as well as investment final demand (as defined in GTAP). Finally, the gravity estimations
rely on bilateral variables describing physical distance, common language, colonial link and contiguity
which are obtained from CEPII.21

4.2      Using gravity to estimate cross-country price differences
We now describe the estimation of the key parameters in the model. The estimation here closely
follows Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014, 2017), although with a newer dataset and a number of
additional robustness checks. The main challenge is to disentangle demand and supply side effects.
For instance, a country with a comparative advantage in a certain sector will tend to have lower
relative prices in that sector, leading to relatively larger production volumes as well as higher or
lower demand, depending on whether elasticities of substitution are higher or lower than unity. These
patterns may bias our cross-sectional estimates of income elasticity. Using gravity equations as a first
  18
     Treatment of energy in the GTAP data and mapping to Extended Energy Balances data is described in
https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/download/2934.pdf.
  19
     The dataset does not cover CO2 emissions which are unrelated with fossil fuel use. Some industrial processes, notably
cement manufacturing, produce CO2 . These emissions account for less than 5% of total CO2 emissions.
  20
     These other greenhouse gases are equivalent to about a third of total GHG emissions in terms of warming potential.
  21
     Data are available at www.cepii.fr.



                                                           20
step, we are able to estimate patterns of comparative advantage separately from demand-side effects,
which then allows us to control for supply-side effects when estimating preferences.
   In a first step, we rewrite equation 10 in logs and allow trade costs dnik to depend on a number of
factors such as distance and contiguity. We thus obtain a set of gravity equations in which Sik , Φnk
and xnk are captured using exporter (F Xik ) and importer (F Mnk ) fixed effects:

  log xnik = F Xik + F Mnk − βDist,k log Distni + βContig,k .Contiguityni
                + βLang,k .CommonLangni + βColony,k .ColonialLinkni + βHomeBias,k .In=i + εnik

   This gravity equation is estimated separately for each sector using Poisson pseudo maximum
likelihood regressions (as in Fally, 2015). The gravity equations are used to estimate trade costs and
patterns of comparative advantage. Following the strategy developed by Redding and Venables (2004),
we then use the estimates of log Sik (F
                                      d X ik ), and log dnik (using all transport cost proxies and their
coefficients) to construct an estimate of our price index proxy Φnk as:
                 X       
       Φ
       b nk =         exp FdX ik − βbDist,k log Distni + βbContig,k .Contiguityni
                  i
                                                                                               
                 + βbLang,k .CommonLangni + βbColony,k .ColonialLinkni + βbHomeBias,k .In=i

   In a second step, the estimated Φ
                                   b nk are used to structurally control for supply-driven effects in
the estimation of demand parameters. The advantage of these price proxies is that they are partially
exogenous to country n’s own demand for sector k, being determined by the country’s proximity to
trading partners with large comparative advantages in the sector.

4.3   Estimating non-homothetic preferences
The value of individual expenditures in an industry is determined by Equation 1, the stochastic version
of which is estimated in logs as:

                                                             σk − 1
                         log dnk = log αk + −σk . log λn +          . log Φ
                                                                          b nk + εnk               (44)
                                                               θk
in which αk is a sector-specific preference parameter which varies across industries only and λn is
the shadow value of the budget constraint. σk , our parameter of interest, drives both income and
price elasticity, but as θk is left unconstrained in the estimation of Equation 44, income and price
elasticities are estimated separately. In addition, final demand should satisfy the budget constraint
(equation 8) which determines the Lagrangian multiplier λn : a higher income per capita is associated
with a smaller λn . There is no closed-form solution expressing λn as a function of per capita income
In except in the homothetic case where σk = σ is constant across goods, so equations 44 and 8 are
estimated simultaneously using constrained non-linear least square regressions. Regressions and the
corresponding statistics we report, including the R2, are weighted by each sector’s mean expenditure
share. Finally, using the estimates of σk and observed expenditure shares, we can compute the income


                                                    21
elasticity of consumption of each sector k in country n using equation 2.


5      Empirical results: The income-consumption-CO2 relationship
In this section, we investigate the role of per capita income in determining CO2 emissions levels through
its impact on consumption patterns. We start by describing the estimation of preference parameters
and income elasticities, correlate them to CO2 intensity coefficients across sectors, and investigate the
link between income and emissions across countries. Finally, we use the estimated general equilibrium
model to simulate the extent to which per capita income growth affects CO2 emissions.
     To motivate our empirical analysis, the first four columns of Table 1 display the average expenditure
share of energy goods as well as broad categories of non-energy goods in lower, lower-middle, upper-
middle and high-income countries (based on World Bank guidelines for 2007).22 Significant differences
for all goods indicate large scope for income to affect consumption patterns across the spectrum of
per-capita income levels.23
     The last column of Table 1 displays each sector’s (world average) share of total consumption
emissions (EC total ). It shows that on average, the “direct” consumption of energy (mostly electricity
and refined oil but also natural gas and coal) corresponds to about 27% of the emissions associated
with consumption. Consumption of non-energy goods is thus associated with large shares of emissions,
mostly through manufacturing and service sectors.


Table 1: Expenditure shares, income elasticity and total CO2 intensity (in kg/$) across broad sectors
                          Expenditure share (by country income group)            Income      Total CO2   Share of tot.
                      Lower    Lower-middle    Upper-middle      High-income    elasticity   intensity   CO2 in cons.
    Refined oil       0.018        0.018            0.013           0.010         0.78         5.26          0.107
    Electricity        0.019      0.016             0.016           0.009         0.81          6.30         0.116
    Coal              0.0002      0.0004           0.0002          0.0000         0.95         56.81         0.009
    Natural gas       0.0082      0.0016           0.0018          0.0019         1.82         10.94         0.036
    Agriculture       0.280        0.166            0.122           0.059         0.67         0.51          0.072
    Transportation    0.044        0.041            0.052           0.024         0.86         1.44          0.078
    Manufacturing     0.350        0.428            0.340           0.315         0.99         0.61          0.343
    Services          0.256        0.314            0.447           0.581         1.07         0.25          0.237
    Notes: Income elasticities evaluated at mean expenditure shares. Total CO2 intensities are world weighted averages
    of β̄ktotal and are expressed in kg per $ of consumption.


  22
     The classification is based on GNI/capita. The cut-off for low-income countries is 935$ and below, while it is 3705$
for lower-middle-income countries and 11455$ for upper-middle-income countries. In our dataset, there are 16, 27, 24
and 42 countries in each income class.
  23
     These expenditure shares represent the share of total final demand expenditures (including investment and govern-
ment expenditures). If considering the share of spending within household consumption only, expenditure shares for
energy goods would be higher, corresponding to 4.3% of expenditures (on average over all countries) instead of 2.4% if
considering total final demand.




                                                            22
5.1    Consumption patterns and income elasticity estimates
The first step in our estimation procedure is to estimate supply-side parameters describing comparative
advantage and trade costs. The results from the gravity equations are standard and summary statistics
can be found in Appendix Table A.3. From these, we back out our price index proxies and use them
to estimate income elasticity.
    As already documented in Caron et al. (2014), the constrained NLLS estimation of demand patterns
described by equation 44 fits the data well, with an R2 of 0.85 (0.86 if considering energy goods only).24
The high R2 is partially explained by large average differences in expenditures shares captured by αk .
A partial R2 measure reveals that income and price differences capture 0.323 of the variability left
unexplained by a model in which σk = 1. The F-stat on the σ parameters being significantly different
from unity indicates strongly significant non-homotheticities in consumption patterns (12.01 across
all goods, 6.69 for secondary energy goods, both with a p-value < 0.001). CRIE preferences yield
Engel curves which are close to log-linear25 which has been shown to be a good approximation of
consumer behavior in a range of contexts. Comin et al. (2015), for example, find log-linearity to hold
for broad sectors over a wide range or per capita income levels. Table 5 in the Extensions section
provides additional regression statics and a comparison to more flexible demand systems allowing for
non-linearities.
    Focusing first on energy consumption, Figure 1 plots fitted and observed consumption against
per capita total expenditure for the 4 secondary energy sectors. The fit is overall good, although a
substantial amount of unexplained heterogeneity remains in the coal and, to a lesser extent, natural
gas sectors.
    Figure 3 then displays the distribution of estimated ‘direct’ income elasticities εk for all sectors,
computed following equation 2 and evaluated at mean expenditure shares (income elasticity varies
across countries according to observed consumption shares). Table A.1 in Appendix contains the
underlying numerical values. These estimates exhibit considerable variability across sectors.26

5.2    Sector-level correlation of income elasticity and CO2 intensity
Before turning to the link between consumption patterns and emissions at the country level, we look at
the relationship between a sector’s income elasticity and the CO2 emissions caused by its consumption.
A sector-level relationship between these parameters provides preliminary evidence for the possibility
of a demand-side link between energy use, emissions and income levels.
   24
      The NLLS estimation covers 49 sectors, as we drop Dwellings, which are non-tradable and for which price indice
proxies are not available, as well as 6 intermediate good sectors which have zero or negligible shares of output going to
final demand (pdr, oil, omn, nmm, i s, nfm).
   25
      Caron et al. (2014) find a very high correlation between the estimated log λn and log In .
   26
      Our assumption of homogeneous within-country income could actually be biasing income elasticity estimates towards
one, leading us to underestimate the role of income growth: energy use in low-income countries may be driven by a small
number of high-income households, for example. The bias may not be large: using a similar framework Caron, Fally
and Markusen (2014), finds that the distribution of income elasticity estimates is only slightly larger when integrating
within-country income distributions.




                                                           23
                                                                                        Coal                                                                  Electricity




                                             5




                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                               4
                                             0
                Log per capita consumption




                                                                                                                               2
                                             −5




                                                                                                                               0
                                             −10




                                                                                                                               −2
                                                                                        Gas                                                                   Refined oil
                                             5




                                                                                                                               6
                                             0




                                                                                                                               4
                                             −5




                                                                                                                               2
                                             −10




                                                                                                                               0
                                                               5            6    7        8          9      10           11           5         6         7           8     9    10       11
                                                                                                Log per capita total expenditure
                                                                                     Data            Non−homothetic fitted value (CRIE)



Figure 1: Per capita consumption of secondary energy goods (log) against per capita total expenditure.
  Notes: the solid lines represent a kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing of CRIE fitted values.


                                                                                                                                coa
                                                          4




                                                                                     Linear fit
                                                                                     Quadratic fit
                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                gas
                                              Log total CO2 intensity
                                                                 2




                                                                                                                    ely
                                                                                                                   p_c
                                                         1




                                                                                                              wtp              atp
                                                                                                                         otp
                                                 0




                                                                                                                   tex         crp
                                                                                                                             wht                          pfb
                                                                                                                          fmp
                                                                                                                         wtr
                                                                                  pcr fsh vol          sgrlumc_b
                                                                                                                        pppome   wap wol
                                                                                                                              lea omf
                                                                                gro
                                                                                 osdoap
                                                                                                     v_f
                                                                                                           ofd
                                                                                                            b_t          milcns cmtele
                                                                                                                                    otn mvh
                                                                                ctl                                   ocr
                                                                                                                     ros             omt
                                                          −1




                                                                                          frs        rmk
                                                                                                                                        trd
                                                                                                                                     osg
                                                                                                                                      cmn
                                                                                                                                                    obs
                                                                                                                                          isr
                                                          −2




                                                                                                                                                          ofi

                                                                        0                       .5                     1                                        1.5                   2
                                                                                                                 Income elasticity


       Figure 2: The correlation of income elasticities and CO2 intensities at the sector-level.
       Notes: Marker size reflects the sector’s average share of final demand. See Table A.1 in Appendix for
       underlying data and full sector names.




                                                                                                                         24
Table 2: Relationship between income elasticity estimates and (log) total CO2 intensity coefficients

               Dep. var.:                                           CO2 intensity (log)
                                             All sectors         Non-energy only         Manufacturing only
               Beta coeff:                   (1)     (2)          (1)      (2)            (1)       (2)
               Income elasticity           -0.356      0.587     -0.424      1.095       -0.345         0.281
               Square term                            -0.972                 -1.559                    -0.629
               P-value joint. Sign.        0.006      0.011      0.002      <0.001       0.027         0.073
               AIC                         104.9      103.8       66.8       61.5        11.6          13.6
               Obs. (sectors)                49         49          45         45          13            13
             Notes: beta coefficients; p-values of F-test of significance of the coefficient on income elasticity or
             the joint significance of the coefficients on income elasticity and its square; regressions weighted
             by average share of final demand.


       Figure 2 displays the relationship between income elasticity ε̄k and average total CO2 intensity
               Ctot , in logs, computed as described in equation 30.27 Both parameters vary across
coefficients β̄kF
countries, so we display average values.
       The figure reveals an inverted-U pattern: sectors of intermediate income elasticity have on average
the highest CO2 intensity. But it is also asymmetric and negative overall, with high income elasticity
sectors having on average the lowest CO2 requirements. This systematic relationship between income
elasticity and CO2 intensity implies that consumers of different income levels will consume baskets of
goods with different average CO2 intensities.
       Both the negative and inverted-U patterns are statistically significant. Table 2 displays the beta
coefficients resulting from regressions of (log) CO2 intensity on income elasticity. Specification (1)
is linear, and finds a negative correlation of -0.36 (p-value < 0.01). Specification (2) allows for a
quadratic term and yields coefficients consistent with an inverted-U relationship (the coefficients are
jointly significant with p-value = 0.01). Comparisons of the Akaike information criteria (AIC) show
that the non-linear specification is slightly favored.
       The negative relationship partially reflects a transition away from the direct consumption of energy
as final goods, as three of the four secondary energy goods have income elasticities that are below unity
on average. This can also be seen in the last three columns of Table 1, which show income elasticity
and CO2 intensity across secondary energy sectors and non-energy sectors (an exception is natural
gas consumption, which is highly income elastic but accounts for just 3.6% of total consumption
emissions).
       Beyond this, the negative and inverted-U relationship also holds — and is even stronger — when
restricted to the set of non-energy goods (middle two columns of Table 2). In broad terms, this
reflects a transition from low-income elasticity, low-CO2 intensity agricultural sectors to medium-
  27
    The relationship is plotted for the 49 sectors in the dataset which are consumed as final goods. Figure 12 in Section 6.2
displays the corresponding relationship between income elasticity, secondary energy intensity and GHG intensity.




                                                               25
income elasticity, high-CO2 intensity transportation28 and medium-intensity manufacturing, to high-
income elasticity, low-CO2 intensity service sectors such as businesses and financial services (OBS,
OFI). The relationship is not only driven by the transition between broad sectors, as we also find a
negative (but not inverted-U) relationship within the 13 manufacturing sectors (last two columns).

Cross-country variation             For exposition purposes, we have thus far focused on average income
elasticity parameters, but estimates vary across countries because of variations in expenditure shares
(see equation 2). CRIE preferences generates income elasticity which declines with income for all
sectors. For instance, while the income elasticity of the oil and electricity sectors is below unity (0.78
and 0.81) when evaluated using average expenditure shares, their estimates vary across countries and
are above one in six of the lowest income countries.
       Despite these differences, note that relative income elasticity is constant with CRIE preferences,
so the correlations with CO2 intensities displayed in Table 2 are unaffected by the choice of country.29
Cross-country differences do matter when assessing the overall direction and magnitude of the income-
driven changes in CO2 , however. Whether CRIE preferences allow for sufficient cross-country variation
will be further investigated in the Extensions Section 6.1.

Total income elasticity           Some of the sectors displayed in Figure 2 are used primarily as intermedi-
ates with only a small share of production consumed as final goods. As an alternative way of thinking
about the link between income and emissions, Figure 3 compares each sector’s income elasticity in
final consumption (defined as the “direct income elasticity”) to the income elasticity of their total
demand (or absorption). The “total income elasticity” (εtot
                                                        ih , computed as in equation 38) reflects the
income elasticity of total demand for sector k, driven not only by an increase in its own final demand
but also by an increase in the final demand of goods which use sector k as an intermediate. The
“financial services nec” sector, as an example, has a very high “direct” elasticity of 1.38. Its “total”
income elasticity is considerably lower, at 1.14, suggesting that a number of sectors with lower direct
income elasticity use it as an input.
       Figure 3 helps illustrate several facts. First, while direct and total elasticities are correlated,
there is less variance in total income elasticities than direct elasticities, and the estimates exhibit
smaller deviations from unity. The structure of the input-output linkages is such that many low
income elasticity goods are required as intermediate inputs to sectors with higher income elasticity
than theirs, and conversely for many high-income elasticity sectors. This implies that changes in per
capita income will affect absorption (total demand) patterns less than final consumption patterns.30
       Second, Figure 3 shows that the total income elasticity of energy goods (the first block of four
sectors) also differs from their direct elasticity. The two most important, refined oil and electricity,
  28
     The transportation sectors represent market-supplied transportation (ground, sea and air transportation) and does
not include household-provided transportation, which is captured by the final demand for refined oil (p c).
  29
     Emission intensity coefficients also vary between countries, but the correlations are robust within countries and using
averages based on various sub-groups of countries.
  30
     This point is related to Herrendorf et al. (2013) who find that measuring structural change on a final demand basis
yields a different relationship with per capita income than when measuring on a value added basis.


                                                            26
                                                      Estimated income elasticities (evaluated at mean expenditure shares)
                                                  0                 .5                 1              1.5               2

                    Petroleum, coal products
                                  Electricity
                                        Coal
                                        Gas
                              Ferrous metals
                                  Metals nec
                        Mineral products nec
                                Minerals nec
                                            Oil
                                   Paddy rice
                Cattle, sheep, goats, horses
                           Cereal grains nec
                                    Oil seeds
                              Processed rice
                        Animal products nec
                                       Fishing
                                      Forestry
                     Vegetable oils and fats
                                     Raw milk
                       Vegetables, fruit, nuts
                                        Sugar
                              Wood products
                          Food products nec
                    Beverages and tobacco
                     Sugar cane, sugar beet
                              Water transport
                                       Textiles
                  Recreational and other srv
                                   Crops nec
                               Transport nec
                 Paper products, publishing
                                        Water
                               Dairy products
                               Metal products
                                 Air transport
               Machinery and equipment nec
                                Construction
                                        Wheat
                            Leather products
                   Chemical, rubber, plastic
                             Public spending
                       Bovine meat products
                            Wearing apparel
                              Communication
                                        Trade
                        Electronic equipment
                           Manufactures nec
                                   Insurance
                   Transport equipment nec
                   Wool, silk−worm cocoons
                          Meat products nec
                    Motor vehicles and parts
                      Business services nec
                                                         Direct income elasticity
                      Financial services nec
                          Plant−based fibers             Total income elasticity



                                                      Figure 3: Direct versus total income elasticities
       Notes: Income elasticities evaluated at mean shares. See Table A.1 in Appendix for underlying data.


have higher total income elasticity, implying that they are used as intermediates to goods which have
on average a higher income elasticity than their own. On the contrary, natural gas has a considerably
lower total income elasticity — easily explained by the fact that it is an important input to the
production of electricity and a number of other industrial sectors with lower income elasticity. Overall,
the total income elasticity of energy is much closer to unity than its direct elasticity, so the share of
energy goods in total GDP is less sensitive to per capita income than their share in final demand.

5.3   Emissions content of consumption, production and imports
We now investigate the extent to which the above sector-level relationships translate to a country-
level link between per capita income and the average CO2 content of consumption. Since preferences
are non-homothetic and income elasticities are linked to CO2 intensities, income levels will affect
consumption patterns in a way which systematically affects the overall energy and CO2 content of a
country’s final consumption. We also investigate the relationship between income and the emissions
content of production and imports.
   Figure 4 displays the country-level CO2 content of consumption, ECndir , ECnindir , ECntot , and of
production, EYn (Equations 31 to 35), expressed as averages (i.e. as intensities, in kg CO2 /$) by
dividing them by the value of total expenditure. They are plotted as a function of log per capita
expenditure (which in most regions is close to per capita income), the dashed line representing a
kernel-weighted local linear regression, the shaded area the 95% confidence interval and the solid line



                                                                                    27
                                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             IRN                                           95% CI                                                                                                                                                                   95% CI
 Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                                                                    Avg. total CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)
                                                                                                                                                           Fit                                                                                                                                                                      Fit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                                                                                           Quadratic fit                                                                           ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Quadratic fit
                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                  ZWE
                                                                                                             UKR
                                                                                                       AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KGZ                    CHN    IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VNM

                                                                                                                                 SAU                                                                                                                                                               UKR
                       .4




                                                                                                                                              BHR                                                                                                                                            AZE                    RUS




                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                           RUS                                                                                                                                                                                            SAU       BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IND
                                                                                VNM                                                                                                                                                                                           EGY                                           OMN
                                                                                                EGY                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZAF
                                                                                                                   BLR                                                                                                                                               PAK BOLIDN                               BGR                 EST   KWT         ARE
                                                                                          BOL                                                                                                                                                                 KHM                                 THA     MYS
                                                                         KHM                                         ZAF                                                                                                                                                        NIC
                                                                                                                                                    KWT                                                                                                                                                   BLR
                                                                                 KGZ            IDN CHN
                                                                                  PAK                                              omn EST
                                                                                                                                 POL                                                                                                                    BGD                      HND GEOARM     BWA
                                                                                                         ECU       MYSBGR
                                                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ECU NAM ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL
                                                                                   IND                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TWN        HKG
             .2




                                                                                                        GEO
                                                                                                         THA        ARG                                                                                                                           MOZ                      PHL LKA                              CZE
                                                                   BGD                                                                                                                                                                                                 SEN           MAR TUN        VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MUS                  MLT CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ISR                  QAT




                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                                                                      CZEVEN                                                                                                              MWI                            GHA               ALB         ROU     HRV      SGPGRC
                                                                                        PHL HNDGTM                    TWN                                                                                                                                                                               TUR HUN LVA KOR       AUS
                                                                                               MARTUN                                         isr                                                                                           ETH    NPL                          PRYGTM               CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAN       LTUSVK
                                                                                      NIC                      ROU HUN                                 AUS
                                                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                                             ARE                                                                                     TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KENCIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGA                 SLV                                   CAN USA
                                                                NPL                 SEN
                                                                                  NGA     LKA            BWA CHLMEX  HRV                      MLT CYP                                                                                                                                          CRI       MEX           SVN
                                                                 TZA                 GHA   PRY     SLV
                                                                                                     NAM
                                                                                                                TUR                             SVNGRC CAN
                                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UGA               ZMB                 PERCOL  URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRT NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIN
                                                           ETH UGA
                                                          MWI                      CMR
                                                                                 CIV
                                                                               KEN                   ALBCRI
                                                                                                         MUSPAN
                                                                                                            URY        LVA
                                                                                                                       SVK                            DEUIRLDNK                                                                                                       CMR                                                     DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ESP  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IRLDNK
                                                              MOZ
                                                                MDG                               ARMCOL BRA
                                                                                                 PER                LTU                        PRT
                                                                                                                                                    JPN FIN
                                                                                                                                                   NZL
                                                                                                                                                 HKG      GBR QAT
                                                                                                                                                     ITAAUT
                                                                                                                                                          BEL
                                                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                                                                       LUX                                                                                                                       BRA                         ITAAUTGBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD    NOR
                                                                                                                                                 SGPESP                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                              LAO                                                                       FRA CHE                                                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                 ZMB                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                                               NOR
 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                    5         6                     7            8          9        10                                         11       12                                                        5              6                   7           8            9                                   10           11
                                                                                          Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                                                  Log per capita expenditure


                                                        (a) Direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                                          (c) Indirect CO2 content of consumption
                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZWE
                                                                                                                     IRN
                                                                                                                                                            95% CI                                                                                                                                                                  95% CI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
 Avg. total CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                  KAZ                       Fit                                                                                                                                               KAZ                   Fit
                                                                   ZWE




                                                                                                                                                                                    Avg. CO2 content of production (kg/$)
                                                                                                                                                            Quadratic fit                                                                                                                                                           Quadratic fit
                                 1.5




                                                                                         KGZ                                                                                                                                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRN
                                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                        VNM                                                                                                                                                                          KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                     UKR
                                                                                                               AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EGY                           RUS
                                                                                                                                        RUS                                                                                                                         VNM                     CHN                             OMN
                                                                                                                                               SAU                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                                  EGY                                                       BHR                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                          IND BOL                                                                                                                                                                                                            BGR
                      1




                                                                              KHM        PAK    IDN                          ZAF                    OMN                                                                                                              PAK                                                  SAU     EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4



                                                                                                                           BLR
                                                                                                                           MYSBGR
                                                                                                                    THA                                          KWT         ARE                                                                                                   IDN                                                    GRC
                                                                                                                                                          EST                                                                                                                                AZE
                                                                                                 NIC                                                                                                                                                                             NIC            THA                  KWT
                                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                                   GEO                                                                                                                                                                     ARG VEN                                   QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ARE
                                                                        BGD                                  HNDARG         POL                                                                                                                                                                       POL        MLT
                                                                                                            NAM BWAVEN                                                                                                                                                             ARM MYS
                                                                  MOZ                       PHL LKA      ARM                   TWN                                                                                                                                                                       TWN          CYP
                                                                                                      MAR TUN                    CZE                                                                                                                                            GEO
                                                                                        SEN                                                HKG                                                                                                                              HND      TUN
                                                          MWI                             GHA               ALB MUS     ROU          ISR     GRC
                                                                                                                                       MLT CYP            QAT                                                                                                     SEN                             ROU
                                                            ETH    NPL                           PRYGTM               CHLTUR HUNHRV KOR                                                                                                             BGD                   LKA     ECU              TUR                     AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CZE
          .5




                                                                     TZA                                            PAN          LVA
                                                                                                                                 SVK      SGP AUS                                                                                                               NGA   PHL                BLRMUS     MEX
                                                                                  KENNGA                                                             USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                         SLV              MEX LTU                CAN                                                                                                                            MAR             CHL            ISR              USA
                                                                                 LAO CIV                                                                                                                                                                            GHA                                                     CAN
                                                                    MDG                                         CRI
                                                                                                                 URY                     SVN                                                                                                            KHM                            ALB BWA            HRV
                                                                  UGA                                    PERCOL                                    FIN                                                                                                                              SLV                                           DNK
                                                                                       CMR
                                                                                     ZMB                                               PRT NZL
                                                                                                                                             JPNDEU IRL
                                                                                                                                                    BEL                                                                                     ETH   NPL          CIV            GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COL                 LVA  KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HKG
                                                                                                                  BRA                          ITAAUT
                                                                                                                                               ESP     DNK
                                                                                                                                                     GBR                                                                                                    KEN                                         LTUSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUN        SVN
                                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                                     CHE NOR                                                                                    UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MOZTZA     LAO                     PER       BRA                 PRTSGPJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NZLESP  FIN
                                                                                                                                                  FRA                                                                                     MWI     MDG            CMR                        URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CRI                             DEUNLD
                                                                                                                                                    SWE                                                                                                                    PRY                                            ITA   GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEL NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ZMB                                                           FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHE
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                    5             6                       7           8            9                                       10            11                                                        5              6                   7           8            9                                   10           11
                                                                                          Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                                                  Log per capita expenditure


                                                        (b) Total CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                                            (d) Total CO2 content of production

                                                                                                                      Figure 4: Average CO2 content in the data


the fitted prediction from a quadratic least-squares regression (a functional form commonly used in the
literature to represent this relationship). The average values for the total CO2 content of consumption
are around three times as large as those of direct consumption, consistent with the fact that a large
part of consumption emissions are indirect.
                                  Similar to the cross-sector relationships, the country-level relationship between income and the
average direct, indirect and total CO2 contents of consumption (Figures 4a, 4b and 4c) follow a
distinct inverted-U pattern with an overall negative trend. Indeed, the quadratic fit follows the non-
parametric local regression fit quite closely. For all three, the coefficients of either a linear regression
(negative) or a quadratic regression (inverted-U) are significant with p-values smaller than 0.01.
                                  Differences in intensities between income levels are substantial. Classifying countries according to
per capita income, we find that the (weighted) average CO2 intensity of direct consumption is 0.21
kg/$ for low-income countries, 0.266 kg/$ for lower-middle-income countries, 0.158 kg/$ for upper-
middle-income countries, and only 0.063 kg/$ for high-income countries. For the total CO2 content,


                                                                                                                                                                               28
variations are also substantial: 0.789, 1.190, 0.654 and 0.365. We should also note that the shape
of the quadratic and non-parametetric curves suggest that intensities peak at relatively low levels of
income.
   There is, however, a lot of variability around these patterns not explained by per capita income
levels, and R-squared values from the quadratic regressions are fairly low: 0.11, 0.20 and 0.17 for direct,
indirect and total consumption. Thus, although the average CO2 content significantly co-varies with
per capita income levels, most of the variability across countries is not explained by income, at least
in reduced-form. Finally, Figure 4d shows that the average CO2 content of production also follows an
inverted-U pattern, even though it is flatter and the quadratic fits seems to exaggerate the pattern.

5.4   Isolating the role of consumption patterns and per-capita income
The cross-country variability observed in Figure 4 reflects more than differences in consumption pat-
terns. In order to isolate their role, we compute weighted average (across countries) direct and total
                             C
CO2 intensity coefficients β̄nkF       Ctot , and use them to re-calculate EC dir , EC indir , EC tot ,
                                 and β̄nkF                                   n        n          n
ECnimp and EYn . Using average production CO2 intensities at the sector level neutralizes differences
in production technologies across countries, within-sector heterogeneity (types of goods, differences in
quality) and the role of trade (the sourcing of goods).
   In a second step, we investigate the predictive power of per capita income as a determinant, through
its influence on consumption patterns, of the CO2 content of consumption. For this, we use fitted
consumption vectors from the CRIE demand system, computed under the assumption of identical but
non-homothetic preferences (as estimated in equation 44). In order to distinguish the effect of supply-
driven price differences from that of per capita income, consumption is also fitted with homothetic
preferences by imposing σk = σ in equation 44. Thus, three types ∆ ∈ {data, homoth, non-homoth}
of consumption values Dnk are defined:
                          
                           data
                           Dnk                                    observed
                          
                          
                                            (σk −1)
                          
                          
                    ∆       homoth = L α Φ θk
                   Dnk   = Dnk        n k nk                      fitted, homothetic
                          
                                                   (σk −1)
                          
                          Dnon−homoth = L α λ−σk Φ θk
                          
                                                                  fitted, non-homothetic
                            nk            n   k  n  nk

Building on these fitted consumption patterns, we obtain the following decomposition of CO2 content:

               dir,∆       X
                                   C   ∆      Ctot ∆               indir,∆       X
                                                                                        Cindir ∆
            EC n       =         β̄kF Dnk + β̄ele Dn,ele        EC n         =        β̄kF    Dnk
                           k∈S                                                    k
                   ∆       X                                       imp,∆         X
             EY    n   =         πink β̄kCtot Dik
                                               ∆
                                                                EC n         =            πnik β̄kCtot Dnk
                                                                                                        ∆

                           i,k                                                   i6=n,k


   Figure 5 displays these values using kernel-weighted local linear regression to compare, in each
case, the average CO2 content observed in the data (the solid line) to values obtained with average
production technologies and observed, fitted non-homothetic and fitted homothetic demand patterns



                                                           29
                                                                                                                                                                            .7
                                                                                                                               Avg. indirect CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)
                                              .25
    Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                     .5
                        .15




                                                                                                                                          .4
              .1




                                                           Data                                                                                                                          Data
                                                           Average tech. − Cbserved consumption                                                                                          Average tech. − Observed consumption
                                                           Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic consumption                                                                             Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic consumption
 .05




                                                                                                                              .3
                                                           Average tech. − Fitted homothetic consumption                                                                                 Average tech. − Fitted homothetic consumption

                                                    5        6             7           8            9          10   11                                                           5         6              7           8            9         10   11
                                                                           Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                     Log per capita expenditure


                                                    (a) Avg. Direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                       (c) Avg. indirect CO2 content of cons.




                                                                                                                                                        .7
                                           .8
 Avg. total CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                              Avg. CO2 content of production (kg/$)
                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                 .7




                                                                                                                                                    .5
                         .6




                                                                                                                                         .4
               .5




                                                           Data                                                                                                                          Data
                                                                                                                                .3
       .4




                                                           Average tech. − Observed consumption                                                                                          Average tech. − Observed consumption
                                                           Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic consumption                                                                             Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic cons.
                                                           Average tech. − Fitted homothetic consumption                                                                                 Average tech. − Fitted homothetic cons.
                           .3




                                                                                                                                                        .2




                                                    5        6             7           8            9          10   11                                                           5         6              7           8            9         10   11
                                                                           Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                     Log per capita expenditure


                                                    (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption                                                                                    (d) Avg. total CO2 content of production

                                                                       Figure 5: Average CO2 content, local linear regression smoothing.


(the dashed lines). To summarize the relative fit of each decomposed element, Table 3 displays the
correlation between the observed average CO2 content (the solid line in Figure 5) and the fitted values
(the dashed lines) computing using average production intensities and variations in consumption
patterns.

The role of consumption patterns Differences in consumption patterns contribute to the ob-
served inverted-U relationship between the CO2 content of consumption and per capita income. Sim-
ilarly to observed values, fitted values evaluated using observed consumption patterns but constant
production intensities (∆ = data) exhibit an inverted-U relationship with per capita income with a
negative overall trend for the direct (Figure 5a), indirect (Figure 5c) and the total (Figure 5b) CO2
content. In each case, the coefficients of either linear or quadratic coefficients significantly describe
negative or inverted-U relationships (p-values < 0.01).
                                  The observation that differences in the average CO2 content of consumption are at least partially


                                                                                                                         30
     Table 3: Correlations between true content (with observed technologies) and fitted values

                Production intensities:                 average                observed
                Consumption patterns:     homoth    non-homoth     observed    observed
                Direct consumption         0.297        0.508        0.826         1
                Indirect consumption       0.382        0.630        0.654         1
                Total consumption          0.386        0.626        0.721         1


driven by consumption patterns can also be confirmed in Table 3. Using observed consumption
patterns but average intensities yields estimates which are well correlated with observed values, with
correlation coefficients of 0.826, 0.654 and 0.721 for the direct, indirect and total CO2 content.
   Finally, differences in consumption patterns also contribute to explaining why production emissions
EYn decrease with per capita income (see Figure 5d).

The role of non-homotheticity We then investigate the extent to which per capita income de-
termines CO2 contents through its role in changing consumption patterns (and thus, whether it can
be used as a predictor of emissions). To see this, Figure 5 also displays the average CO2 contents
obtained with average production technologies and fitted consumption patterns.
   As a point of comparison, we first consider consumption patterns fitted under the assumption
of homothetic preferences (green medium-dotted line in Figure 5). These vary according to price
differences but not income. They generate a weakly decreasing relationship between average direct,
indirect and total CO2 content of consumption and per capita income. This suggests that the cross-
country price differences estimated in the gravity framework are correlated with CO2 intensity: CO2 -
intensive goods are on average relatively cheaper in low-income countries and more expensive in
high-income countries. This effect is moderate, however, and Table 3 shows that the resulting fitted
CO2 content is only 29.7% (for direct) and 38.6% (for total) correlated with observed content.
   Relaxing the assumption of homothetic preferences — that is, allowing per capita income to
determine consumption patterns — significantly increases the correlation between fitted content and
observed content: from 29.7% to 50.8% for direct; 38.2% to 63.0% for indirect; and 38.6% to 62.6%
for total. These can be compared to the 82.6%, 65.4% and 72.1% correlations obtained with observed
consumption patterns. The average CO2 content declines significantly faster with income under non-
homothetic preferences (see the orange small-dashed line in Figure 5). For the indirect CO2 content,
the relationship is very similar to that obtained with observed consumption. However, while the model
captures the negative trend observed for middle- and high-income countries, it fails to capture the
increase in average content at very low incomes.
   Again grouping countries by per capita income level, we find the magnitude of the income effect
predicted by the model to be substantial: the (weighted) average CO2 intensity of total consumption
is 0.733 kg/$ for low-income countries, 0.613 kg/$ for middle-income, and 0.461 kg/$ for high-income
countries, in each case evaluated using average production intensities.


                                                   31
 Avg. MRIO CO2 content of imported consumption (kg/$)
                                                 1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                                                                                                             95% CI




                                                                                                                                                                          Avg. CO2 content of imported consumption (kg/$)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Data
                                                                                       KGZ
                                                                                                                                             Fit                                                                                                    Average tech. − Observed consumption
                                                                    NPL                                                BWA                   Quadratic fit                                                                                          Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic cons.
                                                                                                                    BLR                                                                                                                             Average tech. − Fitted homothetic cons.
                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8
                                                                    ZWE          LAO

                                                                                                                NAM       KAZ
                                                            MWI          BGD
                                                                                                              ARM
                                                                   MOZ                             LKA
                                                             ETH                      VNM
                                                                                                                                                              ARE
                           .8




                                                                               KHM     ZMB




                                                                                                                                                                                                .7
                                                                                     KEN     GHA
                                                                                         PAK                                                     HKG
                                                                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                           GEO                                     GRC
                                                                      TZA                                              URY
                                                                   UGA
                                                                     MDG                  IND             AZE UKR
                                                                                               NICIDN        ECU
                                                                                                    EGY                  BRA
                                                                                       NGASEN PHL PRY         IRN
                                                                                                               PER
                                                                                                                SLVALB
                                                                                                                        MUS                    BHR
                                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                       CIV                                   CHLTUR          ISR         AUS
                                                                                                                                         SVK
             .6




                                                                                                         GTM THA COL ZAF   PAN RUS                 KWT
                                                                                                                                                   CYP
                                                                                                                                         LVA                 USA NOR




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                              BOL                    MYS
                                                                                                                       CRI
                                                                                                                       ARG             TWN
                                                                                                                                 MEX LTU            NZL
                                                                                                       HND                                        SGP             QAT
                                                                                                           MAR                      SAU                   CAN
                                                                                         CMR                                VEN        OMN
                                                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                                                        HRV
                                                                                                                         BGR                             DEU GBR
                                                                                                                                         CZE                FIN
                                                                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                                 TUN                                    ITA NLD
                                                                                                                                    POL    EST
                                                                                                        CHN                                    MLT
                                                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                                                                 SVN       AUTCHE
                                                                                                                                ROU                   ESP BELSWE
   .4




                                                                                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                                                                                          IRLDNK

                                                        5          6                    7           8            9                          10               11                                                               5   6   7           8            9               10             11
                                                                                        Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                    Log per capita expenditure


                                                                                        (a) Observed                                                                                                                                   (b) Fitted

                                                                                             Figure 6: Average CO2 content of imported consumption


Measure of fit and summary                                                                                                      As an alternate way of describing the role of consumption patterns
and non-homotheticity in determining cross-country patterns in emissions, we compute a measure of
fit, R2pseudo , which summarizes the share of variance in each true CO2 content measure explained by
                                   d n 31 Focusing on the total CO2 content, we obtain an R2pseudo of
their different fitted equivalents EC
0.336 when using observed consumption patterns and average production intensities. In other words,
the fact that consumers in different countries chose to consume different baskets of goods explains
one third of the large observed differences in the total CO2 intensity of consumption (for direct
CO2 emissions, the equivalent R2pseudo is even higher and equals 0.673). Any model which ignores
differences in consumption patterns (or any predictive exercise which fails to account for the evolution
of these patterns due to growth in per capita income) will fail to account for 34% of the variability in
the CO2 emissions embodied in consumption.
                                     In turn, much of this variability can be explained by non-homothetic preferences. Using the fitted
non-homothetic consumption patterns from our model explains more than two thirds of this variance,
with an R2pseudo of 0.239. Conversely, imposing homothetic preferences yields an R2pseudo of 0.101
only. We conclude that per capita income explains a substantial part of the variability in the average
CO2 content of consumption across countries through its influence on consumption patterns. This
conclusion also holds for total and indirect emissions in consumption, as depicted in Figures 5a and 5c,
but to a smaller extent since income effects are weaker for intermediate goods demand (as emphasized
in Section 5.2, total income elasticities tend to be closer to unity than direct elasticities).

Imported consumption                                                                                             Finally, we consider the role of income and consumption patterns in deter-
mining the CO2 content of imported consumption and display EC Imp (eq. 35) and its decompositions
in Figure 6b. The fact that high-income countries “outsource” the production of CO2 -intensive goods,
                                                                                                                                                       true d
                                                                                                                                                           −EC n )2
                                                                                                                                                P
  31                                                                                                                                               (ECn
                                    It is computed as R2pseudo = 1 −                                                   SSR
                                                                                                                       SSE
                                                                                                                                 =1−           P n   true −EC true )2
                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                n (ECn        n




                                                                                                                                                                   32
making them net importers of CO2 on average, is an important and well documented phenomenon
sometimes referred to as the pollution-heaven hypothesis (Copeland and Taylor, 2005). We confirm
a variant of this hypothesis using our model and multi-regional input-output dataset: the share of
imported CO2 in consumption within total CO2 in consumption is U-shaped with both the lowest-
and highest-income countries importing the largest shares of the CO2 they consume.
   In addition, we identify a new mitigating mechanism: within imported consumption, the average
CO2 content declines with per capita income. In other words, the goods imported by higher income
countries are less CO2 -intensive than those imported by lower income countries. The solid line in
Figure 6b shows the observed relationship with income to be quite strong. Again evaluating with
average technologies, we find most of the downward trend to be explained by the fact that high-
income countries import from countries with on average less CO2 -intensive technologies (as evidenced
by the large difference between the solid and dashed lines). However, once again, consumption patterns
also contribute to the downward slope, part of which is generated by non-homotheticity. The effect
here is mostly significant for the lowest- and highest-income countries: it is fairly flat for the middle
section of the per capita income spectrum.
   To summarize, consumers in rich countries indeed import more of the CO2 they consume, but
also have preferences which make their imports less CO2 intensive. Our model would thus predict a
weaker “pollution-heaven” effect than standard models with homothetic preferences.

5.5   Simulating a counterfactual increase in per capita income
Having established per capita income as a important determinant of CO2 emissions contents, we
now investigate the potential for further income growth to reduce energy use and emissions through
a shift in consumption patterns, absent any other change in production functions (technology) and
endowments. We simulate growth in per capita income by introducing an exogenous shock which
increases total factor productivity z by one percent. In this context, a world economy with homothetic
preferences would see a one percent homogeneous increase in emissions in all countries, making it a
natural benchmark to highlight the role of non-homotheticities.
   In section 3.2, we have described how uniform TFP growth across all sectors in all countries affects
emissions intensity in partial equilibrium approximations. Here, we use the full general equilibrium
model and parameter estimates described in Section 2 to simulate income growth and estimate the
elasticity of emissions to income. Simulated values should be interpreted as general equilibrium elas-
ticities as they are the outcome of counterfactual simulations which capture the response of supply
to the demand shock. General-equilibrium feedback effects include price responses for all sectors and
all factors: for example, a reduction in the relative consumption of energy goods (both as final goods
and intermediates) is mitigated by a decrease in their relative prices. They also include trade-related
effects: for instance, reductions in the price of energy goods in rich countries is mitigated by increasing
demand in low-income countries. Counterfactual equilibria are obtained by formulating equations 18
to 27 as a system of non-linear equations in GAMS which is solved numerically using the non-linear



                                                    33
PATH solver.32

Calibration of energy supply elasticity Changes in total demand for fossil fuels ultimately
depends on the supply and demand equilibrium. While we want to illustrate the role of the demand-
side, specifically a demand shock which affects relative consumption shares across sectors, changes in
the equilibrium level of emission thus also depend on the response of fossil fuel supply. Obtaining
precise estimates of the price elasticity of supply of gas, oil and coal for all the countries in our dataset
is beyond the scope of this paper. While the literature has made some attempts at estimating such
elasticities, cleanly identified estimates are scarce, and ultimately depend on the time-scale under
consideration. Nevertheless, a survey of the literature suggests that response to prices is low, with
long-run estimates generally lying between 0.5 and 1 for oil and coal, while estimates for natural gas
have sometimes been slightly larger than unity.33 In our benchmark simulations, we chose to calibrate
the supply elasticity of all three fuels to 0.75 — an arbitrary but plausible value in line with the
long-run nature of our simulation exercise. This value generates relatively low supply-side response
in terms of quantities and large response in terms of prices on the fossil fuel markets. To examine
sensitivity to this assumption, we also provide results generated with a higher supply elasticity of 1.5,
a value possibly consistent with supply response in the very long run.

                                                      d dir
Simulation results The simulated change in emissions, EC       d tot
                                                         n and EC n , are displayed in Figures
7a and 7b in terms of elasticities to income. A value of one in Figure 7 implies that per capita income
and the CO2 content of consumption increase at the same rate, so the CO2 intensity of consumption
is insensitive to income. This would be the case for all countries if preferences were homothetic, as
uniform productivity growth across sectors and factors (including fossil fuel resource factors) would
increase income and consumption but not affect the relative demand for each sector.
       Figure 7a reveals that the income elasticity of the average direct CO2 content of consumption to
income is substantially below one for all but a handful of lowest-income countries. Estimates range
from 1.036 for Ethiopia to 0.839 for Hong-Kong. For the USA, the country with the world’s largest
share of direct CO2 emissions, the elasticity is 0.856. The weighted average for the world is 0.882,
implying that a 1% increase in per capita income in all countries would reduce the average direct CO2
content of consumption by about 0.12%. Importantly, the reduction in CO2 intensity is consistently
stronger in high-income countries: their average elasticity is 0.867, while it is 0.897 for middle-income
and 0.954 for low-income countries. The average world elasticity is thus likely to decrease as incomes
converge towards high-income country levels.
       Turning to the total CO2 content of consumption in Figure 7b — the most relevant metric from a
policy perspective — results are qualitatively similar but weaker. This is consistent with the findings
that the total income elasticity of energy is closer to one than its direct elasticity. In 36 of the 109
  32
     Fitted values are used for all baseline equilibrium outcomes (Dnk , Ynk , etc...) to insure consistency with the model.
Similar results are obtained using observed values.
  33
     More generally, Fally and Sayre (2017) survey the literature and find that most estimates of supply elasticity for
primary commodities tend to be lower than unity.



                                                            34
                                                   1.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.08
 Income elasticity of direct CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                                                                                    Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption
                                                                                                                  Linear fit                                                                                                     ETH                                                     Linear fit
                                                               ETH
                                                                                                                  Elasticity estimate (simulation)                                                                                                                                       Elasticity estimate (simulation)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.06
                                                              MWI        BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MWI              KHM
                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.04
                                                                       MDG
                                                                      ZWE                                                                                                                                                                  MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAO KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MOZ
                                                                     UGA
                                                                     MOZ                                                             HRV                                                                                                                 ZMB
                                                                        TZA                                                                                                                                                            UGATZA             PAK
                                                                                      VNM
                                                                               KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SEN




                                                                                                                                                                                                1.02
                                                                                        PAK                                                                                                                                             NPL                              LKA       ARM
                              .95




                                                                      NPL                                                                                                                                                                BGD
                                                                                       ZMB                                                                                                                                                                         MNG
                                                                                       CIVSEN               THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CIV GHA                             KAZ
                                                                                 LAO                          SLV                                                                                                                                             BOL                                                            FIN
                                                                                          IND
                                                                                        KGZ GHA EGY
                                                                                                  LKA                                                                                                                                                                                                     SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HRV
                                                                                     KENNGA BOL        GTM                                             FIN
                                                                                                                                                        SWE                                                                                                        PHLEGY                              HUN
                                                                                         CMR NIC
                                                                                              PHL PRY MAR                                                                                                                                                           IDN                                   LVA         JPN FRA SWE




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                    HND             CRI                                                                                                                                                            SLV      BGR                               BEL
                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                              MNG
                                                                                                          GEO PERALB MUS
                                                                                                                      URY            LVA              AUTCHE                                                                                                               HND  GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MAR         MUS
                                                                                                           ECU COL      PAN                  SVN                                                                                                       KEN                    AZE                                 SVN       AUT
                                                                                                        AZE      NAM BRA VEN
                                                                                                                                           MLT NZL FRA        QAT                                                                                                         PRYGTM IRN ALBMYS                    KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HKG        CHE
                 .9




                                                                                                      CHN    ARM                           PRT                                                                                                             CMR              CHN                                 MLT
                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                             UKR                  LTUSVK
                                                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                                                                                   ITA  BEL
                                                                                                                                                        IRL                                                                             ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGA                    ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UKR            ROU            PRT      ITA IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                   BLR    CHL                                                                                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUN BLRURY CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PER                 LTU           CYP      GBR




                                                                                                                                                                              .98
                                                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                                                     ZAF                                      NOR                                                                                                                                 TUR                        NLD
                                                                                                                       BGR TUR  SAUOMN               CAN
                                                                                                                                                       NLD                                                                                                                       THA NAMCRI                          NZL DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                            IRN               MEX              CYP
                                                                                                                                                 GRC       DNK                                                                                                                                            CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OMN
                                                                                                                   MYS                                                                                                                                                                COL ZAF        POL
                                                                                                                                           BHRKWT                                                                                                            IND                           BWA RUS      TWN EST    SGP ESPAUS       NOR
                                                                                                                      BWA ROU        CZE
                                                                                                                                                 JPN                                                                                                                                                            BHR   GRC
                                                                                                                                POL                ESP      ARE                                                                                                                               VEN
                                                                                                                                       ESTKOR
                                                                                                                        KAZRUS                      AUS GBR                                                                                                                                          SAU      ISR
                                                                                                                                   TWN              DEU USA                                                                                                                                                                   USA




                                                                                                                                                                       .96
                                                                                                                                         ISR
    .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARG                                     ARE
                                                                                                                                                SGP                                                                                                                                                MEX              KWT
                                                                                                                                                 HKG                                                                                                                                                                                QAT

                                                          5          6                   7             8           9                       10             11                                                                5          6                  7             8           9                          10               11
                                                                                             Log per capita income                                                                                                                                            Log per capita income


                                                          (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                        (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure 7: Simulated elasticity of the CO2 content of consumption to per capita income (supply
elasticity of fossil fuels calibrated to 0.75). CRIE preferences.


countries, the simulated elasticities are above one, implying that the total CO2 intensity of their
consumption will further grow with income as they are still shifting their consumption towards more
CO2 intensive goods. This is consistent with the inverted-U pattern described in Section 5.4. Values
are also higher than one in a few high-income countries such as Finland, Sweden and Japan, in
most cases because of high consumption of natural gas. But as with the direct CO2 content, there
is an overall declining relationship with income: most high-income countries are predicted to see
their emission intensities decline, with for instance an elasticity of 0.963 for the USA. The average
elasticity for high-income countries is 0.977, while it is 0.983 for middle-income and 1.021 for low-
income countries. The weighted average elasticity for the world is 0.979 (this corresponds to the
income elasticity of production emissions as well). Thus, changes in consumption patterns resulting
from a 1% increase in per capita income would decrease total emission intensity by 2.1% relative to
models with homothetic preferences.
                                      We have so far focused on the income elasticity of the aggregate CO2 content of consumption
(Figure 7). Figure A.3 in Appendix compares it to the income elasticity of production emissions,
EY
d n . The two metrics are overall very similar in levels but low- and high-income countries tend to
see their consumption emissions rise more than their production emissions. The opposite is true for
middle-income countries, who see an increase in their net exports of emissions.

Fossil fuel supply response                                                                                             As a robustness test, Figure 8 compares estimates resulting from a
price elasticity of fossil fuel supply calibrated to 0.75 (as in Figure 7) to an elasticity of 1.5. Doubling
the fossil fuel supply elasticity increases the strength of the shift in demand away from energy, but
the difference is small: the world average income elasticity is 0.860 instead of 0.882 for the direct CO2
content and 0.962 instead of 0.979 for the total CO2 content. Aside from the downward adjustment,
the distribution of effects between countries is very similar to our baseline counterfactual with a


                                                                                                                                                               35
                                                    1.05




                                                                                                                                                                         1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08
  Income elasticity of direct CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                                                           Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption
                                                                                          Fossil fuel supply elasticity = 0.75                                                                                                   Fossil fuel supply elasticity = 0.75
                                                                                          Fossil fuel supply elasticity = 1.5                                                                                                    Fossil fuel supply elasticity = 1.5
                                 .95         1




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                        .9




                                                                                                                                                           .98
           .85




                                                                                                                                             .94  .96
   .8




                                                           5       6      7             8           9            10              11                                                                5      6      7             8           9            10              11
                                                                              Log per capita income                                                                                                                  Log per capita income


                                                           (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                              (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure 8: Simulated elasticity of the CO2 content of consumption to per capita income – sensitivity
to fossil fuel supply elasticity. CRIE preferences.


lower supply elasticity. This suggests that world markets in energy and energy-intensive goods are
sufficiently integrated to mostly decouple the demand shocks from supply response across countries.34
                                       In our benchmark counterfactual, the productivity of the natural resource factor specific to each
fossil fuel also increases, similarly to all production factors, which implies no effect on CO2 intensities
when preferences are homothetic. As a robustness check, we simulate a productivity shock in all but
the fossil fuel sectors. This represents a world in which fossil fuel scarcity (and thus their relative
price) increases, so that structural change is driven by more than just the demand effect. Figure
A.4 in Appendix displays our simulation results with homothetic and non-homothetic preferences
as well as the difference between the two. In this case the simulated elasticity of total CO2 to
income is smaller than unity (0.806 for the world) even with homothetic preferences. The difference
between non-homothetic and homothetic preferences is however very similar to what occurs with
resource productivity growth, suggesting that interactions between rising relative costs of energy and
the income effect are not important. The average world elasticity is again slightly lower with non-
homothetic preferences, at 0.778. While the results differ from country-to-country (especially for some
small resource producing countries), the negative relationship with income persists (and is actually
slightly stronger).

Comparison to partial equilibrium approximations Section 3.2 described how uniform TFP
growth across all sectors in all countries affects emissions in partial equilibrium approximations of
d dir
EC                   d tot
   n (eq. 40) and EC n (eq. 41). Figure A.2 in Appendix compares the simulated results shown
above, which incorporate all general-equilibrium feedbacks, to their approximated value. These first-
order approximations account for input-output linkages, trade linkages, and changes in the price of
   34
      If countries were in complete autarky, low supply elasticity would push the income elasticity of CO2 towards one in
all countries.



                                                                                                                                      36
           Table 4: Decomposing the income elasticity of the CO2 intensity of consumption.

                                               Country                             Totals by income level
                           Ethiopia   China    Japan     USA      Germany          low     middle    high    World
  Coal                                0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000          0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000
  Natural gas                          0.002    0.002     0.001     0.003          0.001    0.002    0.003   0.002
  Refined oil               -0.018    -0.010   -0.015    -0.014    -0.017         -0.018   -0.017   -0.018   -0.017
  Electricity                0.000    -0.022   -0.022    -0.019    -0.036         -0.007   -0.021   -0.021   -0.021
  Total energy goods        -0.018    -0.031   -0.035    -0.032    -0.051         -0.025   -0.036   -0.036   -0.036
  Manufacturing              0.060     0.013   -0.008    -0.003    -0.004         0.044     0.012   -0.004    0.004
  Services                  0.021      0.020    0.011    -0.014     0.009          0.026   0.018     0.001    0.010
  Transportation            0.003     -0.007   -0.012    -0.017    -0.013         -0.003   -0.010   -0.017   -0.013
  Agriculture               -0.035    -0.031   -0.012    -0.010    -0.017         -0.046   -0.032   -0.013   -0.023
  Total non-energy goods     0.046    -0.006   -0.022    -0.045    -0.026          0.020   -0.013   -0.033   -0.023
  Total                     0.027     -0.037   -0.057    -0.077    -0.076         -0.005   -0.049   -0.070   -0.059



primary energy in a static way but ignore second-order effects in consumption and the relative price
of other goods and factors. Interested primarily in the effect of shifting consumption patterns, we
compute approximations assuming infinite supply elasticity (ζ = ∞). This isolates the consumption
shift mechanism which is a function of the correlation between income elasticity and the share of each
sector in consumption emissions. The figure shows that while there are country-to-country differences
between the approximated and simulated elasticity, the approximation is overall very good (the average
level is closer to zero in general equilibrium because of the calibrated supply elasticity). This suggests
that while general equilibrium modeling is necessary to capture rich patterns of variability in estimates
across countries, the broad patterns of the demand effect can be estimated by a simple correlation
formula which only requires knowledge of income elasticity and a measure of consumption-related
emissions per sector (see equations 40 and 41).

Decomposition by sector The partial equilibrium approximations of the total emissions contents
 d total ) can also be used to decompose the correlation driving the consumption effect. Table 4
(EC  n
                                        d total
displays how each sector contributes to EC n
                                                              β Ctotal D
                                                by displaying nkF totalnk (εnk − 1) per sector. It does
                                                                            ECn
so for a subset of countries and shows weighted average values for low-, middle- and high-income
countries and for the world. As the numbers do not include the effect of productivity growth (log ẑ),
summing across sectors yields changes in the average CO2 intensity of consumption, not emission
levels (numbers would sum up to zero in the homothetic case with no income-driven consumption
shifts).
    The approximated average for the world as whole is -0.059 (last column), implying that an increase
in productivity leads to a moderate decrease in the CO2 intensity of consumption. Direct energy
consumption would contribute to more than half of that decline (elasticity of -0.036), driven by
reductions in electricity and refined oil (-0.021 and -0.017) despite a positive but negligible contribution
from natural gas. Emissions embodied in non-energy goods contribute -0.023 to the elasticity — about


                                                         37
40% of the total. Reductions caused by shifts away from agriculture (-0.023) and transportation (-
0.013) outweigh increases in emissions embodied in manufacturing and services.35
         Sectoral contributions also vary significantly across income levels. In low-income countries, shifts
in the patterns of non-energy good consumption lead to an increase in CO2 intensity. In Ethiopia, for
example, the only broad non-energy sector which contributes to a decline in intensities is agriculture.
Both refined oil and electricity contribute to reductions in intensities even in middle-income countries
(including China). In high-income countries, all broad non-energy sectors except services contribute to
reductions in intensities. Interestingly, the contribution of (direct) energy consumption decreases sub-
stantially as income increases (from 73% in middle-income countries to 52% in high-income countries):
shifts in the composition of non-energy consumption will be increasingly important in the long-run.


6         Extensions
We now extend the results described in Section 5 along two dimensions: i) using a more flexible demand
system to test the robustness of results to the functional form imposed by Constant Relative Income
Elasticity (CRIE) preferences; and ii) going beyond CO2 to investigate the effect of consumption
patterns on additional greenhouse gases and secondary energy demand.

6.1        Alternative specifications with more flexible Engel curves
CRIE preferences yield a wide distribution of income elasticity estimates with a relatively parsimonious
functional form. Resulting Engel curves are close to log-linear which provides a good approximation of
behavior in many sectors. For some goods, however, Engel curves may follow more complex patterns.
For energy goods, for instance, there is empirical evidence of income elasticity varying considerably
across the income spectrum (Cao et al., 2016 and Gertler et al., 2016 among others).

Non-homothetic CES We test the importance of allowing for richer income effects by estimat-
ing “Non-homothetic CES” (NH CES) preferences based on implicitly-additive utility, developed in
Hanoch (1975) and more recently used in Comin et al. (2015). While imposing constant elasticity
of substitution across goods, they allow for more flexible Engel curves. Utility Un for consumers in
country n is implicitly defined as the solution of:
                                                               σ−1
                                              X  Qnk          σ
                                                                     =1                                          (45)
                                                 gk (Un )
                                               k

Combining with the budget constraint, we obtain the following expression for expenditures in good k
in country n:
                                                                         1−σ
                                     Xnk = Qnk Pnk = gk (Un )1−σ Ln eσn Pnk                                      (46)
    35
    At a more disaggregated level of detail (not shown in the table), we find that sectors contributing to the largest
reductions are other types of transport, recreational and other services, food products n.e.c., and construction. The
largest positive contributors are trade and retail, other business services, and motor vehicles.


                                                         38
Un plays a role similar to λn in the benchmark CRIE specification. There is no analytical expression for
                                                                   P
Un , but it is the unique solution satisfying the budget constraint k Xnk = Ln en , using expression 46
for Xnk . Uniqueness is guaranteed if σ 6= 1 and gk is strictly increasing in Un , but gk (Un ) can otherwise
take any form, thus allowing for flexible Engel curves as long as σ is sufficiently different from unity.
The income elasticity of consumption is given by:

                                                               εgnk k0 xnk0
                                                                    P
                                       ∂ log xnk
                                                 = σ + (1−σ) . P           g                                          (47)
                                       ∂ log en                   k0 xnk0 εnk0


where εgnk =     ∂ log gk
                 ∂ log Un   denotes the elasticity of gk in Un . One can see that if εgnk is constant across
goods, preferences are homothetic.36 This implicit utility function does not impose any link between
income elasticity and price elasticity (σ), unlike directly-separable utility functions such as CRIE
where income elasticity is proportional to price elasticity across sectors for any country.
    We consider three alternative specifications for gk (Un ). First, a “log-linear” case with gk (Un ) =
     k −σ

αk Un1−σ (the main case emphasized in Comin et al., 2015) which yields:

                                             Xnk = αk Ln eσn Unk −σ Pnk
                                                                      1−σ
                                                                                                                      (48)

It is very similar to our baseline specification, except that price elasticities are constant and equal to
σ across all sectors. We also estimate two “augmented” specifications which allow for more flexible
Engel curves while remaining parsimonious:

                        Shifter NH CES:          log gk (U ) = log αk + ρk log(Un + bk )                              (49)
                                                                                                     2
                   Quadratic NH CES:             log gk (U ) = log αn + ρk log Un − bk (log U )                       (50)

where in each case bk is a constant parameter for each sector k. The first introduces a sector-specific
“shifter” bk , which plays a similar role as in Stone-Geary preferences, Simonovska (2015), and others.
Depending on the sign of bk , εgnk may be either decreasing or increasing in Un , i.e. decreasing or
increasing in income. The second introduces a quadratic form. This case is more simple with the
                                                                                                                     ρk
caveat that gk must remain increasing in Un (gk (Un ) can be replaced by a flat portion if log Un >                  2bk ).


Estimation        We estimate these preferences using the same data as in the benchmark with CRIE
preferences and follow the same approach to identify the unobserved country variable Un (similar to
λn ).37 We calibrate trade elasticity θ to be equal to 4, a common value in the literature.38
    Table 5 displays regression statistics for the three NH CES specifications and compares them to
the estimation of CRIE, while Figure 9 displays fitted consumption and implied income elasticties for
   36
      These preferences are homothetic if σ = 1 and close to homothetic if σ ≈ 1. If σ < 1, the income elasticity has a
lower bound at σ, since εgnk > 0 for all sectors k. If σ > 1 the income elasticity has an upper bound at σ.
   37
      That is, we estimate a constrained regression imposing the budget constraint to determine Un . One could also treat
Un as a free parameter for each country: this alternative approach yields similar estimates (as it does for CRIE).
   38
      Contrary to CRIE in which θ is identified in each sector using the restrictions on price and income elasticity, there
is no explicit link between the elasticities in non-homothetic CES preferences so we chose to calibrate θ.


                                                            39
         Table 5: NLLS estimation of final demand – regression statistics across demand systems

                                                                 (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)
        Demand system:                                          CRIE     NH CES         NH CES         NH CES
        Specification:                                                   Log-linear     Quadratic       Shifter
        Estimated σ                                                /         3.15           3.15         3.15
        Weighted av. income elasticity of energy goods           0.88        0.83           0.73         0.75
           - low-income countries only                           0.92        0.88           0.92         0.91
        Weighted av. coeff on Φnk                                0.51        0.42           0.43         0.43
           - energy goods only                                   0.34        0.42           0.43         0.43
        F-stat ρk = 0 (non-homotheticity)                       12.01       16.05           9.86         9.83
           - energy goods only                                   6.69       14.39          7.71          7.69
        F-stat bk = 0 (flexible Engel terms)                       /          /            3.32          3.27
           - energy goods only                                     /          /            15.32         15.29
        R2                                                       0.85       0.84            0.84         0.84
        Partial R2                                               0.32       0.27            0.30          0.30
        AIC                                                     -2.01       -1.95          -1.96         -1.96
        BIC                                                     -1.69       -1.69          -1.65         -1.65
        Parameters                                              256          208            257          257
        Observations                                            5341        5341           5341          5341


energy goods under NH CES and CRIE.               39   The overall fit, reflected by the R2 statistic, is similar
across specifications. The partial R2, AIC and BIC suggest CRIE to be preferable despite additional
parameters. Focusing on the role of non-homotheticity, however, the partial R2 and Figure 9b show the
two “augmented” specifications with flexible forms (columns 3 and 4) slightly improve the fit relative
to the log-linear NH CES. The bk coefficients (flexible Engel terms) are jointly significant in both cases,
but the increase in fit is driven by a subset of sectors — most bk ’s are not individually significant. The
information criteria are not conclusive as to whether the inclusion of additional parameters (relative
to log-linear NH CES) is justified, as AIC is lower but not BIC.
       Added flexibility is more important for energy goods, however. The F-stat of joint significance of
the flexible (quadratic or shifter) Engel terms (the bk ’s) is considerably higher than for all goods taken
together. Their inclusion significantly changes the variation in income elasticities for energy goods,
more than tripling the difference between the average income elasticity of energy goods in all countries
versus low-income countries (below the median per capita income): 0.92 relative to 0.88 for CRIE;
0.92 relative to 0.73 for NH CES quadratic. Hence, while CRIE provides a good fit for most sectors,
we conclude that having more flexible income effects may be desirable for energy goods. There is no
substantial difference between the performance of the “quadratic” or “shifter” specifications, so we
chose the quadratic specification for subsequent results unless otherwise indicated.
  39
    Note that we estimate the price elasticity σ to be fairly high (3.15) compared to Comin et al. (2015) for instance.
This can be explained by the larger number of sectors in our sample, as aggregation tends to be associated with lower
estimates. Higher elasticities also improve the fit of income effects with the implicit utility approach: as noted in
equation 47, income elasticity is bounded by the price elasticity.



                                                           40
                                                                         Coal                                        Electricity                                                                                                  Coal                                        Electricity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 4
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
 Log per capita consumption




                                                                                                                                                       Estimated income elasticity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                 2
                              −5




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                 0
                              −10




                                                                                                 −2




                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                         Gas                                         Refined Oil                                                                                                  Gas                                         Refined Oil




                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                                                 6
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                              −5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                              −10




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                      5   6      7        8     9     10    11        5   6      7       8         9    10   11                                                               5   6       7        8     9     10    11         5   6     7       8         9   10   11
                                                                                Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                               Log per capita expenditure
                                                              Data                                CRIE                                 NH CES                                                                         CRIE                            NH CES                     NH CES quadratic
                                                              NH CES quadratic                    NH CES shifter                                                                                                      NH CES shifter



                                                                     (a) Fitted log consumption                                                                                                                          (b) Income elasticity estimates

Figure 9: Consumption and income elasticities against log per capita income - across specifications


                                                                                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                .25
      Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                                            Avg. total CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)
                                                                                                                                                                                            .7
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                         .15




                                                                 Observed consumption                                                                                                                                     Observed consumption
                                                                                                                                                                     .5
               .1




                                                                 CRIE                                                                                                                                                     CRIE
                                                                 NH CES                                                                                                                                                   NH CES
                                                                 NH CES − quadratic                                                                                                                                       NH CES − quadratic
                                                                 NH CES − shifter                                                                                                                                         NH CES − shifter
                              .05




                                                                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                      5              6              7           8            9                10             11                                                               5               6              7           8            9                10            11
                                                                                    Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                               Log per capita expenditure


                                                      (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                              (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure 10: Comparison between demand systems of the average CO2 content, evaluated using average
production intensities. Local polynomial smoothing.


Improvements in the estimation of the income-consumption-CO2 relationship                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cross-
specification differences are obvious when looking at the resulting income elasticity estimates of energy
goods in Figure 9b: differences in income elasticity between rich and poor countries are larger for the
augmented specifications (Shifter and Quadratic NH CES). This does not substantially affect the
cross-sector relationship between income elasticity and CO2 intensity (evaluated at world average in-
come), but leads to significant differences across countries. Figure 10 plots the relationship between
per capita income and the average direct and total CO2 contents of consumption for each demand
specification. All curves are evaluated using average production intensities to focus on the role of
consumption patterns. Log-linear NH CES and CRIE preferences yield very similar curves. However,
the augmented NH CES specifications, while providing similar estimates for a large part of the income


                                                                                                                                                  41
  Income elasticity of direct CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.2
                                                    1.3




                                                                                                                                                                        Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption
                                                               MWI
                                                                                                                   Linear fit                                                                                                        MWI                                               Linear fit
                                                                      MOZ                                          Elasticity estimate (simulation)                                                                                                                                    Elasticity estimate (simulation)
                                               1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.15
                                                                       ZWE                                                                                       QAT

                                                                ETH     MDG                                                                                                                                                           ETH MOZ
                                                                      UGABGD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UGA
                                       1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MDG




                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.1
                                                                          TZA KHM      CIV
                                                                       NPL                                             MUS
                                                                                     VNM
                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                         SEN                                                                                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                              BOL                                                                                                                                           NPL
                                 1




                                                                                LAO                                                                                                                                                                   KHM
                                                                                          IND
                                                                                            GHANICIDN                                                                                                                                                       CIV




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.05
                                                                                      KGZCMR MNG
                                                                                        PAK
                                                                                    KEN                  GTM
                                                                                                    EGYHND                                    BHR                                                                                                       LAO
                                                                                      ZMB                                                                                                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                                PHL LKA                                                                                                                                                   VNM  SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NGA                            MUS
                                                                                                                SLV                                                                                                                             BGD         KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZMB                    ARM
                                                                                                          AZEECU                                                                                                                                                    NIC LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BOL
                          .9




                                                                                                        CHN
                                                                                                      PRY  MAR
                                                                                                            GEO                       OMN
                                                                                                             THA TUN
                                                                                                               UKR
                                                                                                              IRN  COL CRI
                                                                                                               ARM MYS PAN                                                                                                                               KEN        MNG                        KAZ
                                                                                                                PERALB ARGBGR
                                                                                                                        ZAF
                                                                                                                         BWA            HRV       KWT                                                                                                                      HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GTM                            LVA
                                                                                                                     BLRURY
                                                                                                                   NAM     KAZ
                                                                                                                             CHLROU
                                                                                                                                    SAU LVA
                                                                                                                                      LTU                                                                                                                     CMR       EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IDN PRY MAR




                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                               RUS                 NZL                                                                                                                           ECUSLV       BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PAN         HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SVK
                                                                                                                            VEN TURPOL
                                                                                                                                     HUNSVK                                                                                                                          PHL                                 HUN
                                                                                                                                 MEX                              NOR
                                                                                                                                                                ARE                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAK              AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GEO    ALBMYS
                  .8




                                                                                                                          BRA              EST
                                                                                                                                         CZE MLT                                                                                                                                  IRNTUN   CRI     ROU    OMN                 FIN
                                                                                                                                                SVN        NLD                                                                                                                                   CHL                  CYP
                                                                                                                                       TWN ISRPRT CYP       SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHN    UKRNAM BWA          POL          SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LTU ESTMLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BHRHKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                                               DNK                                                                                                                  PER BLR ZAF                       NZL
                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                 SGP
                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZWE                                   THA COL     URY RUSTURSAU CZE KOR      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JPN       DNK
                                                                                                                                                            BEL                                                                                                                                                                IRL
                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                       ITA   CHE                                                                                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN CHE NOR




                                                                                                                                                                               .95
                                                                                                                                                    GRC  CAN
                                                                                                                                                          FRA                                                                                                                              ARG                               AUT
                                                                                                                                                            IRL                                                                                                                                                 ISR
         .7




                                                                                                                                                    JPN                                                                                                                                                   TWN        KWT        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                        DEU                                                                                                                                   BRA
                                                                                                                                                      ESP GBR                                                                                                                                                             ESP      ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MEX                   DEU
                                                                                                                                                  HKG                                                                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SGP
                                                                                                                                                           USA
   .6




                                                                                                                                                                        .9
                                                           5          6                 7              8           9                        10               11                                                                  5         6                 7             8           9                       10               11
                                                                                             Log per capita income                                                                                                                                               Log per capita income


                                                           (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                            (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure 11: Using quadratic Non-homothetic CES preferences – Simulated elasticity of the CO2 content
of consumption to per capita income (fossil fuel supply elasticity calibrated at 0.75).


spectrum (middle-income countries and above), are now able to replicate the increasing intensities
for low-income countries and, therefore, the inverted-U pattern generated by observed differences in
consumption patterns.

Counterfactual simulation results                                                                                                             Non-homothetic CES preferences can be integrated within
the general equilibrium model similarly to preferences in the benchmark calibration.40 Figure 11
                                               d dir
replicates the results of Figure 7, displaying EC       d tot
                                                  n and EC n with augmented quadratic NH CES
preferences. Relative to CRIE, the income effect is stronger and the difference between low- and high-
income countries considerably more significant for the direct CO2 intensity of consumption. A much
larger group of countries have elasticity estimates above 1 and low-income countries as a whole have
a weighted elasticity of 1.059 (up from 0.954 for CRIE). High-income countries have a much lower
elasticity, at 0.715 (compared to 0.867). The world average, overall, is also lower at 0.812 (compared
to 0.882). Comparing elasticities across all NH CES specifications (Figure A.5), we find that the
“augmented” terms drive these differences: NH CES preferences, in their standard log-linear form, do
not otherwise provide results which differ substantially from CRIE.
                                       Results for the total CO2 content are closer to CRIE on average, but “augmented” specifications
again yield larger differences across countries (Figure 11b). The range between high- and low-income
countries is 10% (1.050 to 0.952) with quadratic NH CES, compared to 5% (1.021 to 0.977) with
CRIE (see Appendix Figure A.5 for other specifications). Similar conclusions are obtained with
                                                                                             1−σ    σ b 1−σ
   40
      Taking the change ratios of final demand (equation 46), we obtain: D    b nk = gkd (U )    ec
                                                                                                  n Pnk     with: gkd (U ) =
                    k −σ  d                                                                        
                     1−σ   Un Un +bk                                                   2             2
Un
c       , log gbk = ρk log Un +bk       and log gbk = ρk log Un − bk (log Un + log Un ) − (log Un )
                                                             c            c                               for the log-linear,
shifter and quadratic specficications, respectively. Like the Lagrange multiplier in our benchmark case with CRIE
preferences, the change in utility U
                                   cn is constrained by the consumer budget and is thus determined by the change in
income. The above equations and the budget constraint allow us to determine D   b nk and Ubn depending on other outcome
variables (changes in income ebn and prices Pbnk ) and estimated parameters.


                                                                                                                                                                  42
partial equilibrium approximations: the income elasticity of total CO2 consumption in this case is
0.913 for the world on average, 0.889 for high-income countries (see full results in Appendix Figure
A.7).

6.2                                           Beyond CO2 : effects on secondary energy demand and other greenhouse gases.
Secondary energy demand                                                                                      Section 5.2 has documented the relationship between income, con-
sumption patterns and CO2 emissions. We now focus directly on the final demand for secondary
energy, which in itself can be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, as fossil fuels are exhaustible and
energy is associated with a number of production and consumption externalities beyond CO2 . These
include local pollutants (SO2 , NOx ) but also externalities associated with non-fossil fuel electricity
production such as nuclear waste disposal, flooding caused by hydroelectricity generation, etc.
                           Figure 12a displays the relationship between income elasticity (reverting back to CRIE preferences)
and the log total secondary energy intensity (expressed in kg of “oil equivalent” energy per $) across
sectors. While CO2 , in our model and data, is associated with fossil fuel use, there are some differences
between CO2 and secondary energy intensity. Fossil fuels vary in the amount of CO2 emitted per unit
of energy delivered (coal for instance is significantly more CO2 intensive). Electricity has higher energy
content, as it is produced using a mix of primary energy sources, each emitting different amounts of
CO2 , including some, like nuclear, solar or wind, emitting none. The chemicals sector also has slightly
higher secondary energy than CO2 intensity, as it transforms some fossil fuels without burning them.
Overall, though, differences are small: the correlation between CO2 and secondary intensity across
sectors is 0.990. Figure 12a reveals a negative and inverted-U pattern similar to that found with CO2
and Table 6 confirms that the relationships are statistically significant. All of our results regarding
the link between income and CO2 thus hold for secondary energy.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  coa
                     3




                                                                                                                                                       4




                                                   Linear fit                                     coa                                                                                                                                                CO2 intensity
                                                   Quadratic fit                                                                                                                                                                                     GHG intensity
                                      2
  Log total secondary energy intensity




                                                                                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                              gas
                                                                                                                                                                        ctl                                                                                  gas
                              1




                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                             Log total intensity




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ely
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ely
                                                                                     p_c                                                                                                                  p_c
                                                                                                                                                                                                          p_c
                                                                                      ely                                                                                                                               cmt
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                          pcr
                                                                                wtp                                                                                                                                                      pfb
                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                 atp                                                                                         rmk
                                                                                                                                                                            oap                        wtp
                                                                                                                                                                                                       wtp         wht
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 atp
                                                                                                                                                                        gro
                                                                                                                                                                         osd                         c_b         atp
               −1




                                                                                           otp         crp                                                                        vol        v_f              otp
                                                                                                                                                                                                              otpmil lea
                                                                                                                                                                                                          tex ocr      crp wol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              omt
                                                                                               wht                pfb                                                                          sgr
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ofd tex
                                                                                                                                              0




                                                      fsh                            tex   wtr                                                                                fsh                                      crp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     wht wap             pfb
                                                  pcr     vol         sgr                   fmp
                                                                                          ppp          wol                                                                                                        fmp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wtr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ppp         ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            omf
                                                gro                            c_b                 wap                                                                                               b_t         wtr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fmp
                                                                                             cnslea
                                                                                           milome     omf mvh                                                                                                      ome
        −2




                                                 osd
                                                ctl oap frs
                                                                             ofd
                                                                            lum
                                                                              b_t     ele         cmt                                                                     pcr fsh vol          sgrlum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                pppome   wap  wol
                                                                     v_f
                                                                     rmk                ocr
                                                                                       ros             otn
                                                                                                        omt                                                             gro                           c_b          cnslea omf otn mvh
                                                                                                                                                                         osdoap frs
                                                                                                                                                                                             v_f
                                                                                                                                                                                                   lum
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ofd
                                                                                                                                                                                                     b_t     ros milcns cmteleotn mvh
                                                                                                                                                                        ctl                                   ocr
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ros              omt
                                                                                                                                                       −1




                                                                                                     trd                                                                          frs        rmk                        osgtrd
                                                                                                  osg                                                                                                                      trd
 −3




                                                                                                   cmn      obs                                                                                                          cmn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        osg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cmn       obs
                                                                                                                  ofi                                                                                                       isr    obs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            isr
                                                                                                                                                       −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ofi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ofi
                     −4




                                          0                     .5                     1                                1.5         2                              0                    .5                     1                               1.5                   2
                                                                                 Income elasticity                                                                                                       Income elasticity


                                                  (a) Secondary energy intensity                                                                                       (b) CO2 versus total GHG intensity

Figure 12: Income elasticity and intensity in secondary energy, CO2 and total GHGs at the sector-level.
Notes: Secondary energy expressed in oil equivalent kg/$; total GHG intensity expressed in CO2 equivalent kg/$.




                                                                                                                                        43
  Table 6: Correlations between income elasticity, secondary energy intensity and GHG intensity.

          Dep. var.:                                  Secondary energy intensity (log)
                                         All sectors          Non-energy only          Manufacturing only
          Beta coeff:                   (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)             (5)       (6)
          Income elasticity           -0.359       0.497         -0.418    1.026       -0.218         0.634
          Square term                             -0.882                   -1.483                    -0.856
          P-value joint. Sign.         0.006       0.011         0.002    < 0.001       0.069         0.244
          AIC                          102.6        102          70.51       66         18.22         20.13
          Dep. var.:                                          GHG intensity (log)
          Income elasticity           -0.599      -0.427         -0.675    -0.298      -0.322         0.648
          Square term                             -0.177                   -0.386                    -0.974
          P-value joint. Sign.        <0.001      <0.001      <0.001       <0.001       0.061         0.113
          AIC                          99.53      101.4       70.53         71.9        15.59        17.46
          Obs. (sectors)                 49          49           45          45         13             13
          Notes: beta coefficients; p-values of F-test of significance of the coefficient on income elasticity or
          the joint significance of the coefficients on income elasticity and its square; regressions weighted
          by average share of final demand.


Other greenhouse gases (GHG)                  CO2 is the most prevalent GHG and thus the primary driver of
global climate change. Being directly proportional to fossil fuel use, it is the most easily measurable
GHG with reliable emissions data available for a large range of countries. We now investigate the
relationship between income and a larger set of GHGs, including not only CO2 but methane, nitrous
oxides and fluorinated greenhouse gases (CH4 , N2 O and F -gases), which are caused mostly by energy
and agricultural production. The data describing non-CO2 GHG exhibit extremely large variance in
country-level intensities, so we decide to restrain our analysis to the use of sector-level averages.
   The inclusion of non-CO2 gases significantly increases the average GHG-intensity of some sectors,
particularly agricultural sectors such as cattle, cattle meat, raw milk or processed rice, but also, to
a smaller extent, some manufacturing sectors such as chemicals. The intensity of energy goods is
mostly unaffected. As is clear in Figure 12b, intensity in non-CO2 GHGs is heavily biased towards
low-income elasticity sectors and the inverted-U relationship across sectors disappears in favor of a
strongly negative relationship (see bottom of Table 6: the quadratic term does not improve the fit).
   This translates to country-level patterns. Figure 13 plots per capita income and the average total
GHG content of consumption — all evaluated at average production intensities. As with CO2 , observed
consumption patterns create an inverted-U curve, but its peak occurs at considerably lower income
levels. The magnitude of the composition of consumption effect is stronger than when considering
CO2 on its own: evaluated at average technologies, the average GHG content of consumption (in
CO2 -equivalent kg/$) is 1.366 for low-income countries, 0.858 for middle-income countries and 0.602
for high-income countries (equivalent values for CO2 are 0.732, 0.663 and 0.509).




                                                            44
                                                                  1.4
                         Avg. total GHG content of consumption (kg/$)
                                 .8         1          1.2


                                                                            Average tech. − Observed consumption
                                                                            Average tech. − Fitted non−homothetic consumption
                                                                            Average tech. − Fitted homothetic consumption
                                                .6




                                                                        5     6             7           8            9          10   11
                                                                                            Log per capita expenditure



Figure 13: Income and the total GHG intensity of consumption (based on avg. production intensities).


    Non-homothetic fitted consumption patterns again replicate the downward sloping part of the
curve. They capture a larger part of the variation between income levels than with CO2 (from 1.011
kg/$ for low-income countries to 0.583 for high-income countries), in part because the shift away from
agriculture is well captured by non-homothetic preferences.


7    Summary and concluding remarks
This paper has analyzed the importance of consumption patterns in determining CO2 emissions across
a large number of countries covering most of the world economy and a wide range of per capita income
levels. Our framework has allowed identifying income-driven consumption effects and simulating their
impact in general equilibrium. We have found an important role for income with non-homothetic
behavior prevalent for most consumption goods including energy.
    The literature, mostly based on country-specific estimates, has documented income effects in direct
energy consumption, such as rapidly rising energy demand in the developing world and the generally
low income elasticity of energy in high-income countries. Our study summarizes the situation for
many countries. While differences in the direct consumption of energy across income levels create an
inverted-U relationship between the average CO2 content of a country’s consumption and its level of
income, the effect is overall negative: high-income countries consume less energy and CO2 per dollar.
Differences are quantitatively important, especially when estimated with flexible Engel curves.
    More unique is our inclusion of the emissions embodied in the consumption of non-energy goods.
Indirect emissions correspond to a large share (73%) of consumption emissions — so clearly matter
— and taking them into account considerably reduces the quantitative role of income. Indeed, the
structure of technology as reflected by the input-output tables is such that the total income elasticity
of energy is closer to one than its direct income elasticity: CO2 -emitting energy goods exhibit low
income elasticity of consumption, but are used as intermediates for high income elasticity goods.


                                                                                                      45
Thus, energy goods correspond to rapidly decreasing shares of consumer expenditures, but the total
energy embodied in consumption does not decrease as strongly with income, contrary to what could
be inferred from single-country studies focused on direct energy demand.
   Despite this, income effects remain significant: total demand for energy has an income elasticity
that is lower than one on average, driven by a negative correlation between income elasticity and
total CO2 intensity across sectors. The shape of the cross-country patterns in emissions can therefore
be replicated by consumption shares generated by non-homothetic preferences. Per capita income
explains about half of the variability in the total CO2 contents of consumption left unexplained by
a model with homothetic preferences, and can thus be used as a predictor of consumption-driven
changes in emissions.
   With this finding in hand, we simulate the response of world CO2 emissions to income growth.
Consumption effects are large for the direct CO2 content of consumption: its world elasticity to
income is 0.812-0.882 (on average across all countries) depending on the specification of preferences.
Consistent with cross-sector findings, the impact of income growth on total emissions is weaker: the
income elasticity of the total world CO2 contents of consumption (and thus of production) is 0.96-0.97
— it will increase only 3% to 4% slower than increase in income. Results for total emissions are robust
to using alternative demand systems, while direct emissions are more sensitive to modeling choices.
Despite the near-homothetic aggregate effect for the world, our results indicate a very heterogeneous
role for income growth across countries: the income elasticity of CO2 contents is considerably lower in
high-income countries, both for the direct and total contents. The decarbonising effect of consumption
patterns thus has the potential to grow stronger in the long run when all or most countries pass peak
intensity levels. Finally, while we focus on well-measured CO2 emissions, our estimates suggest a
stronger income effect if non-CO2 greenhouse gases are accounted for: income-inelastic (necessity)
goods are particularly intensive in these gases.
   Our findings indicate that ’consumption-driven’ booms in emissions in the lowest-income countries
are likely limited in scope and maybe be compensated by reductions in high-income countries. On
the other hand, there is no silver bullet: consumption-driven decarbonisation will not be nearly
quick enough to solve the climate change problem on its own. While our findings are important for
anticipating future global emission levels, they also have further implications for policy: the relative
demand for energy is shifting towards low-income countries and from direct to indirect consumption.
CO2 reduction efforts should be designed accordingly.


References
Aguiar, Angel, Robert McDougall, and Badri Narayanan, “Global Trade, Assistance, and
 Production: The GTAP 8 Data Base,” Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University, 2012.

Aldy, Joseph E, “An environmental Kuznets curve analysis of US state-level carbon dioxide emis-
 sions,” The Journal of Environment & Development, 2005, 14 (1), 48–72.




                                                   46
Amer, S. Ahmed, Steven K. Rose, Thomas Hertel, and Zeynep Burcu Irfanoglu, “Devel-
 opment of the version 8 non-co2 GHG emissions dataset,” 2014. GTAP discussion paper, Purdue.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.

Cao, Jing, Mun S Ho, Huifang Liang et al., “Household energy demand in Urban China:
 Accounting for regional prices and rapid income change,” The Energy Journal, 2016, 37 (China
 Special Issue).

Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally, and James R. Markusen, “International Trade Puzzles: A
 Solution Linking Production and Preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3).

  ,     , and   , “Per capita income and the demand for skills,” 2017. Working Paper.

Comin, Diego A, Danial Lashkari, and Martı́ Mestieri, “Structural change with long-run
 income and price effects,” 2015. National Bureau of Economic Research w21595.

Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor, “Free trade and global warming: a trade theory view
 of the Kyoto Protocol,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2005, 205-234 (49).

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, “What goods do countries trade?
 A quantitative exploration of Ricardo’s ideas,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79, 581–608.

Dai, Hancheng, Toshihiko Masui, Yuzuru Matsuoka, and Shinichiro Fujimori, “The impacts
 of China’s household consumption expenditure patterns on energy demand and carbon emissions
 towards 2050,” Energy Policy, 2012.

Davis, Lucas W. and Paul J. Gertler, “Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future energy
 use under global warming,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (19).

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, “Unbalanced Trade,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 351–355.

Dietz, Thomas and Eugene A. Rosa, “Effects of population and affluence on CO2 emissions,”
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1997, 94 (1), 175–179.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
 2002, 79(5), 1453–1498.

Fally, Thibault, “Structural Gravity and Fixed Effects,” Journal of International Economics, 2015.

      and James Sayre, “Commodity Trade Matters,” 2017. Mimeo.

Farsi, Mehdi, Massimo Filippini, and Shonali Pachauri, “Fuel choices in urban Indian house-
  holds,” Environment and Development Economics, 12 2007, 12, 757–774.

Fieler, Ana Cecilia, “Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Expla-
  nation,” Econometrica, 2011, 79(4), 1069–1101.

Gertler, Paul J., Orie Shelef, Catherine D. Wolfram, and Alan Fuchs, “The Demand for
 Energy-Using Assets among the World’s Rising Middle Classes,” American Economic Review, June
 2016, 106 (6), 1366–1401.


                                                 47
Golley, Jane and Xin Meng, “Income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions: The case of Chinese
 urban households,” Energy Economics, 2012, 34 (6), 1864 – 1872.

Grossman, Gene and Alan Krueger, “Economic growth and the environment,” Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 1995, 110, 353–377.

Hanoch, Giora, “Production and Demand Models with Direct or Indirect Implicit Additivity,”
 Econometrica, 1975, 43(3), 395–419.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi, “Two Perspectives on Pref-
 erences and Structural Transformation,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2752–89.

Hertwich, Edgar G. and Glen P. Peters, “Carbon Footprint of Nations: A Global, Trade-Linked
 Analysis,” Environmental Science and Technology, 2009, 43 (16), 6414–6420.

Hung-po, Sehun Kim Chao and Alan S. Manne, “Computation of Equilibria for Nonlinear
 Economies: Two Experimental Model,” Journal of Policy Modeling, 1982, 4(1), 23–43.

IEA, “World Energy Model Documentation,” Technical Report, IEA 2013.

Kerkhof, Annemarie C, Rene MJ Benders, and Henri C Moll, “Determinants of variation in
 household CO2 emissions between and within countries,” Energy Policy, 2009, 37-4, 1509–1517.

Levinson, Arik and James O’Brien, “Environmental Engel Curves: Indirect Emissions of Com-
  mon Air Pollutants,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 0 (ja), null.

Medlock, Kenneth B and Ronald Soligo, “Economic development and end-use energy demand,”
 The Energy Journal, 2001, pp. 77–105.

Munksgaard, Jesper, Klaus Alsted Pedersen, and Mette Wier, “Changing consumption
 pattern and CO2 reduction,” Int. J. Environment and Pollution, 2001, 15-2, 158.

Paltsev, Sergey, John M Reilly, Henry D Jacoby, Richard S Eckaus, James R McFar-
 land, Marcus C Sarofim, Malcolm O Asadoorian, and Mustafa HM Babiker, “The MIT
 emissions prediction and policy analysis (EPPA) model: version 4,” Technical Report, MIT Joint
 Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change 2005.

Peters, Glen P, “From production-based to consumption-based national emission inventories,” Eco-
 logical Economics, 2008, 65 (1), 13–23.

Raupach, Michael R., Gregg Marland, Philippe Ciais, Corinne Le Quere, Josep G.
 Canadell, Gernot Klepper, and Christopher B. Field, “Global and regional drivers of accel-
 erating CO2 emissions,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2007, 104 (24).

Redding, Stefan James. and Anthony J. Venables, “Economic geography and international
 inequality,” Journal of International Economics, 2004, 62(1), 53–82.

Roberts, Timmons and Peter Grimes, “Carbon intensity and economic development 1962-1991:
 A brief exploration of the environmental Kuznets curve,” World Development, 1997.

Rutherford, Thomas, “Lecture notes on constant elasticity functions,” U of Colorado, 2002.

Schmalensee, Richard, Thomas M Stoker, and Ruth A Judson, “World carbon dioxide
  emissions: 1950-2050,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 80 (1), 15–27.


                                              48
Shapiro, Joseph S and Reed Walker, “Why is Pollution from US Manufacturing Declining? The
  Roles of Trade, Regulation, Productivity, and Preferences,” 2014. UC Berkeley mimeo.

Simonovska, Ina, “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables: Insights from an Online Retailer,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1612–1656.

van Benthem, Arthur A., “Energy Leapfrogging,” Journal of the Association of Environmental
  and Resource Economists, 2015, 2 (1), 93–132.

Wier, Mette, Manfred Lenzen, Jesper Munksgaard, and Sinne Smed, “Effects of Household
 Consumption Patterns on CO2 Requirements,” Economic Systems Research, 2001, 13:3, 259–274.

Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul Gertler, “How Will Energy Demand Develop in
 the Developing World?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, pp. 119–138.

Yamaji, K, R Matsuhashi, Y Nagata, and Y Kaya, “An integrated system for
 CO2/energy/GNP analysis: case Studies on economic measures for CO2 reduction in Japan,” in
 “Workshop on CO2 reduction and removal: measures for the next century,” Vol. 19 1991.

Zhao, Xiaoli, Na Li, and Chunbo Ma, “Residential Energy Consumption in Urban China,”
 Technical Report 2011.




                                              49
A     Appendix – For online publication
A.1    Supply elasticity of primary energy goods
This section describes the steps leading to the equation describing the supply elasticity of primary
energy goods k ∈ P in countries i. We hold wages constant (treating mobile inputs as infinitely elastic)
but account for changes in the cost of natural resource factors (entering fossil fuel production).
    Equation 16 yields:
                                                                       1−νik
                                                       βikf Yik µR,ik wR,ik
                                        Rik wR,ik =                                                       (A.1)
                                                                χ1−ν
                                                                 ik
                                                                     ik


           h                               i 1
                   1−νik
where χik = µR,ik wR,ik  + (1−µR,ik )c1−ν
                                      ik
                                         ik 1−νik
                                                  denotes the cost of factors of production (excluding
intermediate goods). This yields:
                                                                               1
                                                           βikf Yik µR,ik       νik
                                         wR,ik = χik
                                                              Rik χik

and                                                           
                                 ∂ log wR,ik    1           1 ∂ log χik
                                             =     + 1−
                                  ∂ log Yik    νik         νik ∂ log Yik
                                                                      h                                i 1
                                                                              1−νik
    In turn, taking wR,ik as endogeneous in the cost function in χik = µR,ik wR,ik  + (1−µR,ik )c1−ν
                                                                                                 ik
                                                                                                     ik 1−νik
                                                                                                              ,
                                           1−ν
                                    µR,ik wR,ikik
and denoting by ϕR,ik =           1−νik            1−ν      the share of natural resources in total factor costs
                           µR,ik wR,ik +(1−µR,ik )cik ik
(net of intermediate goods), we obtain:

                          ∂ log χik             ∂ log wR,ik
                                        = ϕR,ik                                                           (A.2)
                          ∂ log Yik               ∂ log Yik
                                                                        
                                                   1                   1 ∂ log χik
                                        = ϕR,ik .      + ϕR,ik 1 −                                        (A.3)
                                                  νik                 νik ∂ log Yik
                                                            1
                                                   ϕR,ik . νik
                                        =                                                                 (A.4)
                                          ϕR,ik . ν1ik + (1 − ϕR,ik )

    As the output price pik depends on χβikik (taking other input prices as given), we need to multiply
the inverse supply elasticity by βik :

                           ∂ log pik       ∂ log χik         βik ϕR,ik ν1ik
                                     = βik           =
                           ∂ log Yik       ∂ log Yik   ϕR,ik . ν1ik + (1 − ϕR,ik )

This implies that the supply elasticity is:

                                      ∂ log Yik      νik (1 − ϕR,ik ) + ϕR,ik
                           ζik =                −1 =                          −1                          (A.5)
                                      ∂ log pik              βik ϕR,ik




                                                            1
A.2     Analytical approximations of Section 3
Under the assumption that the productivity increase zb augments all factors of production in all
countries, the change in price P
                               d                   b−1 when we neglect the feedback effect of wages
                                 nk corresponds to z
on prices, holding world nominal GDP constant as our normalization. Similarly, there is no change in
the cost of non-resource factors wdnf ≈ 0 (assuming that the share of resource factors is negligible).
                         θ
We obtain that Sc ik ≈ z
                       b k for each exporter i in industry k, which implies that import shares πnik =
Xnik
Xnk    remain constant. In addition, direct input-output coefficients are determined by the Cobb-
Douglas upper tier, hence both global and domestic linkage coefficients remain constant as a first-order
approximation.
   Next, we describe the steps leading to equation 36. Taking P
                                                              d     b−1 as a first approximation,
                                                               nk ≈ z
holding nominal income constant and using equation 18, we get:

                                          log D nk = −σk log λn + (σk − 1) log z
                                              d              c                 b

Given the constraint on total expenditures provided by equation 27, we need:
                                    P                   P               c + (σk − 1) log zb)
                                          Dnk log D        Dnk (−σk log λ
                                                    nk
                                                                     P n
                                                  d
                                      k
                   0 = log ebn ≈          P            = k
                                            k Dnk                      k Dnk
                                            P
                                             k (σk −1)Dnk
Solving for log λ
                cn yields: log λ
                               cn =          P              log zb. Re-incorporating the solution for log λ
                                                                                                          cn into the
                                                k σk Dnk
equation describing changes in demand, we obtain the first-order approximation provided in the text:

                                                  log Dnk = (εnk − 1) log z
                                                      d                   b
                   P
              σk      k0 Dnk0
where εnk =   P
                     σk0 Dnk0   is the income elasticity of demand in sector k, country n.
                k0
   Finally, we describe how to obtain equation 38, which allows us to describe the changes in pro-
duction. With Sc     bθk and P
                ik ≈ z
                             dnk ≈ zb−1 , we obtain from the trade equation:

                                              X
                                              d      c d θk d
                                               nik = Sik Pnk Xnk = Xnk
                                                                   d

                                                      Dnk D         P       γnkh Ynh Yd
                                                                                      nh
Next, combining with equation 20, Xnk =
                                                           nk
                                                                +                        ,   we obtain:
                                                          d
                                  d
                                                       Xnk           h          Xnk

                                             X
                                Yik Yc
                                     ik =         πnik Xnk X
                                                           dnk
                                              n
                                             X                      XX
                                        =         πnik Dnk D
                                                           d nk +                 πnik γnkh Ynh Y
                                                                                                dnh
                                              n                         n     h

Taking logs (as a first order approximation) and using the Leontief total coefficients defined after
equation 29 and our definition of “total income elasticity”, we obtain:

                     X X γ tot Dnh            X X γ tot Dnh
         log Yc
              ik =
                          nikh
                                   log D
                                       d nh =      nikh
                                                            (εnh − 1) log zb = (εtot
                                                                                 ik − 1) log z
                                                                                             b
                     n
                             Y ik             n
                                                      Y ik
                           h                                    h



                                                                2
A.3   Additional tables and figures

       Table A.1: Sector description, income elasticity (direct and total), CO2 intensities.

                                              Income elasticity   CO2 intensity     sec. energy     GHG
        Code   Description                    Direct    Total     Direct   Total     int. total   int. total
        pdr    Paddy rice                               0.439      0.104    0.464     0.124         6.799
        omn    Minerals nec                             0.730      0.212    0.960      0.223        1.060
        nmm    Mineral products nec                     0.805      0.751    1.701      0.433        1.850
        is     Ferrous metals                           0.823      0.428   1.817      0.431        1.981
        oil    Crude oil                                0.844      0.192   0.407      0.114        0.628
        nfm    Metals nec                               0.879      0.117    1.453      0.308        1.662
        ctl    Cattle, sheep, goats, horses   0.164     0.603     0.062     0.407      0.121       12.051
        gro    Cereal grains nec              0.164     0.544      0.188    0.539      0.159        2.038
        osd    Oil seeds                      0.183     0.544      0.156    0.486      0.142        1.968
        pcr    Processed rice                 0.196     0.754      0.118    0.641     0.172         3.836
        oap    Animal products nec            0.235     0.647      0.075    0.506      0.128        2.247
        fsh    Fishing                        0.290     0.726      0.334    0.699     0.200         0.895
        frs    Forestry                       0.373     0.814      0.128    0.386      0.112        0.470
        vol    Vegetable oils and fats        0.377     0.649      0.072    0.602      0.168        1.577
        rmk    Raw milk                       0.515     1.098     0.048    0.379      0.112        2.629
        vf     Vegetables, fruit, nuts        0.519     0.567      0.111   0.451      0.116        1.436
        sgr    Sugar                          0.560     0.699     0.119    0.588       0.168        1.137
        lum    Wood products                  0.627     0.816      0.033    0.533     0.138         0.633
        ofd    Food products nec              0.648     0.819     0.059    0.526      0.142         1.008
        bt     Beverages and tobacco          0.657     0.807      0.072   0.476      0.132        0.738
        cb     Sugar cane, sugar beet         0.681     0.728      0.117   0.570      0.151        1.911
        wtp    Water transport                0.725     0.978      0.740    2.148      0.677        2.338
        tex    Textiles                       0.771     0.885      0.068    0.933     0.211         1.353
        pc     Petroleum, coal products       0.781     0.879      4.718    5.256     1.321         5.604
        ely    Electricity                    0.811     0.943      5.610    6.297      1.019        6.612
        ros    Recreational and other srv     0.832     1.060      0.025    0.411     0.113         0.493
        ocr    Crops nec                      0.844     0.901      0.125    0.433     0.121         1.409
        otp    Transport nec                  0.849     0.960      0.773    1.293      0.397        1.535
        ppp    Paper products, publishing     0.893     1.000      0.107    0.677     0.179         0.771
        wtr    Water                          0.902     1.108      0.105    0.757      0.191        0.819
        mil    Dairy products                 0.902     0.873      0.054    0.488      0.141        1.325
        fmp    Metal products                 0.921     0.948     0.035    0.757      0.182        0.846
        atp    Air transport                  0.926     1.034     1.264    1.988      0.619         2.179
        ome    Machinery and equipment nec    0.940     1.012      0.021    0.614     0.149         0.704
        cns    Construction                   0.946     0.899      0.020    0.509      0.134        0.579
        coa    Coal                           0.949     0.924     55.952   56.809     15.166       58.973
        wht    Wheat                          0.975     0.847      0.204    0.947      0.224        2.323
        lea    Leather products               1.000     1.024      0.024    0.589      0.150        1.414
        crp    Chemical, rubber, plastic      1.006     0.945      0.164    0.953     0.376         1.214
        osg    Public spending                1.024     1.031      0.025    0.229      0.063        0.373
        cmt    Bovine meat products           1.035     0.920      0.041    0.474     0.141         4.222
        wap    Wearing apparel                1.045     0.955     0.033    0.662      0.152        0.920
        cmn    Communication                  1.052     1.021      0.011    0.213      0.054        0.246
        trd    Trade                          1.097     1.028      0.024    0.302      0.078        0.394
        omf    Manufactures nec               1.102     1.098      0.043    0.585     0.149         0.766
        ele    Electronic equipment           1.102     1.077     0.011     0.539     0.136         0.767
        isr    Insurance                      1.108     1.172     0.005    0.149      0.037         0.172
        otn    Transport equipment nec        1.133     1.124      0.020    0.485     0.124         0.555
        wol    Wool, silk-worm cocoons        1.138     1.323     0.159    0.695       0.182        1.268
        omt    Meat products nec              1.140     0.999      0.025    0.426      0.119        1.367
        mvh    Motor vehicles and parts       1.205     1.026      0.012   0.526      0.144        0.608
        obs    Business services nec          1.248     1.108      0.016    0.173      0.049        0.204
        ofi    Financial services nec         1.382     1.138      0.005    0.124      0.032        0.141
        pfb    Plant-based fibers             1.385     1.093      0.274    0.914     0.238         2.900
        gas    Natural gas                    1.817     0.862     10.732   10.940      4.968       11.165

        Notes: Income elasticity based on the benchmark CRIE specification, evaluated using average
        expenditure shares.



                                                       3
Table A.2: Countries in the dataset, with per capita income and average CO2 content of consumption.

 Code   Country               Income/cap     CO2 content of    Code   Country         Income/cap     CO2 content of
                                           consumption, kg/$                                       consumption, kg/$
                              (2007 USD)   Direct    Total                            (2007 USD)   Direct    Total
 NOR    Norway                  64911      0.016     0.210     BWA    Botswana           5835      0.110     0.675
 QAT    Qatar                   61070      0.069     0.536     ZAF    South Africa       5705      0.284     0.906
 ARE    U. Arab Emirates        54834      0.139     0.836     ARG    Argentina          5660      0.203     0.639
 CHE    Switzerland             51198      0.049     0.228     MUS    Mauritius          5599      0.082     0.548
 DNK    Denmark                 50104      0.082     0.270     CRI    Costa Rica         5184      0.084     0.414
 USA    United States of A.     48593      0.140     0.429     MYS    Malaysia           4978      0.224     0.892
 GBR    United Kingdom          44723      0.068     0.279     BLR    Belarus            4950      0.309     1.028
 BEL    Belgium                 43639      0.057     0.315     COL    Colombia           4458      0.076     0.342
 SWE    Sweden                  43473      0.028     0.200     NAM    Namibia            4330      0.087     0.637
 IRL    Ireland                 43036      0.080     0.325     ALB    Albania            4235      0.078     0.555
 FIN    Finland                 41742      0.070     0.337     SLV    El Salvador        3747      0.093     0.435
 NLD    Netherlands             41484      0.056     0.254     TUN    Tunisia            3642      0.138     0.582
 CAN    Canada                  40381      0.108     0.413     IRN    Iran               3480      0.780     1.799
 FRA    France                  39291      0.043     0.216     ARM    Armenia            3467      0.066     0.588
 AUT    Austria                 39168      0.056     0.268     PER    Peru               3434      0.063     0.361
 AUS    Australia               38406      0.120     0.442     UKR    Ukraine            3291      0.552     1.344
 DEU    Germany                 35371      0.085     0.307     ECU    Ecuador            3205      0.224     0.732
 ITA    Italy                   33884      0.058     0.276     THA    Thailand           3109      0.196     0.846
 ESP    Spain                   32727      0.055     0.288     GEO    Georgia            2930      0.200     0.689
 JPN    Japan                   32606      0.072     0.303     MAR    Morocco            2782      0.142     0.573
 GRC    Greece                  30157      0.108     0.509     GTM    Guatemala          2756      0.139     0.450
 NZL    New Zealand             30064      0.067     0.325     AZE    Azerbaijan         2492      0.537     1.280
 CYP    Cyprus                  27477      0.101     0.521     CHN    China              2274      0.257     1.389
 HKG    Hong Kong               26320      0.059     0.563     HND    Honduras           2188      0.153     0.660
 KWT    Kuwait                  26185      0.271     0.837     PRY    Paraguay           1986      0.095     0.494
 SGP    Singapore               25299      0.053     0.435     LKA    Sri Lanka          1816      0.115     0.570
 SVN    Slovenia                23325      0.097     0.392     EGY    Egypt              1773      0.331     1.042
 PRT    Portugal                21640      0.060     0.316     IDN    Indonesia          1770      0.250     0.871
 BHR    Bahrain                 20903      0.396     1.026     PHL    Philippines        1502      0.150     0.607
 KOR    Korea Republic of       20633      0.088     0.443     MNG    Mongolia           1441      1.188     2.625
 MLT    Malta                   20583      0.110     0.523     NIC    Nicaragua          1341      0.138     0.777
 ISR    Israel                  20473      0.144     0.505     BOL    Bolivia            1324      0.295     0.920
 EST    Estonia                 17396      0.247     0.768     GHA    Ghana              1218      0.101     0.519
 LVA    Latvia                  15274      0.081     0.459     SEN    Senegal            1102      0.111     0.535
 SVK    Slovakia                15227      0.079     0.463     IND    India              1101      0.212     1.028
 CZE    Czech Republic          15051      0.173     0.588     CMR    Cameroon           1012      0.084     0.315
 TWN    Taiwan                  14633      0.157     0.578     PAK    Pakistan            978      0.239     0.935
 HRV    Croatia                 14249      0.118     0.472     NGA    Nigeria            959       0.109     0.420
 OMN    Oman                    12916      0.237     0.955     KGZ    Kyrgyzstan          905      0.256     1.398
 LTU    Lithuania               12802      0.070     0.436     CIV    Cote d’Ivoire      902       0.083     0.429
 HUN    Hungary                 12433      0.140     0.489     ZMB    Zambia              892      0.017     0.304
 SAU    Saudi Arabia            11112      0.421     1.100     VNM    Viet Nam            858      0.345     1.288
 POL    Poland                  10916      0.232     0.664     KEN    Kenya               791      0.082     0.442
 TUR    Turkey                   9204      0.102     0.470     LAO    Laos               718       0.037     0.411
 MEX    Mexico                   9061      0.111     0.453     KHM    Cambodia            592      0.276     0.885
 ROU    Romania                  8559      0.130     0.505     BGD    Bangladesh         461       0.185     0.675
 RUS    Russian Federation       7940      0.374     1.103     TZA    Tanzania            436      0.107     0.445
 CHL    Chile                    7864      0.107     0.478     MDG    Madagascar          406      0.068     0.402
 VEN    Venezuela                7339      0.173     0.645     NPL    Nepal               404      0.109     0.472
 PAN    Panama                   6884      0.084     0.454     ZWE    Zimbabwe            387      0.577     1.561
 URY    Uruguay                  6577      0.082     0.344     UGA    Uganda              371      0.080     0.353
 BRA    Brazil                   6551      0.056     0.280     MOZ    Mozambique          345      0.069     0.595
 KAZ    Kazakhstan              6434       0.228     1.714     ETH    Ethiopia           274       0.086     0.472
 BGR    Bulgaria                6156       0.229     0.851     MWI    Malawi              233      0.080     0.499




                                                         4
                                                                            Table A.3: Coefficients from the gravity equation estimations.

                                                                  Trade cost variable:                                                             Mean                                                                      Standard Deviation
                                                                                                                                               across sectors                                                                   across sectors
                                                                  Distance (log)                                                                       -0.879                                                                                  0.636
                                                                  Contiguity                                                                           0.328                                                                                   0.460
                                                                  Common language                                                                      0.407                                                                                   0.370
                                                                  Colonial link                                                                        0.320                                                                                   0.534
                                                                  Both access to sea                                                                   0.574                                                                                   0.610
                                                                  RTA                                                                                  0.567                                                                                   0.589
                                                                  Common currency                                                                      0.586                                                                                   1.034
                                                                  Common legal origin                                                                  0.024                                                                                   0.264
                                                                  Border effect                                                                        3.767                                                                                   2.128
                                                                  Exporter FE                                                                           Yes
                                                                  Importer FE                                                                           Yes
                                                                  Nb. of industries                                                                      55
                                                                  Pseudo-R2 (incl. domestic)                                                           0.999
                                                                  Pseudo-R2 (excl. domestic)                                                           0.833

                                                                  Notes: Poisson regressions; dependent variable: trade flows. The coefficients above
                                                                  are estimated separately for each industry. Pseudo-R2 equal the square of the cor-
                                                                  relation coefficient between fitted and observed trade flows, including or excluding
                                                                  domestic flows.




                                                                                                    UKR                                                                                                                           KGZ                    UKR
                                                                            KGZ                       At average production intensities                                                                                                                    At average production intensities
                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.2
Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                                       Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                      Data                                                                                                                                                 Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLR
                                                                                                          BLR                                                                                                       ZWE                            AZE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VNM                     IRN
                                                            ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                              AZE
                                .6




                                                                                                    IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BGD KHM                      GEO
                                                                           VNM                                                                                                                                                               BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SAU HRV
                                                                                               GEO                                                                                                                                           EGY      ECU    MYSBGR RUS                   KWT
                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NPL                IND IDN
                                                                            PAK                                                                                                                                                          NIC LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PRY                           HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PHL   HND THA SLVALB                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CZE
                                                                     KHM                                                                                                                                                                               ARM
                                                                                  BOL                           BGR                    BHR                                                                                        CIVSEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAR TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TURPOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARE
                                                                                                                      RUS                                                                                    ETH       TZA             GHA        GTM PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MWI                                                 CRI KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 URY
                                                                                                                                                                      .6




                                                                                                                            SAU                                                                                                    NGA                          MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CMR                             VEN
                                                                                                          MYS                HUNHRV                                                                                MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MDG       KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LAO                          COL       CHLMEX TWN ESTMLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAN
                                                                                        EGY                                      KWT                                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NAM ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UGA                                                               KORSVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GRCDEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JPN AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CYP
                                                               BGD                                                 POL CZE                                                                                                                                                          ISR        AUS IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SWE QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BRA                      NZLITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SGP
                                                                                               ECU ALB                                                                                                                                                           BWA                  PRT       CAN
           .2




                                                            NPL                     IDN
                                                                                   PHL                         ROU   OMN
                                                                                                                     LTU                                                                                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BEL
                                                                                                         URY            SVK                                                                                                                                                                   ESPFRA
                                                                           ZMBIND NIC    HND THA
                                                                                        PRY     ARM                     LVA                                                                                                                                                                       NLDDNK
                                                                                       LKACHNMAR TUN
                                                                                           GTM                            EST
                                                                           CIVSEN                      CRI  VEN                        DEUFIN
                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                                                                              .4




                                                              TZA               GHA              SLV    ZAFPAN
                                                                                                             CHLTUR   TWN ISRMLT
                                                                                                                            KOR    JPN CAN  USA
                                                           MOZ               CMR                    COL ARGKAZ                SVN NZL    AUT
                                                                                                                                           IRLDNK
                                                                        KENNGA                            BRA   MEX          PRT CYP
                                                                                                                                   GRC AUS
                                                                                                                                      ITA   GBR
                                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                                           BEL
                                                       ETH UGA
                                                     MWI                                        PERNAM MUS
                                                                                                         BWA                                CHEARE
                                                                                                                               SGP   ESPFRA
                                                             MDG                                                                HKG              NOR
                                                                       LAO                                                                       QAT
0




                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                 5         6                 7           8            9                               10     11                                                        5           6               7           8            9                      10               11
                                                                             Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                            Log per capita expenditure


                                                 (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                            (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

                                                  Figure A.1: Average total CO2 content of consumption, evaluated at average intensities.




                                                                                                                                                   5
                              1.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.1
                                     1
   Partial equilibrium approximation




                                                                                                                                                                           Partial equilibrium approximation
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.05
                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KHM
                           .95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                                                                                                                BGD                                                                                                                                                              LAO
                                                                                                                                                            ETH                                                                                                                                                                              ETH
                                                                                                                           KHM MOZ                                                                                                                                                               NPL
                                                                                                                                UGA                                                                                                                                                                            MOZ         VNM
                                                                                                                     NPL               MDG
                                                                                                                                      ZWE
                                                                                                                            VNM                                                                                                                                                                          UGA
                                                                                                              LAO            TZA
                                                                                                                              HRV                                                                                                                                                                          ZMB KGZMDG
                    .9




                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                            IND   THA                                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                  CIV
                                                                                                                                               LUX                                                                                                                                           MNG ARM     PAK
                                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                                         KEN      SEN PAK                                                                                                                                                                          SEN
                                                                                                     IDNNGA
                                                                                                        BOL                                                                                                                                                                              NIC   BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                       NIC                                                                                                                                                                           BOLKAZ
                                                                                            CHN             GHA
                                                                                                       PRYKGZ
                                                                                                           LKA     ZMB                                                                                                                                                        IDN      CIV
                                                                                             QATECU PHL  GTM
                                                                                                       CMR                                                                                                                                                               KEN          GHA
          .85




                                                                                                 MNGHND                                                                                                                                                                         EGYHRV
                                                                                               MLT
                                                                                             AZE         FINSLV                                                                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                      ARG
                                                                                        UKR       PERCRI                                                                                                                                                        ZWE CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NGA           PHL
                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                              NZL
                                                                                            ARM
                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                               COLURY
                                                                                                  GEO
                                                                                                  MUS MAR                                                                                                                                                        ECUPRYMYS BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HUN
                                                                                MYSBGR                                                                                                                                                                               IRN




                                                                                                                                                                            .95
                                                                                   OMNBLRTUN
                                                                                          LTU  PANLVA
                                                                                                   AUT                                                                                                                                                              CMR AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HNDBEL              LUX
                                                                           POL
                                                                         KAZ     TURZAF
                                                                                BHR
                                                                             CZE DNK
                                                                                       CHL SVKNAM
                                                                                               SVN ALB SWE                                                                                                                                                NAM        KOR MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HKGGEOSLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                           ARE
                                                                         RUS
                                                                          EST ROU MEX
                                                                                  GRC      HUN
                                                                                         BELPRT                                                                                                                                                           THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NZL     UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROU GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ALB
                                                                          KOR  KWT SAU IRL                                                                                                                                                           RUS     PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLR  PRT AUT FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SVN     JPN
                                                                       TWN
                                                                     ISR          CYP                                                                                                                                                                   OMN     DNK  MLT
                                                                         AUSESP
                                                                              BWA NLD
                                                                                             FRA CHE
                                                                                    CAN ITA BRA                                                                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COLCRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TUR PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                       DEU                                                                                                                                                                              CAN
 .8




                                                                      USAGBR JPN     NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZAF NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ESP  CZE GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST
                                                               SGP                                                                                                                                                                 QAT     USA     SGP DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ISR
                                                              HKG                                                                                                                                                                       BRA SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MEX
                              .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .9
                                                               .85                          .9                 .95                       1                    1.05                                                                   .96                 .98                  1        1.02        1.04                          1.06       1.08
                                                                                                      Simulated elasticity                                                                                                                                                    Simulated elasticity


                                                          (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                           (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure A.2: Approximated versus simulated income elasticity of the CO2 content of consumption
(supply elasticity calibrated at 0.75 in the general equilibrium simulations).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .06
  Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                        LAO
                              1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08




                                                                                                                              Consumption                                                                                                          Difference between consumption and production
                                                                       ETH                                                                                                                                                                               BGD
                                                                                                                                                                           Difference between cons. and prod. elasticity




                                                                                                                              Production                                                                                                                       KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                .04




                                                                     MWI              KHM                                                                                                                                                    ETH
                                                                     MWI     UGA                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NAM
                                                                                              KGZ
                                                                                             VNM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                             MOZ                                                                                                                                                                                               MNG
                                                                               MDG
                                                                               NPL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CYP FRA
                                                                       ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .02




                                                                                        LAO
                                                                                          VNM
                                                                                            KGZ                                                                                                                                                                         PAK                GEO                       LVA
                                                                             MOZ
                                                                               MDG                                                                                                                                                                                     ZMB                               BGR        HRV MLT
                                                                                            ZMB                             MUS                                                                                                                                                    LKA                                               FIN DNK
                                                                             UGATZA          PAK                                                                                                                                                                                          MAR                                         GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                                                  ARM                                                                                                                                                                            ALB              LTU          JPN AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                              NPL       KEN SEN NIC LKA           ARM                                                                                                                                                 VNM SEN PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AZE SLV                     SVK             NLD
                                                                               BGD                                                                                                                                                                     MDG                                                                  SGP
                                                                                           NGA MNG PRY                                                                                                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EGY              BLRURY ROUTUR       EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SVN ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PRT     DEUIRL
                                                                                          ZMBSEN                              KAZ                                                                                                                                                                        PAN             KOR HKG       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL CZEISR
                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                          CIV      NIC                        KAZ                                                                                                                      TZA             CIV    BOL
                                                                                            PAKGHABOL
                                                                                                  BOL                                                                                                                                                                                                    KAZRUS
                                                                                    KHM                                                    SVK               FIN                                                                           MWI                                                 TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ARM                                ESP
                                                                                                GHA IDNLKA                      CHL       HRV                                                                                                                                   IDN HND      IRN                                  AUS
                                                                                                                ECU                     HUN                                                                                                        MOZ                    IND                      MYS
                                                                                             CMR PHL   EGYHND
                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                                            GTM PER                                           SWE                                                                                                                                COL                               CAN
                                                                              ZWE                    IDN                                   LVA BHR JPN FRA                                                                                                                              GTM UKR
                         1




                                                                                                                   SLV MYS  BWAVEN
                                                                                                                             BGR                              BEL                                                                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                       EGY      THA
                                                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                                               GEO
                                                                                                                           ZAF             SVK
                                                                                                                                                                    QAT                                                                                                  CMR NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KGZ             CHN           CRI
                                                                                                    PHL   HND MAR          MUS                                                                                                                                                                                                NZL           NOR
                                                                                                             AZE                                                                                                                                    ZWE                                                       MEX OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                       −.02




                                                                                        KEN                 GTM           ARG
                                                                                                                   SLVALBMYS
                                                                                                                          CRI            OMN
                                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                                                                                                      SAU         SVN NZL AUT
                                                                                                                                                    HKG                                                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ECU                                       USA
                                                                                             CMR MNG PRY
                                                                                           NGA             CHN IRN                ROU    TWN
                                                                                                                                          HRV
                                                                                                                                                KOR
                                                                                                                                                 MLT
                                                                                                                                                KOR
                                                                                                                                                 PRTHKGJPN     CHE
                                                                                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                                                                                               CHE NOR
                                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NPL                                      PER
                                                                              ZWE                            AZEECU
                                                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                    TUN      BRA                  SVN    ITA
                                                                                                                                                           CAN   DNK                                                                                                                                   ZAF CHL
                                                                                                                        BLRURY
                                                                                                                      COL
                                                                                                                    TUN       PAN                PRT KWT      BEL
                                                                                                                                                               GBR                                                                                 UGA                                                                                       ARE
               .98




                                                                                              IND                  PER          CHL
                                                                                                                              PAN ROU   LTU          CYP ITA
                                                                                                                                                       GRC    IRL ARE
                                                                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                                                            AUT                                                                                                                                         BWA          SAU
                                                                                                              MAR     NAM
                                                                                                                THA ALB   CRI      TUR
                                                                                                                             BGR RUS       LVA            AUS  USA                                                                                                                   PRY                 BRA
                                                                                                                        BLR URY            CZE        NZLESP
                                                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                                                            FRA                                                                                                                                            VEN                    BHRKWT
                                                                                                               GEO COL ZAF  BWA RUSTURPOLOMN
                                                                                                                                           CZE                                                                                                                       KENNGA
                                                                                              IND                                        TWN ESTMLTSGP ESPAUS
                                                                                                                                                          DEUNLD    NOR
                                                                                BGD                                            VEN MEX LTU ESTBHR GRC SWE                                                                                                                                              ARG
                                                                                                                                                                               −.04




                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                                      SAU      ISR SGP                                                                                                                                                  MUS
                                                                                                                                                               USA
       .96




                                                                                                                          ARGBRA                     CYP          ARE                                                                                                                                                                            QAT
                                                                                                                                                     KWT                                                                                                         LAO
                                                                                                                                    MEX
                                                                                                                                                                    QAT
                                                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                     −.06
 .94




                                                          5                  6                   7             8           9                   10                 11                                                           5                   6                    7             8           9                              10         11
                                                                                                     Log per capita income                                                                                                                                                  Log per capita income


                                                                      (a) Consumption vs. production                                                                                                                                 (b) Difference between cons. and prod.

Figure A.3: Comparison of consumption and production elasticities (general equilibrium estimates
with supply elasticity calibrated at 0.75).




                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.2
 Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                                                                                   Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption
                                                                          MDG                                                                                                                                                              MDG
                                                 .95




                                                                                                                  Non−Homothetic                                                                                                With resource  productivity growth, non−homothetic
                                                                                                                  Homothetic                                                                                                    Without res. prod. growth, non−homoth. to homoth. difference




                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.15
                                                                                   LAO


                                                                ETH
                                         .9




                                                                                         KGZ                ARM
                                                                                          PAK                                                                                                                                        ETH               LAO




                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.1
                                                                                        SEN                 ARM
                                                                                      ZMB                             KAZ
                                                                      MOZ BGD       KEN   GHA           GEO
                               .85




                                                                         TZA
                                                                          BGD                         AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETH                  KENKGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                                           TUR     SVK                                                                                                     MOZ
                                                                                                          SLV                               SGP                                                                                               TZA             PAK GHA
                                                                                                                                   LVA BHR   HKG




                                                                                                                                                                                              1.05
                                                              MWI                                                    KAZ                                   ARE                                                                                      KHM
                                                                                        PAK                                                  HKG
                                                                                                                                            SGP              QAT                                                                   MWI
                                                                                KHMLAO ZMB
                                                                                         NIC
                                                                                       CIV          AZE IRN
                                                                                                      GEO                          LVA
                                                                                                                                LTUSVK                                                                                                                   NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VNM                         SLV
                                                                                       KGZ
                                                                                       CIV               UKR                     OMN
                                                                                                                                HUN               ITA                                                                              MWI       MDG KHMLAO
                                                                                         NIC               TUN           RUS            KOR       ITA BEL
                                                                                                                                                        GBR                                                                                             KGZ     MNG
                                                                                VNM SEN                                    TUR HUNHRV KORPRT JPN
                                                                                                                                         MLT     ESPFRA
                                                                                                                                                      FIN                                                                                  MOZ          ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GEO             KAZ TUR
                                                                    UGA                                 IRN      ARG
                                                                                                               BLR        ROU                  JPN NLD
                                                                                                                                              CYP      SWEDNK
                                                                                                                                                        GBR                                                                                UGATZA     VNM CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAK
                                                                ETH MOZ               GHAMNGEGY
                                                                                        BOL     HND MAR
                                                                                              LKA        UKRALB
                                                                                                       THA     MYS   PAN
                                                                                                                    BGR   ROU   LTU                  FRA                                                                                     NPL           SEN       LKA AZE IRN ARM                       SVK
                                                                       TZA
                                                                      MDG      KEN CMR
                                                                                                HND MAR SLVTUN     URY
                                                                                                                  MUS             HRVEST              NLD                                                                                      BGD              MNG       GTM UKR
                      .8




                                                              MWI                   IND PHL LKA GTM       PERNAMCRI      RUS     TWN         KWT
                                                                                                                                               GRC   AUT
                                                                                                                                                   DEU       NOR
                                                                     ZWE   KHM          BOL       CHN        COL       CHL         CZEISRPRT
                                                                                                                                           SVNNZL  AUS
                                                                                                                                                 ESPCANIRL
                                                                                                                                                       SWE ARE                                                                                          CIV GHA NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOL                           KAZ       HUN                   FRA
                                                                                VNM            PRYCHN     PERNAM ARG
                                                                                                               MYS                                      USA
                                                                                                                                                        CHE                                                                                    BGD                   LKA    MAR                            LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HRV          JPN FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HKG        GBR
                                                                     ZWE
                                                                    UGA           NGA     PHLEGY
                                                                                           IDN     GTM         BLRMUS
                                                                                                                   BWA        SAU CZE                     DNK                                                                                           CIV      PHLEGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IDN                                  HUN LVA KOR     JPN     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FRA




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                    IND                             BGR
                                                                                                                      VEN                             FIN                                                                                                         IDN             SLV       BGR                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA  BEL
                                                                                                             COL CRIBRA
                                                                                                                     PAN MEX                                                                                                                                                 GEOPER MYS
                                                                      NPL          CMR MNG                   ALB              POLTWN     MLT        CANIRL
                                                                                                                                                     AUTCHE                                                                                 ZWE      KEN CMR PHL PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHNMAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN    IRN  ALB MUS      ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CZE KOR SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRT HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SGP      AUTCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                               PRY                ZAF CHL                BHR                                                                                                ZWE                                ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UKR NAM                                          DNK
                                                                                                       ECU         URY                 ISR SVN
                                                                                                                                     EST                     QAT                                                                                           IND BOL            THA PERCOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TUN BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NAM CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MUS  CHL TUR  LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HRV         CYP       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                                                 OMN          CYP
                                                                                                                                              NZL AUS                                                                                        NPL                      PRY          TUN      BGR RUS POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BWA          OMNCZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LTU  ESTBHR   NZL DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CANSWE NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AUS
                                                                      NPL                                                                               USA                                                                                                IND      EGY                  ARG     RUS POLTWN ISR  PRT     ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SGPGRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SVN
                                                                                                       THA            VEN     POL                                                                                                                                                      BLR    VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAN                                  DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ALB              SAU      ISR              USA
         .75




                                                                                  NGA                              BWA                                                                                                                                                                   ARGBRA              EST      NZL AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BWA                                  USAARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN




                                                                                                                                                                          .95
                                                                                                                                               GRC                                                                                                                                                 MEX           MLT KWT             QAT
                                                                                                                  ZAF                                        NOR                                                                                                                                                                   ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ECU                                    CYP
                                                                                                                    BRA    MEXSAU                                                                                                                                             THA           BRA
                                                                                                                                             KWT                                                                                                                                                   MEX                 GRC
                                                                                                       ECU                                                                                                                                                                                              OMN                          QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAU        BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KWT
 .7




                                                                                                                                                                   .9
                                                          5           6                  7             8           9                    10               11                                                                 5              6                 7              8           9                      10               11
                                                                                             Log per capita income                                                                                                                                                Log per capita income


                                                              (a) No resource productivity growth                                                                                                                                                         (b) Comparison

Figure A.4: Simulated income elasticity of the CO2 content of consumption; supply elasticity = 0.75;
Left panel: no resource productivity growth. Right panel: comparing with and without resource
productivity growth (we plot the “NH minus H” difference between non-homothetic and homothetic
for the later).
 Income elasticity of direct CO2 content of consumption
                                                   1.6




                                                                                                                                                                   Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                               NH CES log−linear                                                                                                                                                      NH CES log−linear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.3




                                                                                                               NH CES quadratic                                                                                                                                                       NH CES quadratic
                                                                                                               NH CES shifter                                                                                                                                                         NH CES shifter
                                           1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.2
                                1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                             1.1
                        1




                                                                                                                                                                               1
  .6       .8




                                                                                                                                                                   .9




                                                          5           6                  7             8           9                    10               11                                                                 5               6                 7             8           9                      10               11
                                                                                             Log per capita income                                                                                                                                                Log per capita income


                                                          (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                        (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure A.5: Sensitivity to demand system (NH CES): simulated income elasticity of the CO2 content
of consumption (fossil fuel supply elasticity calibrated at 0.75).




                                                                                                                                                               7
 Avg. direct secondary energy content of consumption (kg/$)




                                                                                                                                                                          Avg. total secondary energy content of consumption (kg/$)
                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KGZ
                                                                                                                                                95% CI                                                                                                                                                                      95% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRN
                                                                                                                                                Fit                                                                                                                                                                         Fit
                                                                                                                   UKR
                                                                                                                                                Quadratic fit                                                                                                                                                               Quadratic fit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KAZ
                                          .15




                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                         KGZ                                                                                                                                                                                                UKR




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                         BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZE                 RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZWE           VNM                             BLR
                                                                                                                                RUS
                                                                          ZWE                                                                                                                                                                                                   EGY
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAK BOL        CHN
                                                                                         VNM
                                                                                                      EGY                                                                                                                                                                                             SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GEO
                                                                                                BOL            GEO                                                                                                                                                                   THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARM MYSARGVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ECU                omn     BHR            ARE
                                                                                                                          ARG         SAU                                                                                                                KHM                      PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                       PRY                                                                                                                                                            INDNIC                  BGR




                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                          PAK                                                                                                                                                         BGD
                                                                                                               MYS ECU                                                                                                                                                          HND      NAMZAF
                                                                                   KHM                                                                                                                                                          MOZ                                      ALB                 EST KWT
                                                                                                                                    BHR                                                                                                                                                TUN
                 .05




                                                                                                                     VEN                                                                                                                     ETH NPL                       PHLLKA            MUS        LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUNLVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                             BGD                      IDN                                                                                                                                                               GHA        MAR       BWA  CHL POL                       QAT
                                                                            NPL                             CHN THA
                                                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                                                   KAZ      HUN
                                                                                                                          POL                                                                                                               MWI    TZA                SEN                   CRI    ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAN MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TWN KORHKG GRC CAN
                                                                                                             ALB BGR                                                                                                                                             KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CIV             GTM SLV      URY                 CYP
                                                                                                PHL    GTM                    CZEEST          CAN                                                                                                 MDG               NGA               PERCOL BRA               MLTSVN        USA
                                                                        TZA                IND      HNDMARTUN CRI URYROU omn   LVA               USA                                                                                                            LAO                                            isr SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL FIN
                                                                   ETHMOZ                                                                                                                                                                        UGA               ZMB                                                   AUSBEL
                                                                                         NGAGHA LKA           COL BWA CHL
                                                                                                             NAM        TUR HRV
                                                                                                                              TWN      KWT
                                                                                                                                      SVN                                                                                                                                                                       PRT        IRL   NOR    LUX
                                                                                      KEN     NIC         ARM
                                                                                                           SLV      PAN MEX LTUSVK KOR   NZL
                                                                                                                                         GRC        ARE     LUX                                                                                                      CMR                                                DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ESPAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FRASWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NLDCHE
                                                                                        ZMB
                                                                                        CIVSEN           PER       BRA
                                                                                                                 MUS               isr      DEUIRL
                                                                                                                                             AUSSWE
                                                                                                                                               FIN CHE
                                                                  MWI   UGA               CMR                                                   GBR
                                                                                                                                              AUT DNK
                                                                         MDG                                                        PRTCYPJPN
                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                                           ITAFRA
                                                                                                                                                BEL   NOR
                                                                                                                                                     QAT
                                                                                                                                   MLTSGP
                                                                                                                                       HKG
                                                                                     LAO
    0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                              5         6                 7            8          9        10                    11             12                                                                    5           6                7             8          9        10                      11             12
                                                                                                Log per capita expenditure                                                                                                                                                Log per capita expenditure


                                                               (a) Direct energy content of consumption                                                                                                                                   (b) Total energy content of consumption

                                                                                                    Figure A.6: Average secondary energy content in the data.
 Income elasticity of direct CO2 content of consumption
                                                   1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.2
                                                                                                                                                                          Income elasticity of total CO2 content of consumption




                                                                                                                         Linear fit                                                                                                         MWI                                                   Linear fit
                                                                                                                         Elasticity estimate (approximation)                                                                                                                                      Elasticity estimate (approximation)
                                                                  MWI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           QAT
                                                                                                                                                                   QAT                                                                        ETH
                                           1.2




                                                                          MOZ                                                                                                                                                                       MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.1




                                                                    ETH                                                                                                                                                                                   MDG
                                                                             ZWE
                                                                            UGA
                                                                              MDG                                                                                                                                                                      TZA
                                                                               BGD                                                                                                                                                                    NPL          LAO
                                                                               TZA KHM
                                                                                             CIV                                                                                                                                                                KHM
                                                                                              NGA
                                 1




                                                                             NPL         LAO                               MUS
                                                                                           VNM                                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                SENBOL                                                                                                                                                                   CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BGD
                                                                                          KEN IND NICIDN                                         BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                               CMR  MNG
                                                                                                  GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                              PAK           GTM                                                                                                                                                      VNM GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOL
                                                                                             ZMB
                                                                                             KGZ       EGYHND                                                                                                                                                         KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SEN NIC
                                                                                                    PHL LKACHN                                                                                                                                                              MNG     LKA        ARM      MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KAZ
                                                                                                         PRY AZEECUSLV MYS               OMN                                                                                                                                     IDN PRY
                                                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                                                THA
                                                                                                                  UKR                                                                                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                                                    TUN ARG
                       .8




                                                                                                               GEO
                                                                                                              MAR ARM        BGR
                                                                                                                           ZAFKAZ                                                                                                                                                  EGYHND                                     BHR
                                                                                                                   PERCOL CRI
                                                                                                                            BWA            HRV       KWT                                                                                                                                 GTM
                                                                                                                        BLRURYPAN
                                                                                                                                CHLROU POL
                                                                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                                                                    TURSAU                        ARE                                                                                 ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IND PHL     CHN ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IRN    MYS                LVA
                                                                                                                                              EST
                                                                                                                                         LTUCZE                                                                                                                                            MAR SLVNAM BGR              HRV
                                                                                                                      ALB
                                                                                                                      NAM      VEN MEX HUN  LVA MLT NZL
                                                                                                                                            SVK                                                                                                                                           AZE            PANCHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HUNSVK
                                                                                                                                          TWN ISR                                                                                                                                           GEO PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUN CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UKR      BWA    ROU                        FIN
                                                                                                                             BRA                   SVN           DNK                                                                                                                         THA        URY   RUS            KOR  NZL
                                                                                                                                                KOR CYP                                                                                                                                            ALB ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COL                           HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SVN
                                                                                                                                                 PRT         NLD    NOR                                                                                                                                ARG      TURPOL        PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESTMLT           BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LTUCZE
                                                                                                                                                                                      .9




                                                                                                                                                    SGPGRCCANFIN
                                                                                                                                                            AUT                                                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GRCCAN SWE ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                                                       JPN    SWE
                                                                                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                                                                          DEUIRL
                                                                                                                                                               CHE                                                                                                                                       BRA          TWN             ITAFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUTUSA
                                                                                                                                                         ITA
           .6




                                                                                                                                                         ESPFRA                                                                                                                                                    SAU      ISR KWT         CHE NOR
                                                                                                                                                     HKG      GBR                                                                                                                                               MEX                   ESP NLD
                                                                                                                                                              USA                                                                                                                                               VEN                   DEU GBR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SGP
  .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .8




                                                              5             6                   7             8           9                    10               11                                                                    5               6                   7             8           9                      10               11
                                                                                                    Log per capita income                                                                                                                                                     Log per capita income


                                                              (a) Avg. direct CO2 content of consumption                                                                                                                              (b) Avg. total CO2 content of consumption

Figure A.7: Approximated income elasticity of the CO2 content of consumption, based on quadratic
NH CLM preferences.




                                                                                                                                                                      8
