                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO UNDERDIVERSIFICATION AND PROBABILITY WEIGHTING:
                     EVIDENCE FROM THE FIELD

                                      Stephen G. Dimmock
                                        Roy Kouwenberg
                                        Olivia S. Mitchell
                                        Kim Peijnenburg

                                       Working Paper 24928
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24928


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018


This paper is part of the NBER’s Research Program on the Economics of Aging and the Working
Group on Household Portfolios. For assistance with the survey, the authors gratefully
acknowledge Tim Colvin, David Grant, and the American Life Panel team at the RAND
Corporation. For comments, we thank Nishad Kapadia, Alexander Klos, Sonya Lim, Gianpaolo
Parise, Valery Polkovnichenko, Peter Wakker, and Joe Zhang; seminar participants at EDHEC,
HEC Paris, IESE Business School, London School of Economics, University of Cambridge, and
University of Warwick; and participants at the Financial Intermediation Research Society, SFS
Cavalcade, Singapore Symposium, TIAA/PRC Symposium, and Western Finance Association.
Yunju Cha and Yong Yu provided outstanding research assistance. This project received funding
from the TIAA Institute and Wharton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not represent official views of the TIAA
Institute or the Wharton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24928.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Stephen G. Dimmock, Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Portfolio Underdiversification and Probability Weighting: Evidence from the Field
Stephen G. Dimmock, Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg
NBER Working Paper No. 24928
August 2018
JEL No. C83,D14,D81,G11

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore the relation between probability weighting and household portfolio
underdiversification in a representative household survey, using custom-designed incentivized
lotteries. On average, people display Inverse-S shaped probability weighting, overweighting the
small probabilities of tail events. As theory predicts, our Inverse-S measure is positively
associated with portfolio underdiversification, which results in significant Sharpe ratio losses. We
match respondents’ individual stock holdings to CRSP data and find that people with higher
Inverse-S tend to pick stocks with positive skewness and hold positively-skewed equity
portfolios. We show that these choices reflect preferences rather than probability unsophistication
or limited financial knowledge.

Stephen G. Dimmock                               Olivia S. Mitchell
Division of Finance and Banking                  University of Pennsylvania
Nanyang Technological University                 The Wharton School
Singapore                                        3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
dimmock@ntu.edu.sg                               Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
                                                 and NBER
Roy Kouwenberg                                   mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
College of Management
Mahidol University                               Kim Peijnenburg
69 Vipawadee Rangsit Rd                          HEC Paris
Bangkok, 10400, Thailand                         France
and Erasmus University Rotterdam                 peijnenburg@hec.fr
cmroy@mahidol.ac.th




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24928
                 Household Portfolio Underdiversification and
                Probability Weighting: Evidence from the Field

        People frequently violate the tenets of expected utility theory for low probability events:

for example, they simultaneously buy insurance and lottery tickets, overinsure against small losses,

and hold undiversified positions in individual company stocks with high positive skewness hoping

to pick the “next Apple.”1 Such seemingly anomalous behaviors are consistent with probability

weighting: the idea that people use transformed rather than objective probabilities when making

decisions. As formalized in prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and

Kahneman, 1992) and rank-dependent utility theory (Quiggin, 1982; Yaari, 1987), people tend to

overweight low probability tail events and underweight events from the middle of the probability

distribution.

        Several theoretical papers show that probability weighting predicts anomalies in observed

household portfolio decisions, such as underdiversification and the popularity of lottery-type

stocks (e.g., Barberis and Huang, 2008). For individuals who overweight small probability tail

events, the negative skewness of the aggregate stock market makes a well-diversified portfolio less

attractive; but the positive skewness of an underdiversified portfolio containing a few individual

stocks becomes more attractive.2

        The empirical literature is less developed, offering mostly indirect evidence using

calibrated portfolio choice models (e.g., Polkovnichenko, 2005). Obtaining direct empirical

evidence on the role of probability weighting is challenging, because individual preferences such

as probability weighting are not readily observable. The present paper provides direct evidence


1
 For further discussion, see the review articles of Fehr-Duda and Epper (2012) and Barberis (2013a).
2
 See Shefrin and Statman (2000), Polkovnichenko (2005), Barberis and Huang (2008), Jin and Zhou (2008), Chapman
and Polkovnichenko (2011), De Giorgi and Legg (2012), and He, Kouwenberg, and Zhou (2018). Albuquerque (2012)
presents a theoretical foundation for the positive skewness of individual stocks.

                                                      1
that probability weighting can explain actual household portfolio decisions, most notably portfolio

underdiversification, skewness seeking, and investments in lottery-type stocks.

        To elicit individuals’ probability weighting preferences, we designed a purpose-built

internet survey module and fielded it in a nationally-representative sample of several thousand

respondents in the American Life Panel (ALP). Our module elicits certainty equivalents for a series

of binary lotteries adapted from Wakker and Deneffe (1996) and Abdellaoui (2000). The

probabilities of winning the lotteries vary from small to large, allowing us to obtain a non-

parametric measure of individual respondents’ probability weighting behavior which we term

Inverse-S. In addition to a fixed participation fee, all respondents had the opportunity to receive

real monetary incentives based on their choices (we paid a total of $16,020 to 2,072 of the 2,703

eligible respondents). The survey module also measures subjects’ portfolio allocations and collects

the names of their five largest individual stockholdings.

        Our general population estimates of probability weighting are consistent with those found

in laboratory studies (Abdellaoui, 2000; Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilen, 2010; Bruhin, Fehr-

Duda, and Epper, 2010). Specifically, we show that most people have Inverse-S shaped probability

weighting functions implying overweighting of tail events, though there is substantial cross-

subject heterogeneity. On average, when the probability of winning a lottery is only 5%, our

subjects’ certainty equivalent is greater than the expected value of the lottery, which is consistent

with overweighting the small probability of winning. By contrast, when the probability of winning

a lottery is higher (e.g., 50%), our subjects’ certainty equivalent is less than the expected value of

the lottery.

        Using our subject-specific variable, Inverse-S, we test the theoretical predictions regarding

probability weighting and portfolio choice. Specifically, we explore the portfolios of equity



                                                  2
holders and measure the fraction of total equity allocated to individual stocks, which Calvet,

Campbell, and Sodini (2007, 2009) show is a good proxy for portfolio underdiversification.3 We

find that a one standard deviation increase in Inverse-S implies a 12.7 percentage point increase in

the fraction of the portfolio allocated to individual stocks (28.2% relative to the baseline allocation

of 45.0 percentage points). Using subjects’ individual stock holdings, we construct an alternative

measure of underdiversification; the relative Sharpe ratio loss from investing in individual stocks

(as compared to investing in the market portfolio; see Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini, 2007). We

find that high Inverse-S is associated with large Sharpe ratio losses due to idiosyncratic risk. In

particular, our results imply that a one-standard deviation higher Inverse-S implies a cost to the

average (median) stockholder of $2,504 ($351) per year, as for the same amount of risk the person

could have had a higher expected return.

        Our results are robust to controlling for variables commonly used in the literature such as

age, income, financial wealth, education, marital status, number of household members, and

employment, as well as additional controls for subjects’ risk aversion, financial literacy, trust,

optimism, and numeracy. Additionally, the module recorded the time each subject spent on the

elicitation questions and included check questions to assess whether subjects’ choices were

internally consistent. Our results are also robust to excluding subjects who answered the elicitation

questions unusually quickly or who made multiple errors on the check questions. Moreover, we

find similar results when using alternative probability weighting measures based on specific

functional forms (e.g., the functions proposed by Prelec, 1998, and Bordalo, Gennaioli, and

Shleifer, 2012).



3
  Consistent with Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007, 2009), we find that, conditional on owning individual stocks,
half of the respondents held shares in only one or two individual companies, which is consistent with the fraction of
the equity portfolio allocated to individual stocks being a reasonable proxy for underdiversification.

                                                         3
          In addition, probability weighting can help explain the type of individual stocks people

choose. To this end, we asked respondents who own individual stocks to provide the names (or

tickers) of their five largest holdings. We then match these names to the CRSP daily stock return

database and construct various measures of the stocks’ characteristics. Consistent with the

predictions of theory, we find that respondents with high Inverse-S tend to hold individual stocks

with high positive (expected) skewness.

          Next, we evaluate whether probability weighting is a component of preferences or a

symptom of probability unsophistication. For example, poor quantitative reasoning ability could

cause both probability weighting and observed portfolio choices. Based on our summary statistics

this seems unlikely, as probability weighting is weakly positively correlated with education,

numerical reasoning ability, and financial literacy. Robustness tests show our results are similar if

we restrict the sample to subjects who score higher on proxies for probability sophistication:

having a college degree, and making no errors on numerical reasoning questions. The results are

also similar if we restrict the sample to subjects who understand that owning a single company’s

stock is generally riskier than owning a stock mutual fund, or making no errors on all financial

literacy questions. Overall, we conclude that probability weighting reflects preferences, and not

probability unsophistication or limited financial knowledge.

          We then broaden the sample of survey respondents to consider non-participation in equity

markets as well as the type of equity held by those who do participate. The theoretical literature

shows that probability weighting can result in non-participation due to first-order risk aversion,4

and if individuals with high probability weighting do participate they will hold underdiversified

individual stock portfolios. To test these predictions, we use a multinomial logit model with four



4
    See Epstein and Zin (1990), Segal and Spivak (1990), and Chapman and Polkovnichenko (2011).

                                                        4
categories: non-participation, mutual funds only, individual stocks only, and both mutual funds

and individual stocks. We find that Inverse-S is positively associated with non-participation and

ownership of individual stocks, and thus it is negatively associated with owning only mutual funds.

This result provides evidence that probability weighting is not simply a proxy for risk aversion, as

the subjects make either the least risky choice (non-participation) or the riskiest choice (an

undiversified portfolio): this is inconsistent with predictions following from risk aversion.

        Our paper contributes to the household portfolio choice literature by testing theoretical

models of probability weighting and household portfolios.5 Specifically, it is the first to show a

direct relation between elicited probability weighting preferences and actual household portfolio

decisions. Relatedly, Polkovnichenko (2005) uses stock return data to obtain numerical results in

a calibrated model that links probability weighting and underdiversification. Rieger (2012) and

Erner, Klos, and Langer (2013) associate elicited probability weighting metrics to hypothetical

financial decisions about structured products in laboratory experiments using university students.

In contrast, we relate preferences elicited in the field to people’s actual financial decisions.

Consistent with the predictions of theory, we show that probability weighting can explain portfolio

underdiversification, skewness seeking, and investments in lottery-type stocks, and we further

show that probability weighting is related to non-participation in the equity markets.

        Our paper also contributes to the empirical literature on household portfolio

underdiversification (e.g., Blume and Friend, 1975; Kelly, 1995; Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini,

2007; Mitton and Vorkink, 2007; Goetzmann and Kumar, 2008). For instance, Kumar (2009) finds

that households hold underdiversified portfolios and this behavior is related to the demand for



5
  For example, see Shefrin and Statman (2000), Polkovnichenko (2005), Barberis and Huang (2008), Jin and Zhou
(2008), Chapman and Polkovnichenko (2011), De Giorgi and Legg (2012), and He, Kouwenberg, and Zhou (2018),
among others.

                                                      5
stocks with lottery-like features. Our paper complements these studies, as it explores the

underlying preferences driving this demand.

        Finally, our work relates to a branch of the asset pricing literature which posits that

probability weighting can explain the historically low returns of many securities with positive

skewness. Several authors find that stocks with positive expected skewness have unusually low

returns (e.g., Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink, 2010; Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw, 2011; Conrad,

Dittmar, and Ghysels, 2013; Conrad, Kapadia, and Xing, 2014). Boyer and Vorkink (2014) and

Li, Subrahmanyam, and Yang (2018) find similar results for equity options. Though our paper

does not directly address asset pricing implications, our findings do support the preference-based

explanation offered in the cited studies. That is, we find a direct link between investors’ probability

weighting preferences and skewness-seeking behavior.

        Our paper is the first non-laboratory analysis to provide direct evidence relating probability

weighting to households’ portfolio choices, specifically, to underdiversification and investment in

individual stocks with high positive skewness. These results are consistent with theoretical models

predicting that probability weighting can explain puzzling features of household portfolio choice.


1. Eliciting Individuals’ Probability Weighting and Utility Curvature

1.1.   Rank-Dependent Utility and Probability Weighting

        A large body of experimental studies finds that individuals frequently make decisions that

contradict the predictions of expected utility (e.g., Camerer, 1995; Starmer, 2000). In the expected

utility model, the utility      of each outcome       is weighted linearly by its probability pi:


                                             ∙        .                                             (1)




                                                  6
However, Allais (1953) demonstrates that linearity in probabilities is often violated in simple

choice problems. For example, consider the choice between a 100% certainty of receiving $1

million versus a 98% chance of winning $5 million. Most people prefer to receive $1 million with

certainty. Next, consider a modification of this choice in which both probabilities are divided by

100: that is, consider now the choice between a 1% chance of winning $1 million versus a 0.98%

chance of winning $5 million. Now, most people prefer a 0.98% chance of winning $5 million.

Such a combination of choices is inconsistent with expected utility: the first preference implies

U(1,000,000) > 0.98×U(5,000,000), while the second preference implies 0.01×U(1,000,000) <

0.0098×U(5,000,000).

       This phenomenon, known as the Allais paradox, demonstrates that risk preferences can

depend non-linearly on outcome probabilities. Many studies have replicated this finding, including

in experiments with large real monetary rewards (e.g., Starmer, 2000). Generally, in both

experiments and real world situations, people are risk-seeking when the probability of winning is

small but risk averse when the probability of winning is large. Furthermore, many people are risk-

seeking for small probabilities of winning but simultaneously risk averse for small probabilities of

losing. For example, the same person may buy both lottery tickets and insurance (for a review see

Fehr-Duda and Epper, 2012).

       A large theoretical and empirical literature shows that Allais’ findings can be explained by

non-expected utility models in which decision-makers transform probabilities with a non-linear

weighting function (Starmer, 2000; Fehr-Duda and Epper, 2012). The two most commonly used

models are rank-dependent utility (RDU) developed by Quiggin (1982) and cumulative prospect

theory (CPT) developed by Tversky and Kahneman (1992). In these models, individuals order the

possible outcomes from worst to best (                ⋯       ) and then assign each outcome a



                                                 7
decision weight       that depends on the cumulative probability of the outcome. For example, the

utility functional can be given by:


                                                ∙        ,                                     (2)


                                                 ⋯                        ⋯           ,        (3)

where     is determined by an increasing and differentiable weighting function            , such that

   0     0 and    1       1, and                ⋯       is the cumulative probability of outcome i.

        Figure 1 displays the inverse-S shaped pattern of           typically found in experimental

studies, in which low probability tail outcomes are substantially overweighted relative to objective

probabilities (        ). The weighting function is steep on both the left and the right sides of the

figure, which implies that low probability tail outcomes are substantially overweighted for both

extreme good outcomes and extreme bad outcomes. This, in turn, can generate risk-seeking

towards good outcomes with low probabilities and extreme risk aversion towards bad outcomes

with low probabilities.

                                       [Insert Figure 1 here]

        Probability weighting is similar in CPT and RDU – the differences between them come

from their treatment of utility curvature and not probability weighting – except that in CPT the

probabilities for loss outcomes (       ⋯                    0) and gain outcomes (0            ⋯

        ) are transformed by two distinct weighting functions,            and         . Empirically,

the weighting functions for losses and gains tend to have the same inverse-S shaped pattern as in

Figure 1 (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). Therefore, low probability outcomes in both tails are

overweighted, similar to rank dependent utility.




                                                    8
       More recently, Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012) develop a model in which

probability weighting is determined by the salience of the payoffs, with the contrast between

payoffs determining their salience. In this model, people overweight the probability of salient gains

(losses), resulting in risk-seeking (averse) behavior. Although in some contexts this model

generates different predictions than RDU or CPT, for financial choices the predictions are similar.

Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2013) show that, relative to expected utility theory, salience

theory implies a strong preference for positively skewed securities and reduced demand for a

diversified portfolio such as the market index. Accordingly, in this paper we do not seek to

distinguish between RDU, CPT, and salience theory.


1.2.   Hypotheses

       The extant theoretical literature shows that probability weighting affects portfolio choice

through two channels: greater sensitivity to skewness and first-order risk aversion. Probability

weighting increases sensitivity to skewness, because the investor overweights low probability tail

outcomes. Given the negative skewness of the aggregate stock market (Albuquerque, 2012),

probability weighting makes owning a well-diversified equity portfolio less attractive (e.g.,

Polkovnichenko, 2005; Chapman and Polkovnichenko, 2011; De Giorgi and Legg, 2012). In

contrast, given the positive skewness of individual stocks, probability weighting makes owning an

underdiversified portfolio of individual stocks more attractive (e.g., Shefrin and Statman, 2000;

Polkovnichenko, 2005; Barberis and Huang, 2008; Jin and Zhou, 2008). Thus, the prior literature

suggests that higher probability weighting will be associated with underdiversification.

       We illustrate this prediction using a simple calibrated portfolio choice model with

probability weighting preferences. In this calibration, people have constant relative risk aversion

(CRRA) utility and a Prelec (1998) probability weighting function, and they can allocate their


                                                  9
portfolios across a positively skewed individual stock (portfolio), a negatively skewed mutual

fund, and a risk-free asset. Our calibration is generally similar to Polkovnichenko (2005); details

are provided in Online Appendix A. Figure 2 shows the optimal fraction of equity allocated to the

individual stock, for different levels of probability weighting – denoted Inverse-S – and utility

curvature. The fraction of equity allocated to the individual stock is strongly increasing in

probability weighting. In contrast, the allocation is relatively insensitive to utility curvature. Thus,

our simple calibrated portfolio choice model is consistent with prior theoretical papers that predict

people with high Inverse-S will hold underdiversified portfolios with high positive skewness.

                                        [Insert Figure 2 here]

       Furthermore, Epstein and Zin (1990), Segal and Spivak (1990), and Chapman and

Polkovnichenko (2011) show that probability weighting creates first-order risk aversion – that is,

the investor does not become locally risk neutral as the size of a potential investment becomes

small. This increased risk aversion reduces demand for equity securities.


1.3.   The Elicitation Procedure

        Empirically estimating individual-level measures of probability weighting is complicated

because preferences are determined by the product of two (usually non-linear) functions:

probability weighting and utility. Throughout the paper we will use the less conventional term

“utility curvature” to refer to aversion to risk caused by utility curvature, and not the more

frequently used term “risk aversion,” as technically, with probability weighting the curvature of

the utility function alone does not fully describe risk aversion. Risk averse behavior is the outcome

of a combination of utility curvature and probability weighting.

       Thus, the challenge is to separate the effects of probability weighting from utility function

curvature. For elicitation questions with modest rewards this issue is trivial if the subject integrates


                                                  10
outcomes with existing wealth as in expected utility theory or RDU, because the subject’s utility

function is effectively linear for modest rewards and its curvature can be ignored.6 Under

behavioral theories that involve narrow framing, however, the subject evaluates decisions in

isolation and utility function curvature can affect even small stake gambles. Hence, separating

utility curvature and probability weighting is not trivial when assuming narrow framing. Prior

studies address this issue using two different approaches. First, parametric methods that assume a

specific functional form and then estimate probability weighting and utility curvature parameters

(e.g., Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen, 2010; Erner, Klos, and Langer, 2013). The disadvantages of

this approach are the need to commit to a specific functional form and the estimation error in the

individual level parameter estimates. Second, non-parametric methods that do not assume a

functional form, but which require chaining, so that the choices offered to a subject depend upon

her prior choices (e.g., Wakker and Deneffe, 1996; Abdellaoui, 2000; van de Kuilen and Wakker,

2011). The disadvantage of this approach is that, as Abdellaoui (2000, pg. 1511) notes “...error

propagation in the trade-off method can produce `noisy’ probability weighting functions” (e.g., a

response error in the first question affects the choices offered in all subsequent questions).

        We use a non-parametric approach and limit the need for chaining. Our survey questions

are adapted from Wakker and Deneffe (1996) and Abdellaoui (2000), albeit with some

modifications that reduce error propagation and the time required to complete the questions, due

to the constraints of a general population survey (rather than a classroom experiment).7 We


6
  This does not mean that individuals are effectively risk neutral for small gambles, however, as probability
weighting alone generates first-order risk aversion. But deviations from risk neutrality are caused by probability
weighting and not utility function curvature (e.g., see Yaari, 1987; Segal and Spivak, 1990).
7
  We first piloted four different designs of the elicitation method in a sample of 207 ALP respondents, comparing the
method of Abdellaoui (2000) with the midweight method of van de Kuilen and Wakker (2011), while using two
different question presentation formats (choice lists and multiple pairwise choices). For our main survey, we chose
the question format that the respondents found clear, minimized mistakes, and led to lower average response times.
Online Appendix B provides further details of the elicitation method. We do not include the pilot sample responses
in our empirical tests and the subjects for the pilot were not included in the sample for the main survey.

                                                         11
designed and fielded a customized module in the American Life Panel (ALP) survey that presents

subjects with 10 multi-round questions. The first four questions measure utility curvature and the

remaining six measure probability weighting. Each question asks subjects to choose between two

options: A and B. There are three rounds per question, and based on each subject’s choice in a

round, one option in the subsequent round is changed to become either more or less attractive. As

a starting point for each question, we use the answer of a risk-neutral expected utility maximizer.

Hence the choices offered to our subjects are determined only by their prior answers within the

rounds of a single question, rather than across different sets of questions.

      Figure 3 shows the first round of the first question, which is intended to measure utility

curvature. Option A offers a 33% chance of winning $12 and a 67% chance of winning $3, while

Option B initially offers a 33% chance of winning $18 and a 67% chance of winning $0.

Accordingly, both options have an expected value of $6 and offer the same chance of winning the

larger payoff (33%), but Option B is riskier (Option B is a mean-preserving spread of Option A).

If the subject selects the safer Option A, then Option B is made more attractive by increasing the

winning amount to $21. If, instead, the subject chooses Option B, then Option B is made less

attractive by decreasing the winning amount to $16. This process continues for three rounds, until

the subject’s indifference point is closely approximated. For each question, the subject is then

presented with a fourth choice used only to evaluate consistency with prior choices.

      Panel A of Table 1 shows the structure of the four sets of questions designed to measure

utility curvature. In all four questions, the probability of winning the large prize is fixed at 33%

for both Option A and B, but the potential winning amount increases with each question. Thus, the

effect of probability weighting is largely cancelled out in the comparison between Options A and




                                                 12
B, as the probability of winning is the same. We ask four sets of questions instead of one to obtain

a more accurate measure of utility curvature and minimize the effect of measurement error.

                                     [Insert Table 1 and Figure 3 here]

        We next present each subject with six questions designed to measure probability weighting.

The goal is to elicit the certainty equivalent of Option A, which is a risky choice with two possible

outcomes. Figure 4 depicts the first round of one of the questions: Option A offers a fixed large

payoff of $42 with probability p = 5% and a small payoff of $6 with probability 95%, while Option

B offers a sure amount of $8 in the first round. If the subject chooses risky Option A, then in the

second round the sure amount for Option B is increased to $9. If the subject instead chooses Option

B, then in the second round the sure amount is reduced to $7. This process is repeated for three

rounds until the certainty equivalent for Option A is closely approximated, as illustrated by the

decision tree in Figure 5. In the remaining five sets of probability weighting questions, the

probabilities, p, of winning the large prize in Option A are 12%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 88%. For

each question, we elicit the certainty equivalent and compare it to the expected value of the risky

gamble so as to estimate the percentage risk premium.8 Panel B of Table 1 shows the structure of

the six sets of probability weighting questions.

                                        [Insert Figures 4 and 5 here]

        The subjects in our survey module could win real rewards based on their choices. This is

important, as prior studies show that real rewards produce more reliable estimates of preferences

(Smith, 1976). At the beginning of the survey, the subjects were told that one of their choices

would be randomly selected and played for real money. We paid a total of $16,020 in real



8
  For the four sets of risk aversion questions the certainty equivalent is not known, as the respondent compares two
lotteries. For these questions, we define the % risk premium as the percentage difference between the respondent’s
elicited indifference value and the indifference value of a risk-neutral decision maker.

                                                        13
incentives to 2,072 of the 2,703 eligible subjects who completed the survey. The American Life

Panel (ALP) was responsible for determining and making the incentive payments, and subjects in

the ALP regularly participate in and receive payment from the ALP surveys. The involvement of

the ALP should minimize the subjects’ potential concerns about the credibility of the incentives.

        An advantage of our experimental survey approach is that we can explicitly state the

probabilities, ensuring the subjects know the precise probabilities of all outcomes. This allows us

to measure preferences towards probabilities rather than beliefs about probabilities; in contrast, it

is extremely difficult to disentangle preferences and beliefs in purely observational studies. For

instance, the popularity of actuarially unfair extended warranties could result from either

probability weighting or overestimation of the probability of failure (e.g., Abito and Salant, 2017).


1.4.    The Probability Weighting Measure

        Using the six indifference values elicited from the probability weighting questions

described above, we create a probability weighting measure for each individual. First, we convert

the indifference values into percentage premiums relative to the expected value of the risky gamble

(Option A). For example, consider the 5% probability weighting question. Suppose a subject is

indifferent between Option A [5%, $42; 95%, $6] and Option B [100%, $8.25]. The expected value

of Option A is $7.80, implying a percentage risk premium for question PW5% of:

 7.80    8.25 ⁄7.80       5.8%. In this case, the premium is negative as the subject overweights

the low probability of winning a large prize and demands a certainty equivalent greater than the

expected value of the risky gamble.

        The risk premiums are summarized in the final column of Panel B in Table 1. On average,

for high probabilities, people demand large positive risk premiums. For small probabilities (5%

and 12%), however, people are willing to pay more than the expected value to own the lottery.


                                                 14
This pattern is consistent with overweighting of small probabilities. In contrast, this pattern is

inconsistent with any model of expected utility, including models that incorporate skewness

preferences (see Quiggin, 1993).

        Using these premiums, we create our non-parametric probability weighting variable,

Inverse-S, as follows:

           ‐             %           %           %             %          %          %   .              (4)

In the experimental literature, individuals switch from overweighting to underweighting

probabilities in the range between 25% and 50% (where the probability weighting function crosses

the diagonal in Figure 1).9 Thus this measure is simply the premiums in the overweighting range

less the premiums in the underweighting range. Higher values indicate a more pronounced

Inverse-S shape for the probability weighting function.

        This measure is parsimonious and it allows us to avoid assuming a specific functional form

for the probability weighting function. If individuals frame narrowly and utility function curvature

affects the responses, taking the difference between the percentage premiums reduces the influence

of curvature, because curvature affects all premiums similarly and is thus largely differenced out

of the measure. The cost of the tradeoff we have made in our survey design – limiting chaining to

avoid measurement error – is that it is theoretically possible for utility curvature to influence our

non-parametric measure of probability weighting. In practice, however, this possibility does not

appear to significantly affect the measure. As the summary statistics in the next section show,

Inverse-S does not have a high correlation with our measure of utility curvature (r = 0.09), and our

empirical results are theoretically inconsistent with Inverse-S measuring utility curvature.



9
 Note that a positive risk premium for the 25% question does not necessarily imply that the 25% probability is
underweighted. Instead, the effects of utility curvature may fully offset the effects of probability weighting.

                                                      15
Nevertheless, to ensure that Inverse-S does not inadvertently measure utility curvature, in

robustness tests we also jointly estimate utility curvature and probability weighting parameters

using parametric models.

         Specifically, we estimate utility curvature using CRRA utility and the probability

weighting function proposed by Prelec (1998, Eq. 3.1).10 The Prelec function has clear axiomatic

foundations and is well suited for very small and very large probabilities. The curve features a

fixed intersection point at p = 1/e = 0.37, which is consistent with experimental findings. As an

additional robustness test, we also estimate the parameter of the salience function proposed by

Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012, p. 1255). The salience function provides an intuitive

psychological foundation for why probability weighting occurs and its predictions are consistent

with empirically observed patterns. Online Appendix C provides details about the estimation of

both functions.


2. Data and Variables

2.1.    Data Sources: American Life Panel Survey and CRSP

         We fielded our survey module in the RAND American Life Panel11 from June 20 to July

19, 2017. The ALP includes several thousand households that regularly answer Internet surveys,

and households lacking Internet access at the recruiting stage are provided with a laptop and

wireless service to limit selection bias. To ensure that the sample is representative of the U.S.

population, we use survey weights provided by the ALP for all analyses and summary statistics


10
   Tversky and Kahneman (1992) propose an alternative functional form, but their specification suffers from two
significant drawbacks. First, for certain parameter values, the decision weights can be negative, resulting in a
preference for first-order stochastically dominated gambles (Ingersoll, 2008). Second, their specification generates an
artificial negative correlation between the curvature parameter of the utility function and the probability weighting
parameter (Fehr-Duda and Epper, 2012). Nevertheless, in unreported results, we estimate the Tversky and Kahneman
(1992) probability weighting parameter and find that it produces empirical results similar to those of the Prelec (1998)
parameter. Results are available upon request.
11
   For further information about the ALP see Online Appendix D and https://www.rand.org/labor/alp.html.

                                                          16
reported in this paper. In addition to the probability weighting variables, our module also collects

information on portfolio choice and some control variables. Other controls, such as demographic

and economic characteristics, are available from earlier ALP survey modules. The ALP invited

3,397 panel members and closed out the survey when 2,701 completed the survey, resulting in a

completion rate of 79.5%.

        Respondents who indicated that they held individual stocks were asked to list the names

(or tickers) of their five largest holdings. We match these names or tickers by hand to the CRSP

daily stock return database,12 and we then construct various measures of stock characteristics using

daily return data from July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017. We select this specific period since our survey

was fielded from June 20 to July 19, 2017. Table 2 provides summary statistics of the key variables

used in our study (Appendix Table A1 defines the variables).

                                           [Insert Table 2 here]


2.2.   Dependent Variables

       Fraction Allocated to Individual Stocks Conditional is the fraction of the respondent’s total

equity portfolio invested in individual stocks, conditional upon non-zero equity ownership. Among

stock market participants, the average fraction allocated to individual stocks was 45%. Calvet,

Campbell, and Sodini (2007, 2009) show that this fraction is a good proxy for portfolio

underdiversification. In addition, for the subsample of individual stock owners, we observe the

number of individual companies that they own. We find that, conditional on owning individual

stocks, half of the respondents held shares in only one or two individual companies, which is




12
  In our tests, we use only U.S. based common stocks. We are unable to match 12.1% of the reported holdings
because the holding was a foreign or private company, or because the reported name was ambiguous or unmatchable.

                                                      17
consistent with the fraction of the equity portfolio allocated to individual stocks being a reasonable

proxy for underdiversification.

        As an alternative measure of portfolio underdiversification, we also calculate the Relative

Sharpe Ratio Loss (RSRL) of each respondent (following Campbell, Calvet, and Sodini, 2007,

Eq. 7). We assume that the investor’s mutual fund holdings are in a market index fund (beta of one

and no idiosyncratic risk) and calculate the RSRL as follows:

                                                             ∙
                                      1                1         ,                               (6)


where      (   ) is the risk premium of the investor’s portfolio (market portfolio),      (    ) is the

standard deviation of the investor’s portfolio (market portfolio), and    is the beta of the investor’s

entire portfolio. One caveat is that we do not know the exact amount invested in each individual

stock, we know only the total amount invested in individual stocks. Hence, we assume that the

investor holds an equally weighted portfolio of individual stocks. The investor’s RSRL will equal

zero if he holds a fully diversified portfolio while larger values indicate underdiversification.

        We also generate several stock level measures of (expected) skewness using the CRSP

return data. Total Skewness is the skewness of daily stock returns. Following Kumar (2009),

Idiosyncratic Skewness is the skewness of the residuals from a two-factor model that includes the

market risk premium, RMRF, and its square, RMRF2. We include the square of the market risk

premium to remove loading on systematic skewness. Max. One-Day Return is the maximum one-

day return over the period, which Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011) argue is a good proxy for

investors’ beliefs about lottery-like payoffs. Idiosyncratic σ is the annualized standard deviation

of the residuals from a Fama and French (2015) five-factor model. Stock β is the average market

beta of the investor’s stock holdings. For respondents who own multiple stocks, we first average

across stocks for that person and then average across respondents, for the summary statistics
                                                  18
reported in Table 2. We perform the tests at the individual stock level and at the portfolio level

using the equal-weighted daily returns of the investor’s stockholdings.

       The final three dependent variables in Table 2 are summarized for the entire sample,

including subjects who do not own equities. Mutual Funds Only is an indicator variable equal to

one for the 8.3% of the respondents who own only equity mutual funds and no individual stocks.

Individual Stocks Only is an indicator variable equal to one for the 7.0% of the sample whose

equity ownership consists exclusively of individual company stocks and no equity mutual funds.

Both Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks is an indicator variable equal to one for the 8.6% of the

sample who own both equity mutual funds and individual stocks.13


2.3.   Control Variables

        All of the empirical tests control for demographic and economic characteristics including

age, sex, race, ethnicity, marital status, number of household members, education, employment

status, family income, and financial wealth. Including these variables controls for the potential

confounding effects they might have on household portfolio choice.

        Our ALP survey module also included additional questions to measure utility curvature,

numeracy, financial literacy, trust, and optimism.14 These variables mitigate against the potential

omitted variable bias that could occur from factors that are conceptually similar to probability

weighting. For example, utility curvature could be highly correlated with probability weighting.



13
   Our sample had a lower equity participation rate than that reported in some other studies as we exclude equity
ownership in 401(k) and other tax deferred plans. Such equity holdings may not reflect active choices by the
respondent, due to the U.S. Department of Labor’s acceptance of target date funds as an investment default. This
permits employees to be defaulted into holding equities instead of making active choices. For more on target date
funds and 401(k) plan investment options, see Mitchell and Utkus (2012). Further, employee ownership of publicly-
traded companies occurs primarily through tax deferred plans such as 401(k) and employee stock ownership plans
(see Curcuru, Heaton, Lucas, and Moore, 2010).
14
   Online Appendix D provides the exact wording of the questions to measure numeracy, financial literacy, trust, and
optimism.

                                                        19
Thus, in the regressions, we control utility curvature to ensure that our probability weighting

variable captures a component of preferences that is distinct from utility curvature. Our measure

of utility curvature is the average of the risk premiums from the four utility curvature questions

summarized in Panel A of Table 1.

       Optimism could influence the overweighting of small probabilities (i.e., optimists may

assume that small probability lotteries always resolve in their favor). Accordingly, we follow Puri

and Robinson (2007) and include a question assessing individuals’ subjective life expectancies;

this permits us to measure optimism by comparing subjective and objective life expectancies

(where the latter are derived from age/sex population mortality tables). We also control for

financial literacy which prior studies show has a strong association with financial decisions (e.g.,

Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2014; van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011). To ensure that

overweighting of small probabilities is not simply a proxy for low financial literacy, our survey

module also includes the “Big Three” financial literacy questions developed by Lusardi and

Mitchell (2007) for the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our index of financial literacy is the

number of correct responses to these questions; on average, respondents answered slightly more

than two questions correctly. The module also includes three questions to assess numeracy based

on the HRS and the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing, along with the trust question from the

World Values Survey, as Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) report a relation between trust and

portfolio choice.


2.4.   Probability Weighting

       Panel B of Table 1 summarizes the responses to the six probability weighting questions

from the ALP survey module. On average, subjects are risk-seeking for low probability questions

with p = 0.05 and p = 0.12; indeed, consistent with the overweighting of small probabilities, the


                                                 20
average risk premiums are negative (-7.1% and -2.3%, respectively). For these questions, the

required positive risk premium due to utility curvature is more than offset by the risk-seeking due

to probability weighting. For the p = 0.25 question, the average risk premium is 4.6%. At larger

probabilities, p = 0.5, 0.75 and 0.88, the average risk premiums increase to 15.1%, 22.8%, and

28.2%, respectively. Overall, the pattern in the average risk premiums is consistent with Inverse-S-

shaped probability weighting: overweighting of small probabilities and underweighting of high

probabilities.

        Our probability weighting variable, Inverse-S, is positive for 81% of the respondents,

indicating an inverse-S shaped probability weighting function,15 which is consistent with the

results from laboratory experiments using students (e.g., Abdellaoui, 2000; Bruhin, Fehr-Duda,

and Epper, 2010). Panel A of Table 3 summarizes the non-parametric probability weighting

measure, Inverse-S. Consistent with inverse-S shaped probability weighting in the general

population, on average the sum of the risk premiums for the three high probability questions

exceeds the sum of the risk premiums for the three low probability questions by 71 percentage

points. Panel A also shows there is substantial heterogeneity in probability weighting, which has

important implications for the finance literature as it may help explain the observed large

heterogeneity in portfolio allocations.

                                             [Insert Table 3 here]

        Panel B of Table 3 shows the pairwise correlations between Inverse-S and education,

utility curvature, numeracy, financial literacy, optimism, and trust. Although not the main focus

of our paper, these correlations help illustrate the underlying distribution of our Inverse-S

measure. The correlation between utility curvature and Inverse-S is low and positive (r = 0.092),


15
   Similarly, when we fit the Prelec (1998) weighting function jointly with a CRRA power utility function using all
ten questions, the majority (73%) of the respondents exhibit an inverse-S shaped function (see Online Appendix C).

                                                        21
with utility curvature explaining less than 1% (R2) of the variation in Inverse-S. To place this

small correlation in perspective, the average correlation among the risk premiums of the four

utility curvature questions in Panel A of Table 1 is r = 0.70 (demonstrating strong internal

consistency). Accordingly, Inverse-S and utility curvature appear to be separate components of

preferences.

       The correlations in Table 3 also provide evidence on the relation between Inverse-S and

proxies for intelligence. Panel B shows that Inverse-S is positively correlated with education,

numeracy, and financial literacy, although the magnitudes are small. Thus there is no evidence

that probability weighting is greater for individuals who are less intelligent or less educated; this

is consistent with Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilen (2010) who also find no relation between

education and probability weighting in the general population.

       Optimism could potentially lead to overweighting the probability of winning the lotteries.

However, this would decrease the risk premiums for all questions instead of generating a pattern

of risk-seeking for low probabilities and risk aversion for high probabilities. Because we

construct Inverse-S as the difference between risk premiums, any influence from optimism

should be approximately differenced out. Indeed, we do not find a significant correlation between

Inverse-S and optimism.


3. Probability Weighting and Household Portfolio Choice

       Next, we test the relation between probability weighting and household portfolio choice

decisions. For ease of interpretation, we standardize the Inverse-S variable so it has a mean of zero

and a standard deviation of one. Following Dimmock, Kouwenberg, Mitchell, and Peijnenburg

(2016), all specifications include controls for age, age squared, education, log(family income),

log(financial wealth), sex, white, Hispanic, log(number of household members), employment

                                                  22
status, and dummies for variables for which we imputed missing values. Our baseline

specifications also include controls for utility curvature, numeracy, financial literacy, optimism,

and trust.16 For all specifications, we report t-statistics calculated using robust standard errors.


3.1.    Probability Weighting and Equity Portfolio Underdiversification

         Table 4 shows the results of Tobit regressions in which the dependent variable is a measure

of portfolio underdiversification. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the fraction of the subject’s

equity holdings (individual stocks plus stock mutual funds) invested in individual stocks (see

Polkovnichenko, 2005; Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini, 2007). In Panel B, the dependent variable

is the Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss variable of Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007). In both panels,

the sample includes only those subjects with non-zero equity holdings. Column (1) includes no

additional variables; column (2) adds the economic and demographic controls; column (3) adds

our measure of risk aversion; and Column (4) adds controls for numeracy, financial literacy,

optimism, and trust.

                                               [Insert Table 4 here]

         Theoretical models predict that probability weighting will make underdiversified portfolios

more attractive due to their positive skewness (e.g., Shefrin and Statman, 2000; Polkovnichenko,

2005; Barberis and Huang, 2008; Jin and Zhou, 2008). As predicted by theory, Panel A shows a

significant and positive relation between Inverse-S and the fraction of equity holdings allocated to

individual stocks. The results are similar across all four columns and there is little change as

additional control variables are included. The coefficient reported in column (4) implies that a one



16
   Dimmock, Kouwenberg, Mitchell, and Peijnenburg (2016) find that ambiguity aversion relates to portfolio choices
of households. In our elicitation questions, all probabilities are known, so there is no ambiguity. For some respondents,
we have their measure of ambiguity aversion. The correlation between Inverse-S and ambiguity aversion is 0.05 and
our results do not change when we include this variable as control (results available upon request).

                                                           23
standard deviation increase in Inverse-S results in a 12.7 percentage point increase in the fraction

of the portfolio allocated to individual stocks (a 28.2% increase relative to the baseline allocation

of 45.0 percentage points).

         Panel B also show a significant positive relation between probability weighting and

portfolio underdiversification. In all columns, higher Inverse-S is associated with higher Relative

Sharpe Ratio Loss. Thus individuals who overweight small probability tail events hold portfolios

with lower Sharpe ratios than could have been obtained with similar levels of systematic risk. The

coefficient reported in column (4) implies that a one standard deviation increase in Inverse-S

results in a 4.3% lower Sharpe ratio, relative to the market index. To interpret the economic

magnitude of these results, we use the return loss measure of Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007,

Eq. 11). Our results imply that for a one-standard deviation increase in Inverse-S the average

(median) stockholder loses $2,504 ($351) per year.17

         The results in Panel B are generally similar to those in Panel A, though the sample size is

smaller because some respondents do not provide stock identifiers or the identifiers cannot be

matched to specific individual stocks.18 Given the similarity of the results, and because the two

proxies for underdiversification have a correlation of 0.9, in the remainder of the paper we report

results only for the Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks.




17
   The dollar return loss is the additional expected dollar return an investor could have received given her overall level
of risk. It is calculated by fixing the investor’s overall portfolio risk, but replacing the (uncompensated) idiosyncratic
risk with (compensated) systematic risk.
18
   In particular, 40 respondents did not report the name or ticker of any of their holdings and 56 respondents gave
names or tickers that could not be matched as they reported holdings that were not domestic common stocks or could
not be matched to a single security.

                                                           24
3.2.    Alternative Measures of Probability Weighting Preferences

          Our main analyses use a parsimonious non-parametric measure for the Inverse-S

parameter.19 As a robustness test, we estimate two alternative versions of the baseline specification

in which we replace Inverse-S with a parametrically-estimated probability weighting measure.

First, we use the functional form proposed by Prelec (1998, Eq. 3.1) because it has clear axiomatic

foundations and is widely used in the decision sciences literature. In this specification, we use a

parametric measure of risk aversion that was jointly estimated along with the probability weighting

parameter. Second, we use the functional form proposed by Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer

(2012, p. 1255) in their model of salience because it provides a clear and intuitive explanation for

why probability weighting occurs. The correlations between the non-parametric Inverse-S measure

and the alternative measures by Prelec (1998) and Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012) are 0.75

and 0.78, respectively.

          The results are presented in Panel A of Table 5. Both of the parametric measures are

defined so that higher values indicate greater probability weighting. Consistent with earlier tables,

we standardize these variables to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. For both

parametric measures of probability weighting, the results are similar to those in the main

specification. Hence, our results are robust to using this alternative method to separate probability

weighting from utility curvature.




19
   To demonstrate that the results are not driven by outliers, Appendix Table A2 reports results from specifications
that use three alternative measures of Inverse-S: a rank transformation for which zero indicates the lowest value of
Inverse-S and one the highest, an indicator variable equal to one if the subject’s Inverse-S value is above the median,
and an indicator variable equal to one if the subject’s Inverse-S value is above 25% (in which case we can reasonably
assume the person has Inverse-S shaped probability weighting preferences). In all three specifications there is a
positive and significant relation between Inverse-S and the fraction of equity allocated to individual stocks.

                                                          25
3.3.   Measurement Error in Preference Elicitation

       A large literature, beginning with Harless and Camerer (1994) and Hey and Orme (1994),

shows that subjects often give inconsistent responses to questions designed to elicit preferences.

If such errors are pure noise, this will reduce the power of tests but not introduce bias. If, however,

errors in elicited preference are correlated with errors in actual decisions (e.g., holding an

undiversified portfolio), this could potentially affect inferences. Our ALP module includes several

features that allow us to empirically address this issue. First, we included the check questions

described earlier to test the internal consistency of subjects’ choices. Second, the ALP module

recorded the amount of time subjects spent on each question, which allows us to identify subjects

who answered the elicitation questions unusually quickly. Accordingly, Panel B of Table 5 reports

results for two restricted subsamples, which exclude subjects who made more than three mistakes

on the check questions or who spent less than 1.5 minute on the probability weighting questions.

The results are similar to those in the full sample for both of the restricted samples, suggesting that

our main results are not driven by measurement error in elicited preferences or by individuals who

failed to understand the elicitation questions.

                                        [Insert Table 5 here]


4. Probability Weighting and Individual Stock Characteristics

       Probability weighting has implications not just for the choice between mutual funds and

individual stocks, but also for the type of individual stocks an investor chooses. Investors who

overweight the probabilities of tail events should select individual stocks with high positive

skewness, but they will not exhibit a preference for high systematic risk (e.g., see Barberis and

Huang, 2008; Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink, 2010). Investing in a positively skewed stock is




                                                  26
appealing because the investor has a chance, albeit a small one, of becoming rich if that company

becomes the “next Apple.”

        Our survey module asked subjects who owned individual stocks to list the names (or

tickers) of their five largest individual stock holdings. The five largest holdings encompass the

entire portfolio of most individual stockholders in the sample; about half hold only one or two

stocks, and 75% hold five or fewer. As described in Section 2.2., we match these stocks to the

CRSP daily stock return database and construct various stock characteristics that measure

skewness: Total Skewness, Idiosyncratic Skewness, Max. One-Day Return, and Idiosyncratic σ.

Note that we include Idiosyncratic σ because prior papers argue it is a good proxy for expected

positive skewness (e.g., Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink, 2010), and not because probability weighting

implies a preference for idiosyncratic risk itself. We also calculate the market beta, Stock β, as a

measure of systematic risk.

        Table 6 shows regression results for the five dependent variables described above. The key

independent variable is Inverse-S, the sample includes only subjects with individual stockholdings,

and all models include the full set of controls. In Panel A, the unit of observation is an individual

stockholding (e.g., there are three observations for an investor who holds three stocks) and standard

errors are clustered by individual. In this panel, the focus is on the specific type of stocks selected.

In Panel B, the unit of observation is the investor’s entire equity portfolio, and the dependent

variables are characteristics calculated from the returns of an equally-weighted portfolio of the

investor’s stockholdings combined with equity mutual fund holdings. In this panel, the focus is on

the investor’s overall equity portfolio and the characteristics account for portfolio level

diversification effects.

                                        [Insert Table 6 here]



                                                  27
           Columns (1) to (3) show that Inverse-S is significantly and positively related to Total

Skewness, Idiosyncratic Skewness, and Max. One-Day Return. Investors with higher probability

weighting choose stocks that have high expected positive skewness. Column (4) of Panel A shows

that Inverse-S has a positive and significant (at the 10% level) relation with idiosyncratic risk (a

proxy for expected skewness), however this relation is not significant in the portfolio level results

shown in Panel B.

           Column (5) shows that the relation between Inverse-S and systematic risk, measured by

Stock β, is neither statistically nor economically significant. Thus, the overall pattern of results in

Table 6 is that investors with high Inverse-S choose to hold portfolios with high expected positive

skewness but not higher systematic risk. Importantly, this pattern is precisely what is implied by

probability weighting. It is not, however, an obvious implication of alternative explanations. For

example, if Inverse-S inadvertently measured risk-seeking preferences, it would imply higher

positive skewness and higher systematic risk.

           These results also relate to two streams of the literature that that argue probability

weighting explains observed behaviors in financial markets. First, although our data do not allow

us to directly test the relation between probability weighting and asset pricing, the results in this

section are consistent with studies of positive skewness and asset pricing. For instance, Boyer,

Mitton, and Vorkink (2010), Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), Conrad, Dittmar, and Ghysels

(2013), Conrad, Kapadia, and Xing (2014), and Barberis, Mukherjee, and Wang (2016) show that

stocks with positive expected skewness have abnormally low returns.20 Barberis and Huang (2008)

argue that probability weighting can cause positively skewed securities to have low returns. Our

results support the findings of these asset pricing studies, by providing direct evidence that



20
     Relatedly, Wang (2017) shows undervaluation of securities with negative expected skewness.

                                                         28
individuals who overweight small probabilities exhibit a preference for positively skewed

securities. Second, the results in this section are consistent with several papers that argue financial

institutions design products that cater to investor’s probability weighting preferences (Henderson

and Pearson, 2011; Li, Subrahmanyam, and Yang, 2018). These products are popular despite

having large negative abnormal returns.


5. Preference, Probability Unsophistication, or Financial Knowledge?

         Thus far, we have interpreted probability weighting as a component of preferences rather

than a misunderstanding of the underlying probabilities. In other words, we posit that subjects

(approximately) understand the underlying probabilities but, when maximizing their preference

functions, they use weighted rather than actual probabilities. In this section, we consider two

closely-related alternative explanations based on miscalibration of the underlying probabilities

rather than preferences towards probabilities: (1) Probability unsophistication – that some

individuals have difficulty with probabilistic reasoning, and this difficulty affects both their

elicited Inverse-S values and their portfolio choices; and (2) Limited financial knowledge – that,

for some reason, Inverse-S is correlated with a lack of financial knowledge. For these alternative

explanations, probability weighting and underdiversification represent clear mistakes. That is, if

high Inverse-S respondents were educated about probabilistic reasoning or financial markets, they

would likely make different choices. With preferences, on the other hand, such interventions would

not result in different choices.21




21
   Note that even if probability weighting does reflect preferences, it can still be considered a mistake, as it constitutes
a violation of the independence axiom. Nevertheless this it is a fundamentally different type of mistake and one that
is more difficult to change.

                                                            29
5.1.      Preference or Probability Unsophistication

           The first alternative explanation is based on probability unsophistication. For example,

subjects with limited quantitative reasoning skills may have difficulty evaluating questions

involving probabilities, and such cognitive limitations could also cause investment errors. This

explanation appears unlikely based on the summary statistics presented in Panel B of Table 3,

which show that Inverse-S has a small but significantly positive correlation with education,

numeracy, and financial literacy. Nevertheless, we perform additional tests using two restricted

samples. In column (1) of Table 7, the sample includes only subjects with a college degree

(undergraduate or graduate). In column (2), the sample includes only subjects who correctly

answer all three of the numeracy questions. In both restricted samples, and consistent with the full

sample results, Inverse-S has a significant positive relation with portfolio underdiversification.

These results suggest that Inverse-S does not reflect poor quantitative reasoning.

                                                 [Insert Table 7 here]


5.2.      Preference or Limited Financial Knowledge

           The second alternative explanation is that Inverse-S may be correlated with a lack of

financial knowledge. For example, some subjects may simply be unaware of the benefits of

diversification or fail to understand financial risks, resulting in investment errors,22 and this

investment behavior may be correlated with Inverse-S. A priori, however, it is not obvious why a

lack of financial knowledge would be correlated with Inverse-S. Indeed, a key advantage of

eliciting probability weighting preferences using lotteries instead of natural events is that we can

clearly and unambiguously define the relevant probabilities, limiting the scope for beliefs to affect

subjects’ responses (for further discussion see Barberis, 2013b, p. 614).


22
     For instance, von Gaudecker (2015) finds that underdiversification is related to low financial literacy.

                                                             30
      We test this alternative using two restricted samples. In column (3) of Table 7, the sample

includes only subjects who correctly answer all three financial literacy questions. In column (4),

the sample includes only subjects who correctly answer the question “Please tell us whether this

statement is true or false. `Buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer return than a single

company stock.’” In the latter sample, subjects correctly state that a mutual fund is usually safer

than an individual stock. The results in these restricted samples are generally similar to those in

the full sample. Inverse-S is positively associated with portfolio underdiversification, even for

investors who understand the risks associated with underdiversification. These subjects do not

choose individual stocks because they misunderstand the risks; rather, they choose to hold

individual stocks despite knowing they are riskier than mutual funds.

       Overall, this section suggests that the relation between Inverse-S and underdiversification

is due to preferences towards probabilities, rather than probabilistic unsophistication or a lack of

knowledge about the risks of underdiversification. This finding contributes to the discussion about

whether probability weighting constitutes a “mistake,” in the sense that if people were told that

their behavior violated an axiom, they would be expected to reverse their choices (e.g., Fehr-Duda

and Epper, 2012; Barberis, 2013a; Barberis, 2013b). Our results are consistent with early

experimental studies finding that people are unwilling to change choices violating the

independence axiom even after the axiom is explained to them (see MacCrimmon, 1968; Slovic

and Tversky, 1974).


6. Probability Weighting and Participation in Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks

       Next, we broaden the analysis to consider non-participation in equity markets, as well as

the choice between individual stocks versus stock mutual funds by those who do participate. For

these tests, the theoretical predictions are less clear than for the tests discussed above. If an

                                                 31
investor’s choice set includes only the risk-free asset and a mutual fund (or market index), prior

studies show that probability weighting can cause non-participation due to first-order risk

aversion23 (e.g., Chapman and Polkovnichenko, 2011; De Giorgi and Legg, 2012; He,

Kouwenberg, and Zhou, 2018). When an individual stock is added to the choice set, however,

theory is not well developed and the predictions are less clear. On the one hand, probability

weighting implies first-order risk aversion, which makes any equity investment, including

individual stocks, less attractive. On the other hand, probability weighting implies a preference for

positive skewness, which makes individual stocks more attractive. Thus, probability weighting can

result in non-participation or portfolio underdiversification, depending on a subject’s beliefs about

the risks and skewness of individual stocks. Hence the net effect of probability weighting is an

empirical question.

         Table 8 shows the results of multinomial logit models in which the dependent variable,

Portfolio Choice, takes one of four values: Non-Participation, Mutual Funds Only, Individual

Stocks Only, and Both Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks. Classic financial theory predicts that

individuals should (1) participate in the equity market and (2) hold a well-diversified portfolio

(e.g., the market portfolio). In other words, the rational benchmark is to invest in mutual funds;

both non-participation and underdiversification are possible behavioral deviations from rationality

due to probability weighting. Accordingly, Mutual Funds Only serves as a natural basis of

comparison and we use it as the excluded or reference category in the multinomial model.

                                               [Insert Table 8 here]




23
   Epstein and Zin (1990), Segal and Spivak (1990), and Chapman and Polkovnichenko (2011) show that the
probability weighting in rank-dependent utility implies first-order risk aversion (i.e., that the investor does not become
locally risk neutral as the size of a potential investment becomes small).

                                                           32
       The results show that subjects with higher Inverse-S are more likely to choose either non-

participation or individual stock ownership, and they are thus less likely to own only equity mutual

funds. The economic magnitudes implied by the coefficient estimates are large. For instance, the

coefficient in column (1) implies that a one standard deviation increase in Inverse-S raises the

probability of choosing Non-Participation instead of Mutual Funds Only by one-third (e0.290 =

1.34). Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in Inverse-S raises the probability of choosing

Individual Stocks Only instead of Mutual Funds Only by 39.8%, and choosing Both Mutual Funds

and Individual Stocks instead of Mutual Fund Only by 31.1%.

       The interpretation of the multinomial logit results comes with a caveat, however, as

theoretically whether high Inverse-S results in non-participation or underdiversification depends

on the subject’s beliefs about expected equity returns, risk, and individual stock skewness (e.g.,

He, Kouwenberg, and Zhou, 2018). Unfortunately, we lack data on beliefs about return

distributions, and so we cannot disentangle why some high Inverse-S subjects choose not to

participate in the stock market while others buy positively-skewed individual stocks.

       We emphasize that the pattern of results in Table 8 is broadly consistent with the theoretical

predictions of probability weighting, while it is inconsistent with most alternative interpretations

of our measure. For example, if Inverse-S inadvertently measured utility curvature (risk aversion),

it would be positively related to non-participation but negatively related to underdiversification.

Alternatively, if Inverse-S inadvertently measured optimism, it would be negatively related to non-

participation. Instead, however, Inverse-S is positively related to non-participation.


7. Conclusion

       This paper is the first to provide direct evidence linking probability weighting and portfolio

underdiversification. We measure probability weighting using real incentives in a survey module

                                                 33
fielded in a large and nationally representative sample of the U.S. population. Using our new

Inverse-S metric, we demonstrate that most individuals exhibit probability weighting – they

overweight low probability tail events – though there is also substantial heterogeneity. Next we

evaluate how probability weighting preferences relate to household portfolios, and find that higher

probability weighting is associated with underdiversification. Among investors who own

individual stocks, we also show that probability weighting is associated with higher positive stock

skewness. Further, we find evidence consistent with probability weighting being a component of

preferences, rather than the result of probability unsophistication or lack of financial knowledge.

       The implied economic magnitudes of our results are large; a one-standard deviation higher

Inverse-S implies a cost to the average (median) stockholder of $2,504 ($351) per year.

Furthermore, probability weighting increases the dispersion of portfolio returns, pushing people to

either not participate or hold positively skewed portfolios. This will lead to increased heterogeneity

in realized investment returns, which potentially exacerbates wealth inequality (e.g., Bach, Calvet,

and Sodini, 2017; Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell, 2017; Fagereng et al. 2018).




                                                 34
References
Abdellaoui, Mohammed. 2000. Parameter-Free Elicitation of Utility and Probability Weighting
   Functions. Management Science 46, 1497-1512.
Abito, Jose Miguel, and Yuval Salant. 2017. The Effect of Product Misperception on Economic
   Outcomes: Evidence from the Extended Warranty Market. Working paper, University of
   Pennsylvania.
Albuquerque, Rui. 2012. Skewness in Stock Returns: Reconciling the Evidence on Firm Versus
   Aggregate Returns. Review of Financial Studies 25, 1630-1673.
Allais, Maurice. 1953. Le Comportement de L’Homme Rationnel Devant le Risque: Critique des
   Postulats et Axiomes de L’Ecole Américaine. Econometrica 21, 269-290.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini. 2017. Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill
   in the Portfolios of the Wealthy, Working paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici, and Robert Whitelaw. 2011. Maxing Out: Stocks as Lotteries and
   the Cross-Section of Expected Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427-446.
Barberis, Nicholas C. 2013a. Thirty Years of Prospect Theory in Economics: A Review and
   Assessment. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, 173-196.
Barberis, Nicholas C. 2013b. The Psychology of Tail Events: Progress and Challenges. American
   Economic Review (Papers & Proceedings) 103, 611-616.
Barberis, Nicholas C., and Ming Huang. 2008. Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability
   Weighting for Security Prices. American Economic Review 98, 2066-2100.
Barberis, Nicholas C., Abhiroop Mukherjee, and Baolin Wang. 2016. Prospect Theory and Stock
   Returns: An Empirical Test. Review of Financial Studies 29, 3068-3107.
Blume, Marshall E., and Irwin Friend. 1975. The Asset Structure of Individual Portfolios and Some
   Implications for Utility Functions. Journal of Finance 30, 585-603.
Booij, Adam S., Bernard M.S. van Praag, and Gijs van de Kuilen. 2010. A Parametric Analysis of
   Prospect Theory’s Functionals for the General Population. Theory and Decision 68, 115-148.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2012. Salience Theory of Choice under
   Risk. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1243-1285.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. Salience and Asset Prices. American
   Economic Review (Papers & Proceedings) 103, 623-628
Boyer, Brian, Todd Mitton, and Keith Vorkink. 2010. Expected Idiosyncratic Skewness. Review
   of Financial Studies 23, 169-202.
Boyer, Brian, and Keith Vorkink. 2014. Stock Options as Lotteries. Journal of Finance 69, 1485-
   1527.
Bruhin, Adrian, Helga Fehr-Duda, and Thomas Epper. 2010. Risk and Rationality: Uncovering
   Heterogeneity in Probability Distortion. Econometrica 78, 1375-1412.


                                               35
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2007. Down or Out: Assessing the
   Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115, 707-474.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2009. Measuring the Financial
   Sophistication of Households. American Economic Review (Papers & Proceedings) 99, 393-
   398
Camerer, Colin. 1995. Individual Decision Making, In: J. Kagel and A. Roth, eds., Handbook of
  Experimental Economics Princeton: Princeton University Press: 587-703.
Chapman, David A., and Valery Polkovnichenko. 2011. Risk Attitudes Towards Small and Large
   Bets in the Presence of Background Risk. Review of Finance 15, 909-927.
Conrad, Jennifer, Robert F. Dittmar, and Eric Ghysels. 2013. Ex Ante Skewness and Expected
   Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 68, 85-124.
Conrad, Jennifer, Nishad Kapadia, and Yuhang Xing. 2014. Death and Jackpots: Why Do
   Individual Investors Hold Overpriced Stocks? Journal of Financial Economics 113, 455-475.
Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore. 2010. Heterogeneity and
   Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence. In: Y. Ait-Sahalia and L.P. Hansen, editors, Handbook
   of Financial Econometrics: Tools and Techniques, Elsevier, 337-382.
De Giorgi, Enrico G., and Shane Legg. 2012. Dynamic Portfolio Choice and Asset Pricing with
   Narrow Framing and Probability Weighting. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Controls 36,
   951-972.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg. 2016.
   Ambiguity Aversion and Household Portfolio Choice Puzzles: Empirical Evidence. Journal of
   Financial Economics 119, 559-577.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. 1990. ‘First-Order’ Risk Aversion and the Equity Premium
   Puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 387-407.
Erner, Carsten, Alexander Klos, and Thomas Langer. 2013. Can Prospect Theory be Used to
   Predict an Investor’s Willingness to Pay? Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 1960-1973.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2018. Heterogeneity and
   Persistence in Returns to Wealth. NBER working paper 22822.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2015. A Five-Factor Asset Pricing Model. Journal of
   Financial Economics 116, 1-22.
Fehr-Duda, Helga, and Thomas Epper. 2012. Probability and Risk: Foundations and Economic
   Implications of Probability-Dependent Risk Preferences. Annual Review of Economics 4, 567-
   593.
Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar. 2008. Equity Portfolio Diversification. Review of
   Finance 12, 433-463.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. Trusting the Stock Market. Journal of
   Finance 63, 2557-2600.


                                              36
Harless, David W., and Colin F. Camerer. 1994. The Predictive Utility of Generalized Expected
   Utility Theories. Econometrica 62, 1251-1289.
He, Xue Dong, Roy Kouwenberg, and Xun Yu Zhou. 2018. Inverse S-Shaped Probability
   Weighting and Its Impact on Investment. Mathematical Control & Related Fields,
   forthcoming.
Henderson, Brian J., and Neal D. Pearson. 2011. The Dark Side of Financial Innovation: A Case
   Study of the Pricing of a Retail Financial Product. Journal of Financial Economics 100, 227-
   247.
Hey, John D., and Chris Orme. 1994. Investigating Generalizations of Expected Utility Theory
   Using Experimental Data. Econometrica 62, 1291-1326.
Ingersoll, Jonathan. 2008. Non-Monotonicity of the Tversky-Kahneman Probability-Weighting
   Function: A Cautionary Note. European Financial Management 14, 385-390.
Jin, Hanqing, and Xun Yu Zhou. 2008. Behavioral Portfolio Selection in Continuous Time.
    Mathematical Finance 18, 385-426.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions Under
   Risk. Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kelly, Morgan. 1995. All Their Eggs in One Basket: Portfolio Diversification of US Households.
   Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87-96.
Kumar, Alok. 2009. Who Gambles in the Stock Market? Journal of Finance 64, 1889-1933.
Li, Xindan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Xuewei Yang. 2018. Can Financial Innovation
    Succeed by Catering to Behavioral Preferences? Evidence from a Callable Options Market.
    Journal of Financial Economics 128, 38-65.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2017. Optimal Financial
   Knowledge and Wealth Inequality. Journal of Political Economy 125, 431-477.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles
   of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205-
   224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. The Economic Importance of Financial
   Literacy: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 52, 5-44.
MacCrimmon, Kenneth. 1968. Descriptive and Normative Implications of the Decision Theory
  Postulates. Risk and Uncertainty 3, 3-32.
Mitchell, Olivia S., and Steve P. Utkus. 2012. Target-Date Funds in 401(k) Retirement Plans.
   NBER working paper 17911.
Mitton, Todd, and Keith Vorkink. 2007. Equilibrium Underdiversification and the Preference for
   Skewness. Review of Financial Studies 20, 1255-1288.
Polkovnichenko, Valery. 2005. Household Portfolio Diversification: A Case for Rank-Dependent
   Preferences. Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467-1502.

                                              37
Prelec, Drazen. 1998. The Probability Weighting Function. Econometrica 66, 497-527.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson. 2007. Optimism and Economic Choice. Journal of Financial
   Economics 86, 71-99.
Quiggin, John. 1982. A Theory of Anticipated Utility. Journal of Economic Behavior and
   Organization 3, 323-343.
Quiggin, John. 1993. Generalized Expected Utility Theory: The Rank Dependent Model. Kluwer:
   Norwell, MA, USA.
Rieger, Marc O. 2012. Why Do Investors Buy Bad Financial Products? Probability Misestimation
   and Preferences in Financial Investment Decision. Journal of Behavioral Finance 13, 108-118.
Segal, Uzi, and Avia Spivak. 1990. First Order versus Second Order Risk Aversion. Journal of
   Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman. 2000. Behavioral Portfolio Theory. Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis 35, 127-151.
Slovic, Paul, and Amos Tversky. 1974. Who Accepts Savage’s Axiom? Systems Research and
   Behavioral Science 19, 368-373.
Starmer, Chris. 2000. Developments in Non-Expected Utility Theory: The Hunt for a Descriptive
    Theory of Choice under Risk. Journal of Economic Literature 38, 332-382.
Smith, Vernon L. 1976. Experimental Economics: Induced Value Theory. American Economic
   Review 66, 274-279.
Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F. Camerer, and Quang Nguyen. 2010. Risk and Time Preferences:
   Linking Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam. American Economic Review
   100, 557-571.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1992. Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative
   Representation of Uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
van de Kuilen, Gijs and Peter P. Wakker. 2011. The Midweight Method to Measure Attitudes
   Toward Risk and Ambiguity. Management Science 57, 582-599.
van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. Financial Literacy and Stock
   Market Participation. Journal of Financial Economics 101, 449-472.
von Gaudecker, Hans-Martin. 2015. How Does Household Portfolio Diversification Vary with
   Financial Literacy and Financial Advice? Journal of Finance 70, 489-507.
Yaari, Menahem E. 1987. The Dual Theory of Choice under Risk. Econometrica 55, 95-115.
Wakker, Peter P., and Daniel Deneffe. 1996. Eliciting von Neumann-Morgenstern Utilities When
  Probabilities are Distorted or Unknown. Management Science 42, 1131-1150.
Wang, Baolian. 2017. Probability Weighting and Asset Prices: Evidence from Mergers and
  Acquisitions. Working paper, Fordham University.



                                              38
Table 1: Questions to Elicit Utility Curvature and Probability Weighting
This table shows the questions used to elicit utility curvature and probability weighting. Panel A shows the four
questions used to elicit utility curvature and Panel B shows the six questions used to elicit probability weighting. All
results use ALP survey weights.

        Panel A: Utility Curvature Questions
                                  Option A                      Option B            Estimates of $X in Data
                            Probability Amount            Probability Amount        Mean Risk Premium %
        Questions RA$12        33%         $12               33%         $X         21.4         18.5%
                               67%          $3               67%         $0
        Questions RA$18          33%          $18              33%         $X        27.5          14.3%
                                 67%           $3              67%         $0
        Questions RA$24          33%          $24              33%         $X        34.8          15.6%
                                 67%           $3              67%         $0
        Questions RA$30          33%          $30              33%         $X        42.1          16.6%
                                 67%           $3              67%         $0

        Panel B: Probability Weighting Questions
                                   Option A                      Option B            Estimates of $X in Data
                             Probability Amount            Probability Amount        Mean Risk Premium %
        Questions P W5%         5%          $42              100%         $X          8.4         -7.1%
                                95%          $6
        Questions P W12%         12%           $42             100%         $X       10.6          -2.3%
                                 88%            $6
        Questions P W25%         25%           $42             100%         $X       14.3           4.6%
                                 75%            $6
        Questions P W50%         50%           $42             100%         $X       20.4          15.1%
                                 50%            $6
        Questions P W75%         75%           $42             100%         $X       25.5          22.8%
                                 25%            $6
        Questions P W88%         88%           $42             100%         $X       27.0          28.2%
                                 12%            $6




                                                          39
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Outcome and Control Variables
This table reports summary statistics for the variables used in our study. Variable definitions appear in Appendix Table
A1. The individual stock characteristics (Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss, Total Skewness, Idiosyncratic Skewness, Max.
One-Day Return, Idiosyncratic σ, and Stock β) are shown only for respondents who own individual stocks. All results
use ALP survey weights. The number of ALP respondents is N = 2, 671.

                                                                  Equity Owners                      All Respondents
 Variable                                                 Mean      Median        Std        Mean      Median      Std
 Outcome variables
 Fraction Allocated to Individual Stocks Conditional       0.45       0.50        0.41
 Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss                                0.19      0.08         0.23
 Total Skewness                                           -0.00      -0.02        0.79
 Idiosyncratic Skewness                                   -0.03      0.00         0.99
 Max. One-Day Return                                       0.07      0.05         0.05
 Idiosyncratic σ                                           0.18       0.15        0.12
 Stock β                                                   0.99       0.97        0.25
 Mutual Funds Only                                         0.35      0.00         0.48        0.08       0.00      0.28
 Individual Stocks Only                                    0.29      0.00         0.45        0.07       0.00      0.25
 Both Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks                   0.36      0.00         0.48        0.09       0.00      0.28
 Control variables
 Age                                                      52.26      54.00     17.18         47.84      47.00     16.51
 Female                                                    0.44       0.00      0.50          0.52       1.00      0.50
 Married                                                   0.66       1.00      0.47          0.59       1.00      0.49
 White                                                     0.89       1.00      0.31          0.76       1.00      0.43
 Hispanic                                                  0.07       0.00      0.26          0.19       0.00      0.39
 Number of Household members                               1.08       1.00      1.23          1.36       1.00      1.52
 Employed                                                  0.50       0.00      0.50          0.54       1.00      0.50
 Family Income (in $1000)                                100.93      87.50     58.23         71.34      55.00     53.36
 Financial Wealth (in $1000)                             310.53      43.00    2956.16        88.00      0.60     1353.56
 No College Degree                                         0.43       0.00      0.50          0.60       1.00      0.49
 Bachelor or Associate Degree                              0.33      0.00       0.47          0.27       0.00      0.44
 Master or Higher Degree                                   0.24       0.00      0.43          0.13       0.00      0.34
 Utility Curvature                                        0.16       0.12      0.23          0.16       0.13      0.24
 Numeracy                                                 2.66       3.00      0.62          2.39       3.00      0.83
 Financial Literacy                                       2.61       3.00      0.65          2.18       2.00      0.94
 Optimism                                                 1.74       1.73      8.13          0.42       0.57      9.81
 Trust                                                    1.97       2.00      1.34          1.71       2.00      1.36




                                                          40
Table 3: Probability Weighting in the U.S. Population
This table shows summary statistics on probability weighting in the U.S. population measured using our American
Life Panel (ALP) survey module. Panel A summarizes the Inverse-S measure. Panel B shows the pairwise correlations
between Inverse-S and variables measuring utility curvature, financial literacy, numeracy, education, optimism, and
trust. Education is a categorical variable ranging from 1 to 14. Panel C shows the percentage of respondents who
passed the consistency check round for each of the six probability weighting questions. The sample size is N = 2,671.
All results use ALP survey weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.


                   Panel A: Summary statistics Inverse-S measure
                   Measure Mean Standard Deviation Minimum                  Median    Maximum
                   Inverse-S 0.708           0.799           -1.809         0.731      2.955

                              Panel B: Bivariate correlations with Inverse-S measure
                              Variable                        Correlation
                              Education                       0.090***
                              Utility Curvature                0.092***
                              Numeracy                         0.109***
                              Financial Literacy               0.125***
                              Optimism                         0.012
                              Trust                             0.041**

                                 Panel C: Summary statistics consistency checks
                                 Question      Consistent       Inconsistent
                                 5% Question     71.6%              28.4%
                                 12% Question    73.4%              26.6%
                                 25% Question    77.5%              22.5%
                                 50% Question    71.8%              28.2%
                                 75% Question    71.3%              28.7%
                                 88% Question    75.5%              24.5%




                                                         41
Table 4: Probability Weighting and Underdiversification
This table reports Tobit regression results in which the dependent variables are proxies for underdiversification. In
Panel A, the dependent variable is Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the
Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss. This dependent variable is calculated using daily returns over the period July 1, 2016 to
June 30, 2017. In both panels, the key independent variable is Inverse-S. Column (1) includes a constant. Column
(2) includes a constant, missing data dummies, and controls for age, age-squared divided by one thousand, female,
married, white, Hispanic, number of household members, employment status, education, (ln) family income, and
(ln) financial wealth. Column (3) includes the same controls and constant as in column (2) plus a control for utility
curvature. Column (4) includes the same controls and constant as in column (3) plus controls for numeracy, financial
literacy, optimism, and trust. All results use ALP survey weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                        Panel A: Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks
                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)
                        Inverse-S               0.136** 0.121** 0.122**             0.127**
                                                (2.282)     (2.473)    (2.471)       (2.454)
                        Utility Curvature                              -0.022         -0.013
                                                                      (-0.101)      (-0.059)
                        Numeracy                                                      0.127
                                                                                     (1.327)
                        Financial Literacy                                         -0.220**
                                                                                    (-2.392)
                        Optimism                                                     -0.012
                                                                                    (-1.588)
                        Trust                                                         0.014
                                                                                     (0.324)
                        Demographic Controls         no        yes        yes           yes
                        Observations                741        741        741           741
                        Adj. R2                    0.010      0.038      0.038         0.050

                        Panel B: Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss
                                                   (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)
                        Inverse-S               0.047** 0.042**         0.043**    0.043**
                                                 (2.168)   (2.219)       (2.296)    (2.287)
                        Utility Curvature                                 -0.053     -0.042
                                                                        (-0.658)   (-0.536)
                        Numeracy                                                     0.021
                                                                                    (0.539)
                        Financial Literacy                                         -0.060*
                                                                                   (-1.887)
                        Optimism                                                     -0.004
                                                                                   (-1.485)
                        Trust                                                        0.000
                                                                                    (0.003)
                        Demographic Controls         no        yes        yes          yes
                        Observations                645        645        645         645
                        Adj. R2                    0.021      0.114      0.119       0.140




                                                         42
Table 5: Robustness: Alternative Inverse-S Measures and Measurement Error
This table reports Tobit regression results in which the dependent variable is Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks. In
Panel A, the key independent variables are two parametric alternatives to our Inverse-S measure; Prelec Inverse-S and
Salience Theory Inverse-S. In column (1), the probability weighting measure, Prelec Inverse-S, and utility curvature
parameter are jointly estimated assuming the functional form for probability weighting in Prelec (1998, Eq. 3.1)
and CRRA utility. In column (2), Salience Theory Inverse-S is estimated assuming the salience function in Bordalo,
Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012, p. 1255) and we include our baseline non-parametric utility curvature measure. Details
are in Online Appendix C. In Panel B, the key independent variable is Inverse-S. Column (1) excludes respondents
who made more than 3 errors on the consistency check questions. Column (2) excludes respondents who spend
less than 1.5 minutes on the probability weighting questions. All models include a constant, missing data dummies,
and controls for age, age-squared divided by one thousand, female, married, white, Hispanic, number of household
members, employment status, education, (ln) family income, (ln) financial wealth, numeracy, financial literacy, trust,
utility curvature, and optimism. All results use ALP survey weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                        Panel A: Alternative Inverse-S Measures
                                               Prelec Inverse-S Salience Theory Inverse-S
                                                        (1)                       (2)
                        Alternative Inverse-S        0.135**                    0.084*
                                                     (2.194)                    (1.704)
                        Full Controls                  yes                        yes
                        Observations                   734                        741
                        Adj. R2                       0.047                      0.045

                         Panel B: Robustness to Measurement Error
                                       Exclude Respondents Exclude Respondents
                                        More Than 3 Errors   Less Than 1.5 Minutes
                                                    (1)                        (2)
                         Inverse-S               0.155**                    0.120**
                                                 (2.532)                    (2.241)
                         Full Controls             yes                        yes
                         Observations              674                        724
                         Adj. R2                  0.053                      0.054




                                                           43
     Table 6: Probability Weighting and the Characteristics of Individual Stock Holdings
     This table reports the coefficients of OLS regressions. The key independent variable is Inverse-S. The dependent variables are generated using the characteristics
     of the stocks held by the subjects, and they are calculated using daily returns over the period July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017. In Panel A, the analyses are at the
     stock level and standard errors are clustered at the individual level. In Panel B, the analyses are at the portfolio level combining both mutual fund and individual
     stock allocations. Mutual funds are assumed to have similar Sharpe ratios. Individual stock allocations are assumed to be equally weighted and combined with
     mutual fund allocations using the reported amounts allocated to each category. In column (1), the dependent variable Total Skewness is skewness of daily returns.
     In column (2), the dependent variable Idiosyncratic Skewness is the skewness of the residuals from a two factor model (RM RF and RM RF 2 ). In column (3),
     the dependent variable Max. One-Day Return is the maximum one-day return. In column (4), the dependent variable Idiosyncratic σ is the annualized standard
     deviation of the residuals from the Fama-French five-factor model. In column (5), the dependent variable Stock β is the market beta of the investor’s stock holdings.
     All models include a constant, missing data dummies, and controls for age, age-squared divided by one thousand, female, married, white, Hispanic, number of
     household members, employment status, education, (ln) family income, (ln) financial wealth, numeracy, financial literacy, trust, utility curvature, and optimism. All
     results use ALP survey weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                              Panel A: Analysis at the stock level
                                             Total Skewness Idiosyncratic Skewness          Max. One-Day Return       Idiosyncratic σ   Stock β
44




                                                     (1)                   (2)                        (3)                   (4)            (5)
                              Inverse-S           0.111**               0.144***                   0.006**                0.012*          0.015
                                                  (2.524)                (2.742)                   (2.297)                (1.767)        (0.984)
                              Full Controls         yes                    yes                       yes                    yes            yes
                              Observations         1,174                  1,174                     1,174                  1,174          1,174
                              Adj. R2              0.071                  0.070                     0.049                  0.037          0.077

                             Panel B: Analysis at the portfolio level
                                            Total Skewness Idiosyncratic Skewness           Max. One-Day Return      Idiosyncratic σ    Stock β
                                                     (1)                   (2)                       (3)                   (4)            (5)
                             Inverse-S            0.098**               0.167***                   0.005*                 0.009          0.014
                                                  (2.094)                (2.702)                   (1.816)               (1.372)        (0.916)
                             Full Controls          yes                    yes                       yes                   yes            yes
                             Observations           439                    439                       439                   439            439
                             Adj. R2               0.078                  0.068                     0.023                 0.009          0.096
Table 7: Preference, Probability Unsophistication, or Financial Knowledge
This table reports Tobit regression results in which the dependent variable is Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks.
The key independent variable is Inverse-S. Column (1) includes only respondents that have a college degree, column
(2) includes only respondents that answer all three numeracy questions correctly, column (3) only includes respondents
that answer all three financial literacy questions correctly, and column (4) only includes respondents who correctly an-
swer the question "Buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer return than a single company stock." All
models include a constant, missing data dummies, and controls for age, age-squared divided by one thousand, female,
married, white, Hispanic, number of household members, employment status, education, (ln) family income, (ln) fi-
nancial wealth, numeracy, financial literacy, trust, utility curvature, and optimism. All results use ALP survey weights.
The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                     Highly Educated     High Numeracy       High Financial Literacy    Know Stocks Riskier Than
                       Subsample           Subsample               Subsample            Mutual Funds Subsample
                              (1)              (2)                      (3)                           (4)
    Inverse-S               0.116*           0.092*                  0.148**                       0.114**
                            (1.824)          (1.688)                 (2.396)                       (2.065)
    Full Controls             yes              yes                     yes                           yes
    Observations              584              567                     577                           634
    Adj. R2                  0.044            0.078                   0.075                         0.062




Table 8: Participation in Mutual Funds, Individual Stocks, and Both
This table reports the coefficients of a multinomial logit regression for Non-Participation, Individual Stocks Only,
and Both Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks. The excluded category is Mutual Funds Only. In column (1), the
dependent variable equals one if the respondent does not participates in the stock market. In column (2), the dependent
variable equals one if the respondent invests only in individual stocks. In column (3), the dependent variable equals
one if the respondent invests in both mutual funds and individual stocks. The key independent variable is Inverse-S.
The model includes a constant, missing data dummies, and controls for age, age-squared divided by one thousand,
female, married, white, Hispanic, number of household members, employment status, education, (ln) family income,
(ln) financial wealth, numeracy, financial literacy, trust, utility curvature, and optimism. All results use ALP survey
weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                 Non-Participation     Individual Stocks Only   Both Mutual Funds and
                                                                                  Individual Stocks
                                         (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                Inverse-S             0.290***                0.335**                    0.271*
                                       (2.693)                (2.395)                    (1.930)
                Full Controls                                   yes
                Observations                                   2,671
                Adj. R2                                        0.158




                                                           45
Figure 1: Probability Weighting Function
This figure shows an example of a probability weighting function. Pi is the cumulative probability of outcome i and
πi is the decision weight.

           w(P) 1

              πN




w(Pi)-w(Pi-1)=π i




               π1

                    0
                        0                                                               1
                           P1                      Pi-1        Pi                 PN-1 PN
                        worst ranks                                             best ranks




                                                          46
Figure 2: Optimal Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks
The figure displays the average optimal individual stock holdings as a % of total assets invested in equity. The investor
chooses her optimal investment in a negatively skewed mutual fund, a positively skewed individual stock (portfolio),
and a risk free asset. We use CRRA preferences and the probability weighting function specified in Prelec (1998, Eq.
3.1). For details see Online Appendix A.




                                                          47
Figure 3: Example of a Question to Elicit Utility Curvature




Figure 4: Example of a Question to Elicit Inverse-S




                                            48
Figure 5: Example of Question Rounds for a Probability Weighting Question
This figure shows an example of three rounds for a probability weighting question.




                                                        49
     Table A1: Variable Definitions

      Variable Name                             Definition
      Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks   Individual stock holdings as a % of total assets invested in equity
      Relative Sharpe Ratio Loss                1 minus the Sharpe ratio of the individual’s stock portfolio divided by the Sharpe ratio of the market index
      Total Skewness                            Average skewness of daily returns of the individual stocks
      Idiosyncratic Skewness                    Average skewness of the residuals of a two factor model (RM RF and RM RF 2 ) of the individual stocks
      Max. One-Day Return                       Average maximum one-day return of the individual stocks
      Idiosyncratic σ                           Average annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the FF 5-factor model of the individual stocks
      Stock β                                   Average market beta of the individual stocks
      Mutual Funds Only                         Indicator that respondent holds only stock mutual funds
      Individual Stocks Only                    Indicator that respondent holds only individual stocks
      Both Mutual Funds and Individual Stocks   Indicator that respondent holds both stock mutual funds and individual stocks
      Age                                       Age in years
      Female                                    Indicator for female
50




      Married                                   Indicator if respondent is married or has a partner
      White                                     Indicator if respondent considers himself primarily White
      Hispanic                                  Indicator if respondent considers himself primarily Hispanic
      Number of Household Members               Number of additional members in the household
      Employed                                  Indicator if respondent is employed
      Family Income                             Total income for all household members older than 15, including from jobs, business, farm, rental,
                                                pension benefits, dividends, interest, social security, and other income
      Financial Wealth                          The sum of checking and savings account, CDs, government and corporate bonds, T-bills, and stocks
      No College Degree                         Indicator if respondent had less than a bachelor or associate’s degree
      Bachelor or Associate’s Degree            Indicator if respondent completed a bachelor or associate’s degree
      Master or Higher Degree                   Indicator if respondent has a master or higher degree
      Numeracy                                  Number of numeracy questions answered correctly (out of 3 total; see Online Appendix)
      Financial Literacy                        Number of financial literacy questions answered correctly (out of 3 total; see Online Appendix)
      Utility curvature                         Average risk premium required for utility curvature lottery questions
      Optimism                                  Subjective life expectancy minus objective life expectancy (see Online Appendix)
      Trust                                     Ranges from 0 to 5; 0 corresponds to "you can’t be too careful" and 5 corresponds to "most people can be trusted"
Table A2: Inverse-S Robustness Tests
This table reports Tobit regression results in which the dependent variable is Fraction of Equity in Individual Stocks.
In column (1), the key independent variable is Inverse-S Rank, which is a rank variable of Inverse-S ranging from 0 to
1. In column (2), the key independent variable is Above Median Inverse-S Dummy, which equals one if Inverse-S is
above the median. In column (3), the key independent variable is Inverse-S Dummy which equals one if Inverse-S is
above 25%. All models include a constant, missing data dummies, and controls for age, age-squared divided by one
thousand, female, married, white, Hispanic, number of household members, employment status, education, (ln) family
income, (ln) financial wealth, numeracy, financial literacy, trust, utility curvature, and optimism. All results use ALP
survey weights. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)
                         Inverse-S Rank                        0.444**
                                                               (2.477)
                         Above Median Inverse-S Dummy                    0.235**
                                                                         (2.278)
                         Inverse-S Dummy                                             0.258**
                                                                                     (2.428)
                         Full Controls                           yes        yes        yes
                         Observations                            741        741        741
                         Adj. R2                                0.050      0.048      0.049




                                                          51
