NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOMES VS. TARGETED TRANSFERS:
ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Rema Hanna
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 24939
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24939

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. We thank Abhijit Banerjee, Amy Finkelstein
and Rohini Pande for helpful comments and discussions on these issues, Tim Taylor and the
editors of the JEP for helpful editorial suggestions, and Aaron Berman and Samuel Solomon for
helpful research assistance. This research was supported by a grant from the Australian
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24939.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Rema Hanna and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Universal Basic Incomes vs. Targeted Transfers: Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing Countries
Rema Hanna and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 24939
August 2018
JEL No. H53,O12
ABSTRACT
Developing country governments are increasingly implementing cash assistance programs to
combat poverty and inequality. This paper examines the potential tradeoffs between targeting
these transfers towards low income households versus providing universal cash transfers, also
known as a Universal Basic Income. We start by discussing how the fact that most households in
poor countries do not pay income taxes changes how we conceptually think about Universal Basic
Incomes. We then analyze data from two countries, Indonesia and Peru, to document the tradeoffs
involved. The results suggest that, despite the imperfections in targeting using proxy-means tests,
targeted transfers may result in substantially higher welfare gains than universal programs,
because for a given total budget they deliver much higher transfers to the poor. On the other hand,
targeted transfers do lead to more horizontal equity violations, and do create an implied tax on
consumption in the region where benefits are phased out. We discuss how alternative targeting
approaches, such as community-targeting and self-targeting, can be used to further improve
targeting in some situations.

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Rema_Hanna@hks.harvard.edu
Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics, E52-542
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24939

Of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals articulated by the United Nations, number one
is the elimination of extreme poverty by 2030. In recent years, the largest reductions in extreme
poverty worldwide have resulted from substantial economic growth in many emerging economies,
particularly China and India (Page and Pande 2018). While future growth should continue to
reduce poverty, it will not solve the problem by itself – both because a substantial amount of
poverty remains even in rapidly growing countries, and because sustained economic growth over
decades of the type seen in China is the exception, not the norm (Jones and Olken 2008).
Given these realities, there is a potentially important role for national-level transfer
programs that assist poor families in developing countries. Such programs are often run by
developing country governments. For example, China’s rural minimum living standard guarantee
(Dibao) program reaches nearly 75 million individuals (Golan, Sicular, and Umapathi 2017), while
Mexico’s conditional cash transfer program reaches 32 million individuals (World Bank 2014).
As countries become wealthier, a greater share of GDP usually goes to social transfer and insurance
programs (Chetty and Looney 2006), suggesting that these types of safety net programs are likely
to expand in many developing countries.
Many countries have implemented transfer programs that seek to target beneficiaries: that
is, to identify who is poor and then to restrict transfers to those individuals. In developed countries,
because one rarely observes true income-earning ability, targeting is usually based on income (see,
for example, Mirrlees 1971). But in developing countries, governments do not observe income for
the vast majority of the population who work in the informal sector, which typically includes most
of the poor. Imperfect targeting using various proxy measures for income leads to both inclusion
errors (giving the transfer to those who are not poor) and exclusion errors (failing to deliver the
transfer to poor individuals who slip through the cracks in the targeting protocol).
Given these challenges, some have begun to advocate for “universal basic income”
programs, which dispense with trying to identify the poor and instead provide transfers to
everyone. A universal basic income program is comparatively straightforward to implement – each
individual receives a fixed transfer, regardless of income – so the main challenge is to ensure that
each person receives the transfer only once. Although universal basic income programs distribute

1

the same value of transfer to everyone, including the very rich, if they are financed through
proportional or progressive taxation, they can still result in a substantial redistribution to the poor.
We begin by considering the universal basic income as part of the solution to an optimal
income-taxation problem, focusing on the case of developing countries, where there is limited
income data and inclusion in the formal tax system is low. We examine how the targeting of
transfer programs is conducted in these settings, and provide empirical evidence on the tradeoffs
involved between universal basic income and targeted transfer schemes using data from Indonesia
and Peru – two countries that run nationwide transfer programs that are targeted to the poor. We
conclude by linking our findings back the broader policy debate on what tools should be preferred
for redistribution, as well as the practical challenges of administering them in developing countries.

Conceptual Connections and Underpinnings
Universal Basic Incomes and the Tax Schedule
A universal basic income is usually conceived of as a fixed transfer given to everyone,
regardless of income level. Such programs are fairly rare in practice, with prominent examples
coming from places with substantial natural resource revenues. For example, Alaska’s Permanent
Fund transfers a fixed amount – usually between $1,000 and $2,000 per person, per year – to every
citizen of the state. Iran implemented a similar program starting in 2011 (Salehi-Isfahani and
Mostafavi-Dehzooei 2017). Common arguments that are made for universal basic income
programs include their ease of implementation and low administrative costs, because the
government does not have to verify income. Another common argument is that such programs do
not distort labor supply, because the payments do not decline if you work more, but as we discuss
below, this claim about non-distortion turns out to be more complex.
For most developing economies, a substantial universal basic income would need to be
financed via domestic taxation, because official development assistance is a small fraction of
government budgets. For example, for countries ranked as “upper middle-income” by the World
Bank, such as Peru, Lebanon, and the Dominican Republic, overall tax revenue was approximately
157 times the amount of net official development assistance received in 2010. This pattern also
holds for “lower middle-income” countries, such as Indonesia, India, and Morocco, where overall
2

tax revenue in 2010 was approximately 14 times the amount of development assistance received.
It is only with “low-income” countries, such as Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Mozambique, that
official development assistance exceeded tax revenue – that is, approximately 1.2 times the amount
of tax revenue in 2010.1
Given that a universal basic income would need to be financed through taxation, one can
recast universal basic transfers as a particular feature of a tax schedule, as described by Saez (2002)
and illustrated by Figure 1. We assume that a universal basic income program is fully financed by
a progressive income tax schedule. Pre-tax income 𝑦 for an individual appears on the horizontal
axis, and after-tax income 𝛼 𝑦 for that individual is on the vertical axis. The tax paid by a
household is therefore given by 𝑦

𝛼 𝑦 ). The universal basic income – the transfer given to

everyone, regardless of their income – is thus equal to 𝛼 0 on the vertical axis. This perspective
suggests that any tax-and-transfer system that has the feature that 𝛼 0

0 can be thought of as a

universal basic income.
Figure 1 plots a progressive tax schedule with and without a fully financed universal basic
income. The universal basic income acts as an intercept shifter, raising post-tax income at 𝑦

0.

However, it will not raise everyone’s after-tax income by that same amount, because to finance
the universal basic income out of income taxes, marginal tax rates have to increase for someone.
This illustrates three points about the universal basic income: 1) it can make use of income data
collected through the tax system; 2) although a universal basic income acts as an intercept shifter,
raising post-tax income at 𝑦

0, it will not raise everyone’s after-tax income by the same amount;

and 3) as emphasized by Saez (2002), it is not the case that a universal basic income has no labor
supply distortions, since there is still a tax on labor income, and in particular adding the universal
basic income to the tax schedule requires adjusting the tax schedule elsewhere.

Data on taxes and official development assistance come from the World Development Indicators. Data on social
spending
come
from
the
International
Labor
Organization
Social
Security
Inquiry
[http://www.ilo.org/dyn/ilossi/ssimain.home?p_lang=en]. For each comparison above, we include only countries with
non-missing data for both variables (for example, we sum and compare tax revenue and official development
assistance only among countries with non-missing data for both). Country classifications are from the World Bank,
where low-income countries have 2015 gross national per-capita income of $1,025 or less; lower middle-income,
$1,026–4,035; upper middle-income, $4,036–12,475; and high-income, $12,476 or more.

1

3

From this perspective, the tradeoffs involved in adding a universal basic income to an
income tax schedule, therefore, depend on how the rest of the income tax schedule is adjusted to
satisfy the government budget constraint: both in terms of overall redistribution and how this
affects potential distortionary effects from the increased marginal tax rates that introducing a
universal basic income will necessitate. Saez (2002) discusses these conditions in detail. He also
discusses the conditions under which an optimal income tax schedule is likely to feature a universal
basic income – essentially, when intensive labor supply elasticities (the effects of changes in wages
on hours of existing workers) are larger than extensive labor supply elasticities (the effect of
changes in wages on hours of workers entering or leaving the labor force).
Having a program that assures a transfer for those with zero or very low income could also
be important for reasons outside the basic Mirrlees (1971)/Saez (2002) model. For one, could
provide insurance for individuals to take risks: for example, choosing to plant a crop that could be
high-return but has a non-trivial probability of zero income might be a more attractive option with
a universal basic income in place. The same ideas could be applied to other types of risky decisions,
such as human capital investment (Stantcheva 2014).

What about Poor Countries, Where Tax Systems are Less Developed?
In a developed country, where the government observes income for most people and can
redistribute through the tax system, this framework is broadly applicable. However, if we are
interested in the poor in developing countries, it is more complicated.
In less developed countries, substantial activity occurs in the “informal sector” that
includes casual labor, undocumented firms, and small farms. Thus, most individuals are outside
the tax net. Jensen (2016) documents that the share of employment for which people pay any taxes
(and therefore for which the government observes income) rises substantially with real per-capita
national GDP. Conversely, in most poor countries, the government just does not observe any
information about income for most people, and in particular, for the poor. In Indonesia and Peru –
the two countries that we explore in detail below – Jensen reports that 87.5 percent and 79 percent
of the employed population has incomes below the tax exclusion thresholds, respectively. Jensen
argues that these thresholds emerge from the work environment – when most people work in large
4

firms, the government can easily observe incomes (Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez 2016). But when
there is a large informal sector, or many people work on their own or in tiny firms, as is true in
most developing countries (Hsieh and Olken 2014), this is not possible.
Why does this matter? Figure 2 illustrates an example tax schedule with and without a
universal basic income when most individuals – in developing countries, often upwards of 80
percent of people –fall into a tax-exempt region. In the tax-exempt region, everyone receives the
same net transfer regardless of whether they are in the 5th or 70th percentile of income (unlike in
Figure 1). However, to introduce a similarly-sized universal basic income, one would need to
increase the marginal tax rates of those relatively few people inside the tax net substantially more
to finance it. To the extent that these are formal or particularly productive firms, such a tax increase
may have disproportionally larger efficiency consequences.
In this way, a universal basic income will function somewhat differently in a country with
a large number of people outside the tax net. In particular, 1) the net transfer could be the same for
the majority of the population (all those below the tax-exempt cutoff), which may not be the
optimal resource allocation if we want to focus on the poorest of the poor; and 2) relatively few
households will be able to contribute to the financing, which may restrict the overall level of funds
available for the universal basic income. In countries with large numbers of people outside the tax
net, any attempt to target resources toward the poorest of the poor requires using an alternative
data collection approach beyond the income tax system.
This discussion thus far has assumed that a universal basic income is financed entirely
through income taxes (individual or corporate), which in developing countries are paid primarily
by the very top earners. Combined, these taxes, plus import duties (which are also likely to fall on
the rich), make up about 42 percent of tax revenue for low and middle income countries (World
Bank 2018), with the rest of tax revenue in these countries coming from consumption taxes, which
are typically proportional to consumption. A universal basic income financed through a
combination of an income and consumption tax will look closer to a combination of Figures 1 and
2. In this case, one can tax back some of the transfer on households below the income tax
exemption through the consumption tax, but the fact that the tax is generally proportional to
consumption limits the flexibility in doing so.

5

How to Target the Poor in Developing Countries
How can developing country governments target the poor when income is not observable?
When the government observes a proxy for income and targets households based on that, one has
what is termed a “proxy-means test.” The implementation of a proxy-means test is typically based
on large, periodic quasi-censuses of the population, focusing on those most likely to be poor. In
these censuses, government enumerators go door-to-door, often visiting millions of households.
Some countries, such as India, do target government assistance based on self-reported and
unverified income, but this is the exception, not the rule, because people can easily lie if there is
no way of verifying it. Instead, government census enumerators typically ask about assets, all of
which are easy to observe directly. Examples might include ownership of items such as televisions
and refrigerators, the type of material used in one’s roof, floor, and walls, the number of rooms in
one’s house, and so on.
The government uses these assets to predict incomes (or per-capita consumption, which
can be easier to measure in survey data). Thus, eligibility for benefits is based on predicted, rather
than actual, income. This method is quite common, and is used in both large countries such as
Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, Mexico, and the Philippines, as well as a number of smaller countries,
ranging from Burkina Faso to Ecuador to Jamaica (Fiszbein and Schady 2009).
There are a variety of methods to predict income (or consumption), but they all share basic
features. The government takes another dataset that was collected in a low-stakes context (e.g. one
collected not for targeting, but rather just for research purposes), and therefore for which
households have no strong incentive to lie. In this dataset, the government observes the same asset
variables as in the proxy-means census and also observes a measure of poverty, such as a
household’s monthly income or per-capita expenditure. The government then estimates a
regression with the measure of poverty as the dependent variable and the assets as explanatory
variables. The proxy-means score is the predicted income or expenditure, which the government
can calculate for any household using the coefficients from that regression.

6

The government then can set a threshold for eligibility and distribute benefits to all
households with predicted incomes below the threshold.2 If the government sets the threshold level
for eligibility in such a way that it covers the entire population, then a “targeted” program
effectively becomes a universal basic income. Because predictions of income, of course, happen
with error, targeted systems based on a proxy-means test will feature both inclusion and exclusion
errors.

Comparing Targeted Programs to a Universal Basic Income:
Examples from Indonesia and Peru
Depending on the policy context, either a universal basic income or a targeted program
may dominate the other. Besley (1990) provides an early discussion of tradeoffs between the two
approaches. Here, we illustrate the tradeoffs using data from Indonesia and Peru, two countries
that have targeted, nationwide transfer programs. The simulations described this section
(particularly Figures 4 and 5) are broadly similar to other analyses of targeting performance, such
as Ravallion (2009), Alatas et al. (2012), and particularly Klasen and Lange (2016).
Indonesia has a number of targeted transfer programs, ranging from conditional cash
transfers (Program Keluarga Harapan or PKH) to scholarships for poor students (Bantuan Siswa
Miskin or BSM) to subsidized health insurance for the poor. In addition, the government has
periodically conducted nationwide, unconditional cash transfers (previously called Bantuan
Langsung Tunai or BLT, and more recently called Bantuan Langsung Sementara Masyarakat, or
BLSM). The government has conducted nationwide targeting censuses approximately every three
years since 2005, and then uses proxy-means testing.
Several different types of transfer programs also exist in Peru, ranging from nutritional
subsidies (Vaso de Leche) to subsidized health insurance (Seguro Integral de Salud, or SIS) to
Once the eligibility threshold for a program is set, most developing countries do not vary the level of assistance
among the eligible group. Part of the reason is that the imprecision of estimating income based on assets is well
understood. Also, it is easier for reasons of politics and transparency just to explain that a given program provides all
who are eligible with a certain benefit. However, countries do try to replicate the more sophisticated version of linking
level of benefits to predicted income levels by having programs with different eligibility cutoffs. For example, in
Indonesia, the conditional cash transfer program called PKH targets roughly the bottom 7-10 percent of households
(the “very poor”), but those who are in roughly the bottom 40 percent of the national income distribution (the “nearpoor”) can qualify for subsidized health insurance even if they cannot access PKH.
2

7

conditional cash transfers for poor families (Programa Nacional de Apoyo Directo a los Más
Pobres, or Juntos). Eligibility for these programs is determined by a proxy-means targeting system,
the Sistema de Focalización de Hogares (SISFOH), which assigns households a numerical index
to identify eligible households and then allows each individual program to select its final list of
beneficiaries. Recertification occurs every three years via a new targeting survey.
For simplicity, we choose one targeted program per country to explore (although the basic
results would continue to hold if we chose a basket of programs). In Indonesia, we focus on the
Bantuan Langsung Tunai (BLT) program, a temporary and periodic unconditional cash transfer to
poor households. The program was implemented first in 2005-2006, and then again in 2008-2009
and in 2014, to help offset shocks in fuel prices. Beneficiaries receive the equivalent of
approximately $100 over the course of one year (World Bank 2012). For Peru, we focus on the
Juntos program, which is a conditional cash transfer to mothers designed to subsidize child health
and education. Beneficiary households receive a monthly transfer of 100 soles (approximately
$30). Both programs target roughly one-third of the population.

Predicting Income with Proxy Measures
To simulate targeting in the programs, we obtained household-level data from the
Indonesian National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS) and the Peruvian National Household
Survey (ENAHO), both for the years 2010-2011. Both datasets are used for targeting in the
respective countries. Our sample contains 263,705 households in Indonesia and 46,305 households
in Peru. Both surveys contain the complete set of asset variables used in targeting, as well a
measure of actual per-capita consumption, so we can use these datasets to examine targeting
accuracy. For each country, we randomly divide the observations into equally sized “training” and
“test” sets. In the training set, we regress monthly household per-capita consumption on the actual
indicator variables used in each country’s respective proxy-means test formula: 82 variables in
Indonesia; 72 variables in Peru (regressions provided in the online appendix). We then predict
monthly per-capita consumption in the test sets using the coefficients from the training regressions,
and use this “predicted per-capita consumption” for targeting purposes in the simulations below.

8

The predictors used are not perfect. The typical fit we found of these regressions (the R2)
is between 0.53 and 0.66 – so while the regressions have a good amount of explanatory power,
they also lead to prediction errors: exclusion errors of excluding some who should have been
eligible (with true per-capita consumption below the poverty line) and inclusion errors of
including some who should not have been eligible (with true per-capita consumption above it) –
akin to Type I and Type II errors in statistics.
We apply the formula to the other half of our datasets that was not used for estimation (the
“test” datasets). We can then use the actual per-capita consumption measure within the survey to
assess whether the formulas accurately predict a household’s place in the income distribution.
Figure 3 shows the results, plotting actual per-capita consumption against predicted per-capita
consumption. The figure shows four regions: correctly included (bottom-left region), correctly
excluded (top-right region), inclusion error (top-left region), and exclusion error (bottom-right
region).
For the exposition here, we are simplifying the actual process by which each country
determines benefit eligibility. In modeling these two programs, we intend to target households
below 1.5 times the poverty line in Indonesia (about 33 percent of our sample), and households
below the poverty line in Peru (about 28 percent of our sample). However, in reality, the monetary
poverty line varies by year, urban/rural zoning, and province (in Indonesia) or geographic region
(in Peru). In Peru, instead of predicting income directly, the national household targeting system
(SISFOH) actually produces a numerical index of household poverty using proxy means-testing
variables; it then also incorporates certain other household circumstances (such as consumption of
water and electricity) when determining final eligibility. In Indonesia, the proxy means-testing
models are estimated separately by region of the country to allow for the fact that how consumption
of goods predicts income varies across different areas. In both countries, prediction using proxymeans tests is used to determine eligibility for various transfer programs, but each individual
program may edit the list of ultimate beneficiaries.

The Inclusion vs. Exclusion Error Tradeoff
Our first step is to explore the tradeoffs in the errors of inclusion and exclusion. One way
to think about the government’s problem is that by setting different cutoffs for program eligibility
9

𝑐, the government can choose the balance between the inclusion and exclusion errors that it makes.
Figure 3 plots the results with one example 𝑐, but one can see how varying 𝑐 (i.e. shifting the
vertical line in Figure 3 to the left or to the right) would change the balance of inclusion and
exclusion error.3 Say that the government aims to assist those who are actually poor. Intuitively,
not giving out the program to anyone (and setting 𝑐

0) means no transfers, and hence very high

exclusion error, because you are excluding everyone below the poverty line, but it also means no
inclusion error, since no higher-income people who should not be receiving assistance are getting
it. In contrast, a universal basic income (setting 𝑐

∞) implies no exclusion error since all of the

poor will get it, but very high inclusion error, because all the higher-income people are getting
assistance, too. For values in between, varying the cutoff value 𝑐 allows us to trace out the tradeoffs
between inclusion error and exclusion error available to the government.
These tradeoffs can be seen in in Figure 4, Panel A, where we plot data from the proxymeans test regressions that we estimated for Indonesia and Peru. We define a poverty level 𝑦 ∗ for
each country. We then define exclusion errors as failing to give benefits to those below some actual
per-capita income 𝑦 ∗ , and inclusion errors as giving benefits to those above per-capita income 𝑦 ∗ .
These curves, also known as ROC curves,4 plot inclusion error on the 𝑥-axis and 1 - exclusion
error on the 𝑦-axis, and trace out the tradeoff between exclusion error and inclusion error obtained
by varying the cutoff value 𝑐, holding the target actual per capita consumption 𝑦 ∗ fixed. For
Indonesia, we plot the ROC curve with 𝑦 ∗ equal to the 1.5x the government’s poverty line, and for
Peru, we plot the curve with 𝑦 ∗ equal to the government’s poverty line. In the appendix, we
compare curves setting 𝑦 ∗ equal to 0.75x the poverty line, which we call the “extreme poor,” 1.0x
the poverty line, and 1.5x the poverty line, or the “near poor.” The tradeoff is similar in all three
cases.
Panel A of Figure 4 confirms the fundamental tradeoff between inclusion and exclusion
error. In both Indonesia and Peru, to reach 80 percent of the intended beneficiaries (exclusion error
3 Note that these definitions of inclusion and exclusion error are with respect to a household’s true poverty status
(above or below poverty line based on true per-capita consumption; that is, holding the horizontal line in Figure 3
fixed), not with respect to the program design (that is, the eligibility choice 𝑐, shown by the vertical line).

ROC stands for “receiver operating characteristic.” It refers to a situation in which there is binary classifier – in
this case, the proxy-means score combined with different cutoff levels c – and shows the tradeoff between true
positives from false positives as one varies the cutoff level c.

4

10

of 20 percent), the government would need to tolerate an inclusion error of between 22-31 percent.
Further reductions in exclusion error come at the cost of much higher inclusion error.
While more sophisticated prediction methods (like more flexible prediction equations,
machine learning methods, and so on) can improve on these predictions (McBride and Nichols
2016), the fundamental tradeoff between inclusion and exclusion error that we document here
remains. Also, these graphs ignore the very real problems of incomplete take-up by those who are
deemed eligible, which could affect both the targeted programs and universal transfers. We will
revisit this topic below.

Narrowly vs. Widely Targeted Programs with a Fixed Budget
If the government only cares about making sure the poor have access to transfers of some
type, a universal basic income – which eliminates exclusion error entirely – may seem attractive.
However, as we move to the right in Figure 4, Panel A, by raising the cutoff level 𝑐, more and
more people become eligible for the transfer. If the total budget for the program is fixed, then the
transfer given per-person falls as we move to the right on this curve. Therefore, moving to the right
on the curve not only changes the tradeoff between exclusion error and inclusion error, but holding
the total program budget fixed, also changes the amount given.
Figure 4, Panel B, shows this other aspect of the tradeoff, graphing the level of cash
transfers disbursed per beneficiary under Indonesia’s BLT program and Peru’s Juntos program
under different targeting schemes, as defined by different levels of the cutoff income 𝑐. The
transfer level to eligible households steeply falls as you allow more people into the program.
Again, the universal basic income can be thought of as the rightmost extreme point, with zero
exclusion error and the smallest per-capita transfer for a given budget.
One argument for a universal basic income is that you can save on the administrative costs
of targeting, because you do not need to do the periodic targeting census. To capture this, in Figure
4, Panel B we add back in the costs of targeting for the UBI, so the benefits per-capita ticks up
very slightly at the universal basic income point (𝑐

∞ . However, the administrative cost of

targeting is very low relative to the benefits given out: Indonesia spends roughly $42 million every
three years for updating its Unified DataBase, with annual operating costs of about $1.1 million
11

(for further information, see Bah, Nazara, and Satriawan 2015). Peru spends roughly $10.8 million
every three years with annual operating costs of about $1.1 million (Peru MEF 2008). Per year,
this translates to an additional 0.8 and 1.7 percent of the overall transfer budget in Indonesia and
Peru, respectively. Thus, administrative costs are not a large driver of benefits level, especially in
comparison to the level of inclusion error one chooses, which is why the discontinuity at the
universal basic income point is barely visible in Figure 4, Panel B.

Welfare Comparisons
For a given total budget, which point on the graph is “best” depends on various social
welfare weights. For example, it is necessary to put a weight on inclusion errors, while
remembering that just because someone is not below the cutoff line does not imply that the social
value of them receiving a transfer is zero – indeed, generically such a transfer still has a positive
value. It is necessary to put a weight on exclusion errors: how costly is it to the government for
some deserving people not to obtain the transfer, merely because of errors in the targeting formula?
It is necessary to put a weight on the implied reduction in per-capita transfer to the very poorest
that is required to accommodate the increased number of beneficiaries. It is also necessary to take
a stand on how much more the poor value a given dollar than the rich (i.e., the difference in
marginal utilities for poor and rich), which is given by the curvature on the utility function. For a
given amount of targeting, one can then determine the per-capita transfer.
Deciding how to parse the tradeoffs between inclusion error, exclusion error, and per-capita
benefits requires specifying a social welfare function that allows the government to evaluate the
social benefits from these different decision rules, while holding the overall size of the transfer
constant. Here, we will evaluate the total social welfare using what is commonly known as a
constant relative risk-aversion utility function:
𝑈

∑ 𝑦

𝑏
1 𝜌

where 𝑦 is household 𝑖’s pre-tax per-capita income, 𝑏 is the per-capita benefits assigned to
household 𝑖, and 𝜌 is a coefficient of relative risk-aversion, where higher values of 𝜌 put higher
weights on transfers received by the very poor. By comparing the sum of 𝑈 for different
12

configurations of benefits, one can see which scheme produces the highest net social welfare
judged by this metric.
Of course, conclusions will depend on the particular value of 𝜌 one chooses. Here, we
calculate the social welfare from programs with different levels of targeting in Figure 5 for each
country for a particular value of 𝜌
with 𝜌

1 and 𝜌

3. (As a robustness check, we also calculated social welfare

5, and the conclusions are qualitatively similar.) Specifically, in Figure 5, we

plot social welfare evaluated against the amount of inclusion error for a fixed budget B, for both
countries. As before, social welfare will increase discontinuously for the universal basic income
because no targeting costs are incurred in this program.
The key finding from this graph is that narrowly targeted programs – those focused on
distributing large benefits-per-capita to the poorest of the poor – appear to achieve much higher
utility levels than less narrowly targeted programs, including but not limited to a universal basic
income. In Indonesia, the socially optimal program calculated in this way targets about 19 percent
of the population, with inclusion error of 7.4 percent and exclusion error of 58.2 percent; for Peru,
the socially optimal program targets approximately 18 percent of the population, with inclusion
error of 6.4 percent and exclusion error of 52.4 percent.
Even programs that appear somewhat badly targeted could still dominate a universal basic
income. To understand where the programs in Indonesia and Peru fall in terms of social welfare,
we can see where the current level of inclusion error roughly falls. Bah, Bazzi, Sumarto, and Tobias
(2014) calculate that inclusion error in the 2008 Indonesian BLT program was roughly 34 percent,
which is higher than the social optimum, but still substantially more narrowly targeted than a
universal basic income. Peru’s Juntos is at roughly 6.4 percent inclusion error, according to Robles,
Rubio, and Stampini (2015), suggesting that the rate of inclusion error is close to the social
optimum as calculated here.
In short, this analysis illustrates that targeting could be an effective mechanism in
improving overall social welfare, even with high levels of targeting error. However, note that this
discussion focuses only on tradeoffs involved in choosing whether to target transfers based on one
survey – that is, how to identify the poor in the static situation of a given point in time. In reality,
income status varies over time. Thus, the size of the relative errors will also depend on how
frequently the government collects asset data from households and how much churn in and out of
13

poverty occurs over time. Because targeting surveys are infrequent, actual targeting errors may be
higher than what we report here, and so one may want to account for this factor in determining
where to place the cutoff.

Other Challenges with Targeted Transfers
In choosing between a broader approach like a universal basic income and a more narrowly
targeted approach, several other important considerations arise in addition to inclusion and
exclusion errors. We consider four issues: breadth of political support, horizontal equity,
transparency, and labor market distortions.
First, we have focused on the case where the government has a fixed budget available for
the transfer program. However, political support for redistribution may be much higher if everyone
gets a “piece of the pie” (Gelbach and Pritchett 2002). Thus, as inclusion error increases, the overall
amount of funding available for transfers may increase. As the elasticity between the total budget
and the number of beneficiaries increases, universal transfers become more attractive (Klasen and
Lange 2016).
Second, the principle of horizontal equity holds that each person who has the same relevant
conditions should be treated the same. Transfer programs using proxy-means tests will have errors
in the prediction algorithm – and so they do not treat all people with the same utility of receiving
the benefits identically. For programs where the income cutoff for providing benefits is near-zero,
horizontal equity violations are (mechanically) close to zero, because almost no households receive
the program. Violations of horizontal equity are also mechanically zero for universal basic income:
by definition, if all households receive the transfer, then all households are treated the same.
Using our data and simulations for Peru and Indonesia, we looked at all households that
were included in the program at a given cutoff level of predicted income, and then calculated the
percentage of households 5 percentiles above or below that were also included; for households that
were excluded, we calculated the percentage of households 5 percentiles above or below that were
also excluded. At each cutoff point, we average these percentages over all households. Figure 6
shows the resulting measure of horizontal equity and how it varies as we vary the cutoff 𝑐, and
hence the inclusion error, of the program. We find that for cutoff levels in an intermediate range,
14

in which inclusion errors were roughly 30-40 percent, it is common to find that horizontal equity
is violated about 20 percent of the time. In addition to the unfairness they represent, violations of
horizontal equity can also lead to significant political problems.
A third important consideration involves the logistics of implementing targeting schemes
in a low-capacity (and potentially corruption-prone) environment. A proxy-means test has an
inherent lack of transparency, because eligibility is determined based on a weighted sum of many
different variables, which would be hard for ordinary citizens to understand even if the weights
were public information. Moreover, the proxy-means test formula (essentially the weight that the
coefficients in the regression would give to each asset) are kept secret because if they are known,
households (perhaps in cooperation with better-informed agents) may strategically misreport or
hide assets to make sure they fall under the cutoff. Using data from Colombia, Camacho and
Conover (2011) show that over time as the formula became known, there was substantial bunching
of reporting right below the eligibility cutoff. Given this concern, governments not only keep the
formula confidential, but they also tweak the coefficients every few years.
Thus, it is very difficult for citizens to verify that a proxy-means test scheme is being
implemented properly. If a local official says to a citizen, “Sorry, you’re not on the list of eligible
beneficiaries,” villagers have little recourse, because their true eligibility is hard to verify. On the
other hand, a universal basic income is inherently transparent, in the sense that everyone is entitled
to a transfer.
The evidence suggests that greater transparency of the lists of eligible beneficiaries may be
important to effective implementation of a proxy-means test-based scheme. In Banerjee et al.
(2018), we and our co-authors worked with the Indonesian government on a randomized
experiment in which heads of all villages received a list of who was eligible to receive subsidized
rice, but in a treatment group of villages, the central government also mailed out an “identification
card” directly to citizens deemed eligible. Mailing identification cards to the beneficiaries resulted
in treatment villages receiving 26 percent more subsidized rice compared to control villages – and
reduced “leakage” (rice that, as far as we can tell, was not distributed to anyone) by between 33
and 58 percent.
Finally, targeting may introduce distortions. These distortions can, in theory, reduce the
quantity of work, either because income effects decrease the incentive to work, or because phasing
15

out the transfer over some income range decreases the after-tax-and-transfer effective marginal
wage in that range. To study the income effects, we and our co-authors re-examined seven different
randomized trials of government-run cash transfer programs throughout the developing world
(Banerjee et al. 2017), which provided between 4 and 20 percent of household consumption to
beneficiaries for many years. We found no systematic evidence that any of these programs reduced
labor supply.
Regarding the second channel – effects that come through changing the after-tax-andtransfer effective marginal wage – a vast literature in developed economies has studied the
alteration in work incentives that arises either from the changes in the income tax rate formula
needed to raise the revenue to pay for the transfer, or from the effective marginal tax rate imposed
by the phase-out of the transfers. In the US context, for example, the earned-income tax credit
provides a negative marginal income tax rate at the very bottom of the tax schedule (thus
subsidizing work), and was designed with these concerns in mind, given that there is evidence in
the United States that labor supply elasticities are higher on the extensive margin (working at all
vs. staying out of the labor force) than on the intensive margin (how much you work) (for example,
Eissa and Leibman 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001; Saez 2002). Relatedly, a major goal of the
1996 US welfare reform was to redesign the welfare system to reduce very high marginal tax rates
that came from rapid phase-outs of benefits in certain income tax ranges. As discussed above, a
universal basic income program does not eliminate this issue entirely, although the relevant
distortions to think about for a universal basic income are the increases in marginal income tax
rates required to finance the universal basic income.
These issues are related, but somewhat different, to what happens with a proxy-means test
in a developing economy. In this setting, the labor supply distortion will involve the implied tax
rates from the phase-out of the program for those who are eligible, but will also be smoothed out
by the error rate in the formula for those who have equivalent income (or consumption) but are not
designated as eligible by the formula.5 Perhaps ironically, a more accurate proxy-means test
To see this, recall that for each income level 𝑦, one can think of the proxy-means test as producing a probability of
receiving the benefit 𝑝 𝑦 . The fact that the proxy-means test has predictive power implies that 𝑝 will be decreasing
0), but the fact that there are inclusion and exclusion errors means that 𝑝 𝑦 is continuous.
with income (𝑝 𝑦
Abstracting away from the rest of the tax system, one can then write a household’s expected after-tax income as
𝛼 𝑦
𝑦 𝑝 𝑦 𝑏. One can therefore think of the “expected tax rate” imposed by the proxy-means test system as
𝑝 𝑦 𝑏.

5

16

formula, with fewer errors, may actually induce more labor supply distortions, since fewer errors
in the proxy-means formula will imply that that some households face a steeper effective tax rate
over some range. More noise in the proxy-means test formula, making the proxy-means formula
less predictive, tends to smooth out the phase-out region, and will thus tend to reduce the implicit
tax rate that a population faces from a targeted benefit.
For example, Figure 7 illustrates the implied marginal tax rates from actual proxy-means
test formulas and from a counterfactual formula where we double the amount of noise, making the
proxy-means test less predictive than it is in practice. As the figures show, doubling the amount of
noise in the proxy-means test formula reduces the implied marginal tax rate for the poor, but it
increases the implied marginal tax rate somewhat for the middle-class, who face some probability
of receiving the benefits (due to inclusion error) that is declining in their income. If households
are aware that increasing their income or consumption may reduce their chances of being eligible
for benefits, they may reduce their labor supply accordingly, though documenting to what extent
this happens empirically remains an important direction for future research.
The proxy-means test puts particularly heavy weight on certain assets. While the precise
proxy-means test formula may not be known, households do observe which variables the
government asks about – that is, they know that the poverty census asks about televisions,
refrigerators, and so on. The potential for linkage from ownership of such assets to reduced
eligibility for benefits puts a particularly high implicit tax rate on these particular assets, which
could lead households to reduce their consumption of these assets. For example, from 1696 to
1851, Britain imposed a tax on windows, which were easily observable to the taxman – but this
led to the construction of buildings with very few windows, low light, and poor ventilation (Glantz
2008; Oates and Schwab 2015). It is not clear that households understand the formula in a proxymeans test enough to distort their purchases of assets, and we are currently studying this question
in cooperation with the government of Indonesia.

Alternative Methods of Targeting
Our discussion has assumed that the government produces an eligibility list for targeted
transfers through a proxy-means test based on household-level data. However, we now consider
17

two other methods of targeting: community-based targeting and a system that imposes costs and
lets people assist in targeting themselves. We also consider how conditional cash transfer
programs, popular throughout the developing world, can be thought of in relation to the targeting
challenge.

Community-Based Targeting
In a community-based targeting process, a fixed number of program slots are allocated to
a given community, such as a hamlet (a part of a village). The hamlet, through a participatory
meeting of some type, decides who among them is most in need of the transfer.
One might think that such a system would be unpopular: after all, who wants to discuss
their income in front of their neighbors and peers? (Not Americans, as discussed in Card et al.
2012!) In addition, one might fear that such a system is prone to elite capture: for example, a
powerful headman might manipulate the meeting to put his nephew on the list of beneficiaries.
However, when we and our co-authors tried such an approach experimentally in Indonesia and
compared it experimentally, we found that citizens vastly preferred the community based-approach
to a data-based proxy-means test. In addition, the community approach did a much better job of
identifying those households who self-assessed themselves to be poor, and was only slightly worse
at identifying the poor based on per-capita consumption levels. Furthermore, there was no
detectable elite capture (Alatas et al. 2012).
A community targeting approach avoids some key pitfalls of the proxy-means test related
to transparency and horizontal equity. The process for allocating beneficiaries under the
community approach was completely public and transparent – unlike the proxy-means test that
relies on secret formulas to produce a list of eligible and ineligible households that villagers do not
really understand. It also addresses the perception of a horizontal equity problem – from the
perspective of the villagers, if it is broadly agreed that person A is poorer than person B, they can
ensure that person A receives the transfer.
Community targeting also has the potential to be less distortionary. In Alatas et al. (2012),
we showed that communities appear to target based on earning potential, rather than actual
earnings. For example, widows – who have lower earning potential than households headed by
18

men – appear to be more likely to be ranked as poor, even conditional on their actual income level.
The same is true for education: those with high education, and hence high earning power, are
ranked as wealthier than their actual income alone would imply. To the extent that communities
target based on earning potential rather than actual income, such a system has the potential to be
less distortionary not only than a proxy-means test, but also than a regular income tax.
Community targeting has important limitations – in particular, it does not readily allow for
comparisons across locations, and if implemented at scale, could lead households to take actions
to hide their income from their neighbors. But its potential advantages may mean that it is worth
wider consideration as part of the targeting toolkit.

Differential Costs of Take-Up and Self-Targeting
A substantial fraction of households who are eligible for a government benefit program do
not enroll in the program. Moffitt (2003) and Currie (2006a) summarize an extensive US-based
literature studying the reasons for incomplete take-up, including the stigma of receiving benefits,
incomplete information, and both the psychic and real costs of applying for programs.
A universal basic income may reduce the take-up problem, because the government can in
theory send the checks to everyone automatically. This is, of course, easier said than done. Currie
(2006b) shows that take-up is incomplete even in programs with universal eligibility in the United
States, and a developing country setting raises additional issues. For example, the government
would need to have a list of every individual, without duplications. Most developing countries do
not have such lists, although India has been working over the past decade to issue a unique,
unduplicated and biometrically authenticated identity number through the Aadhaar program to
each of its more than 1 billion citizens. Even with such a list, a country would need a way of
automatically delivering the transfer. In most developing country contexts, most people do not
have an address, let alone a bank account, so the idea of “mailing a check to the address on file”
would not work. This suggests that even if enrollment is in theory automatic, in practice some
take-up decisions and enrollment actions will need to occur.
However, having some type of costly take-up can also provide a benefit by helping in the
targeting of a program. If the cost/benefit of taking up a program is higher for the rich than for the
19

poor, the poor may be more likely to take up the program. This idea – that having an “ordeal”
associated with receiving a program can improve the ability to screen among rich and poor – was
developed by Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982), and further studied in the context of take-up
decisions by Kleven and Kopczuk (2011). A key result is that one may want to offer a transfer
program to all takers, but with the catch that signing up for the program entails a cost that is
differentially costly for the rich.
Workfare programs, such as those offered by the US Works Progress Administration in the
1930s and through the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) in India today,
operate on this principle. In the NREGA program, for example, any Indian in a rural area is entitled
to 100 days of work at the official minimum wage, and currently about 180 million people per year
are employed through the program, making it one of the largest (if not the largest) anti-poverty
programs in the world today. This is a universal entitlement – there is no poverty screening, and
there is a guarantee to everyone who wants the work. On the other hand, people with better job
options tend to prefer doing something other than performing manual labor for minimum wage in
the hot sun. Whether these types of programs – universal in nature, but achieving screening through
so-called ordeal mechanisms – are better or worse than a universal basic income program depends
on whether the substantial utility costs imposed on beneficiaries (like manual labor in the hot sun
in order to receive benefits) are outweighed by the cost savings from improved targeting.
However, it may be possible to obtain many of the benefits from self-selection with much
smaller utility costs to recipients if one marries self-selection to a proxy-means test. In Alatas et al
(2016), we and our co-authors study what happens when, instead of having the government come
to everyone’s house and conduct the poverty census automatically, households instead have to
come and apply for the program, at which point they are screened using the proxy-means test.6
Some fraction of households who pass the in-person eligibility test have their eligibility verified
via a home visit, but this allows the government to skip the home visits for those not eligible and
to check the eligible at home probabilistically, saving substantial costs. The proxy-means test is
the same – what differs is the take-up step. Compared to manual labor in the sun, the cost of
applying is relatively small – about three hours total in our context – and pales in comparison to
Both the automatic door-to-door approach and the application-based approach are used in other contexts. For
example, Colombia uses an automatic enrollment door-to-door proxy-means test; Costa Rica and Chile use
application-based proxy-means tests; and both Mexico and Brazil use different approaches in different contexts.
6

20

the potential benefits, which average about $150 per year for six years in the context we studied.
Yet, despite the relatively small costs, we show that self-selection yielded substantially improved
screening; the beneficiaries selected by the application-based method were about 20 percent poorer
than those selected through automatic enrollment.
The key seems to be that the application process substantially reduces the inclusion errors
in the proxy-means test process, while holding the official eligibility cutoff 𝑐 fixed. A relatively
well-off household forecasts correctly that the probability they pass the proxy-means test is small,
and hence even the relatively small application cost can be enough to discourage them from
applying. Since there are so many more relatively well-off households than very poor households,
inducing these households to self-select out can actually lead to a substantial improvement in
program targeting. This logic suggests that the benefits from adding self-selection to a proxymeans test system may be largest when the non-target population is large relative to the target
population. Moreover, an additional benefit is that some of the poorest households may live at the
very margins of society and therefore be off the government’s radar screen, and may be missed by
enumerators trying to do the universal door-to-door screen. When beneficiaries can come to apply,
such households can make themselves known.
However, application processes need not necessarily always improve targeting. For
example, a complicated application form may dissuade those who are less literate or comfortable
with bureaucracy from filling it out, leading to worse targeting (Gupta 2017). The degree to which
these approaches can improve social welfare depend on whether the selection they induce enables
the government to improve the efficiency with which it can deliver assistance to those who need
it most, and also on the extent to which the efficiency gains achieved thereby are sufficiently large
(and hence can translate into larger benefits) to offset the costs they impose on beneficiaries.

Conditional Transfers
A number of transfer programs in developing countries have explicit conditions that
beneficiaries must meet in order to receive assistance. For example, one of the first of these
programs, Mexico’s Prospera program (originally called Progresa), gives cash transfers to poor
households (screened via a proxy-means test) who also meet basic maternal and child health and
21

education conditions, including regular pre- and post-natal care, regular growth monitoring,
immunizations, school enrollment, and school attendance. Conditional cash transfer programs
have spread throughout the world, and now are present in more than 63 countries reaching tens of
millions of households annually (Bastagli et al. 2016).
A number of randomized trials of these programs, including the original launch of
Progresa, showed that these programs led to substantial improvements on the conditioned
indicators, both initially (for example, see Behrman and Todd 1999; Gertler 2004) and over the
medium term (Behrman, Parker, and Todd 2011; Barham, Macours, and Maluccio 2017; Kugler
and Rojas 2018; Cahyadi et al. 2018). These conditions also may help make the programs more
politically palatable, since voters in many countries may prefer that individuals do something in
return for receiving aid.
While much attention has been given to the incentive effects of the health and education
conditions, they can also have targeting effects. In particular, if some very poor households are
unable to meet the conditions, and if the conditions are actually enforced (which they are not
always), then some very poor households may be excluded from the programs. Baird, McIntosh,
and Özler (2011) studied this issue, randomly comparing unconditional and conditional transfer
programs in Malawi. While they found that the conditions increased school enrollments, they noted
that the unconditional program actually had a larger effect on reducing teen pregnancy. The reason
was that the unconditional program (unlike the conditional program) still provided cash transfers
to girls who dropped out of school anyway and were at the highest risk of pregnancy, and the cash
transfers reduced the likelihood of early pregnancy for these girls.
While in principle conditional cash transfers could be either universal (anyone who meets
the education and health conditions receives the transfer) or targeted using a proxy-means test,
almost all are targeted, most often using proxy-means tests (Fiszbein and Schady 2009). One
reason for this is that, in general, richer households are likely to meet the health and education
conditions than the poor. Thus, in the absence of explicit additional restrictions limiting these
programs to the poor, that fact that the conditions are more likely to be fulfilled by wealthier
households would actually make a universal version of these programs regressive rather than
progressive.

22

Summing Up
Government-led anti-poverty programs have a crucial role to play in helping to eliminate
extreme poverty worldwide. However, important questions remain about the form of these
transfers, and in particular, whether they should be universal or targeted more narrowly to the poor.
While some government programs are universal, such as publicly-funded primary schools that are
free to the families using them, most cash transfer programs today involve some type of targeting
mechanism.
In this paper, we explore how to think about this tradeoff in developing countries, where
incomes are unobserved for very large portions of the population. In this setting, universal transfers
cannot be easily taxed back as one moves up the income distribution. As a result, universal transfer
programs will give out the same net transfer quite high up the income distribution – and therefore
the tradeoff between a universal basic income program and transfers targeted through other means
implies a very substantial tradeoff between eliminating exclusion error and giving much smaller
transfers on a per-beneficiary basis.
Our evidence from Indonesia and Peru shows that existing targeting methods in developing
countries, while imperfect, appear to deliver substantial improvements in welfare compared to
universal programs, because they can transfer much more on a per-beneficiary basis to the poor as
compared with universal programs. The primary downside of these programs is horizontal equity
– because targeting is imperfect, there will be a substantial number of poor households who slip
through cracks and are excluded. Nevertheless, for many developing countries, our simulations
suggest the welfare gains from targeting may be substantial.

23

References
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew
Wai-Poi. 2016. “Self-Targeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” Journal
of Political Economy, 124(2): 371-427.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias. 2012.
“Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Economic
Review, 102(4): 1206-1240.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1709-1753.
Bah, Adama, Samuel Bazzi, Sudarno Sumarto, and Julia Tobias. 2014. “Finding the Poor vs.
Measuring Their Poverty: Exploring the Drivers of Targeting Effectiveness in Indonesia.”
TNP2K Working Paper.
Bah, Adama, Suahasil Nazara, and Elan Satriawan. 2015. “Indonesia’s Single Registry for Social
Protection Programmes.” International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth research brief
no. 49.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto. 2018.
“Tangible Information and Citizen Empowerment: Identification Cards and Food Subsidy
Programs in Indonesia.” Journal of Political Economy 126(2): 451-491.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2017. “Debunking the
Stereotype of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs
Worldwide,” World Bank Research Observer, 31 (1): 155-185.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John Maluccio. 2017. “Are Conditional Cash Transfers
Fulfilling Their Promise? Schooling, Learning, and Earnings after 10 Years.” CEPR
Discussion Paper DP11937.
Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca, Georgina Sturge, and
Tanja Schmidt. 2016. “Cash Transfers: What Does the Evidence Say?” Overseas
Development Institute Report.
Behrman, Jere R., and Petra E. Todd. 1999. “Randomness in the Experimental Samples of
PROGRESA—Education, Health, and Nutrition Program.” IFPRI Discussion Paper.
Behrman, Jere R., Susan Parker, and Petra Todd. 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for
Schooling
Generate
Lasting
Benefits?:
A
Five-Year
Follow-up
of
PROGRESA/Oportunidades.” Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 93-122.
24

Besley, Timothy. 1990. “Means Testing Versus Universal Provision in Poverty Alleviation
Programmes.” Economica, 57(225): 119-129.
Cahyadi, Nur, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Rizal Adi Prima, Elan Satriawan, and Ekki
Syamsulhakim. 2018. “Cumulative Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs:
Experimental Evidence from Indonesia.” Working Paper.
Camacho, Adriana, and Emily Conover. 2011. “Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3: 41-65.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at Work:
The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction.” American Economic Review, 102(6):
2981-3003.
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Looney. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing and the Welfare Consequences
of Social Insurance in Developing Economies.” Journal of Public Economics, 90: 23512356.
Currie, Janet. 2006a. The Invisible Safety Net: Protecting the Nation’s Poor Children and
Families. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Currie Janet. 2006b. "The Take-up of Social Benefits," in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John
Quigley (eds). Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, (New York: Russell
Sage). 80-148.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 605–637.
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady, with Francisco H.G. Ferreira, Margaret Grosh, Niall Keleher,
Pedro Olinto, and Emmanuel Skoufias. 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing
Present And Future Poverty.” World Bank Policy Research Report.
Gelbach, Jonah B., and Lant Pritchett. 2002. “Is More for the Poor Less for the Poor? The Politics
of Means-Tested Targeting.” Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 2(1).
Gertler, Paul. 2004. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Child Health? Evidence from
PROGRESA's Control Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review 94(2): 336341.
Glantz, Andrew. 2008. “A Tax on Light and Air: Impact of the Window Duty on Tax
Administration and Architecture, 1696-1851.” Penn History Review, 15(2): 1-23.
Golan, Jennifer, Terry Sicular, and Nithin Umapathi. 2017. “Unconditional Cash Transfers in
China: Who Benefits from the Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee (Dibao)
Program?” World Development, 93: 316-336.

25

Gupta, Sarika. 2017. “Perils of the Paperwork: The Impact of Information and Application
Assistance on Welfare Program Take-Up in India.” Working Paper.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. “The Missing ‘Missing Middle.’” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 28(3): 89-108.
International
Labor
Organization.
“ILO
Social
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/ilossi/ssimain.home?p_lang=en.

Security

Inquiry.”

Jensen, Anders. 2016. “Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System.” Working
Paper.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2008. “The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 582-587.
Klasen, Stephan and Simon Lange. 2016. “Poverty, Equity and Growth in Developing and
Transition Countries: Statistical Methods and Empirical Analysis.” Gottingen Working
Paper Number 213.
Kleven, Henrik, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2011. “Transfer Program Complexity and the Take-Up
of Social Benefits.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3: 54-90.
Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2016. “Why Can Modern Governments Tax
So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries.” Economica, 83: 219-246.
McBride, Linden, and Austin Nichols. 2016. “Retooling Poverty Targeting Using Out-of-Sample
Validation and Machine Learning.” World Bank Economic Review.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 1063–1114.
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas. 2008. “Marco Macroeconómico Multianual 2009-2011.”
MEF, Lima, Peru.
Mirrlees, James A. 1971. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” Review
of Economic Studies, 38(2): 175-208.
Moffitt, Robert A. (ed.). 2003. Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Nichols, Albert L., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on
Recipients.” American Economic Review, 72(2): 372-377.
Oates, Walace E. and Robert M. Schwab, 2015. “The window tax: a case study in excess
burden.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 163-80.

26

Page, Lucy, and Rohini Pande. 2018. “Ending Global Poverty: Why Money Isn’t Enough.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Ravallion, Martin. 2009. “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of an Antipoverty Program?
A Case Study for China.” World Bank Research Observer, 24(2): 205-231.
Robles, Marcos, Marcela G. Rubio, and Marco Stampini. 2015. “Have Cash Transfers Succeeded
in Reaching the Poor in Latin America and the Caribbean?” Inter-American Development
Bank policy brief no. IDB-PB-246.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor
Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 1039–1073.
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad, and Mohammad H. Mostafavi-Dehzooei. 2017. “Cash Transfers and
Labor Supply: Evidence from a Large-Scale Program in Iran.” Economic Research Forum
Working Paper #1090.
Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2014. “Optimal Income Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labour
Market.” Review of Economic Studies, 81: 1296-1329.
World Bank. 2012. “Bantuan Langsung Tunai (BLT) temporary unconditional cash transfer.”
Social assistance program and public expenditure review no. 2.
World Bank. 2014. “The State of Social Safety Nets 2014.”
World Bank. 2018. “World Development Indicators.”

27

Figure 1: Example of Progressive Post-Tax Income Schedules With and Without a Universal
Basic Income

45° line

Post‐tax income

𝛼 𝑦 with no UBI
𝛼 𝑦 with UBI

UBI
Pre‐tax income

Figure 2: Example of Post-Tax Income Schedules with and Without a Universal Basic
Income, With a Tax-Exempt Region
𝛼 𝑦 with no UBI
𝛼 𝑦 with UBI

Post‐tax income

UBI
Pre‐tax income
Tax‐exempt region

28

Figure 3: Predicted vs. actual per-capita consumption in test set data

Notes: The figures above plot actual log per-capita monthly consumption against predicted log per-capital monthly
consumption for both Indonesia and Peru. The solid vertical and horizontal lines represent eligibility cutoffs for the
programs we model here. (In Indonesia, we set the cutoff approximately at the 33rd percentile for consumption; and in
Peru, we set the cutoff at the 28th percentile.) The dashed line is a 45˚ line. For legibility, the points plotted above
represent a random sample of 10 percent of our full data from Indonesia and 50 percent of our full data from Peru.

29

Figure 4: Tradeoffs between inclusion error and exclusion error by varying eligibility
cutoff
Panel A: ROC Curves for Program Targeting

Panel B: Benefits per Household vs. Inclusion Error for Different Eligibility Cutoffs 𝑐

Notes: Panel A plots the ROC curves for both Peru and Indonesia, using a target consumption value equal to the
government poverty line in Peru and 1.5x the government poverty line in Indonesia. Panel B traces the per-household
benefit amount as inclusion error increases, assuming a fixed transfer budget of approximately $1.83 billion per year
in Indonesia and $274 million per year in Peru (modeled after the sizes of BLT and Juntos, respectively). We include
cost-savings from administrative targeting at the universal basic income point (inclusion error = 1).

30

Figure 5: Social Welfare vs. Inclusion Error

Notes: Figure 5 uses the same pooled household data as in Figure 4. For each cutoff value c, we calculate the percapita benefit amount for included households, and then calculate constant relative risk-aversion utility using the
formula noted above. If a household is not included in the program at a given value of c, we simply set bi = 0. Dashed
lines indicate the point of maximum social welfare in each country.

31

Figure 6: Horizontal Equity vs. Inclusion Error

Notes: Figure 6 traces horizontal equity as a function of inclusion error. At each cutoff c, we calculate, for each
household, the percentage of households within ±5 income percentiles (based on actual income) that received the same
benefit status – included or excluded – based on the results of proxy-means test prediction. In other words, for
households that were included in the program at a given c, we calculate the percentage of similar households that were
also included; for households that were excluded, we calculate the percentage of similar households that were also
excluded. At each cutoff point, we average these percentages over all households to compute the horizontal equity
variable graphed above. Dashed lines indicate the location and value of minimum horizontal equity.

32

Figure 7: Implied Tax Rate vs. Household Income

Notes: Figure 7 plots the implied tax rate against actual per-capita household consumption for both Indonesia and
Peru. We designated households as benefit recipients if predicted income was less than 1.5x the poverty line (in
Indonesia) or less than 1x the poverty line (in Peru). Households above the 95th income percentile were dropped from
both country samples. We then performed a local polynomial regression of benefit receipt status on actual income,
using a bandwidth of 50,000 rupiah (Indonesia) and 75 soles (Peru). We took the first derivative of this function and
multiplied it by (minus) the benefit amount in order to calculate the implied tax rate as a function of household income
( 𝑝 𝑦 𝑏). We then applied the same process after adding a random, normally distributed noise term (with the same
standard deviation as our original predicted incomes) to these predicted income values.

33

