NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SPREAD OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND THE GLOBAL RISE IN BANK
ASSET RISK SINCE THE 1970S
Charles W. Calomiris
Sophia Chen
Working Paper 24936
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24936

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

We thank Hala Moussawi for excellent research assistance. We thank Giovanni Dell'Ariccia and
Maria Soledad Martinez Peria for helpful suggestions. The views expressed in this study are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, IMF
management, or the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Charles W. Calomiris and Sophia Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Spread of Deposit Insurance and the Global Rise in Bank Asset Risk since the 1970s
Charles W. Calomiris and Sophia Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 24936
August 2018
JEL No. E32,F55,F65,G01,G18,G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We construct a new measure of the changing generosity of deposit insurance for many countries,
empirically model the international influences on the adoption and generosity of deposit
insurance, and show that the expansion of deposit insurance generosity increased asset risk in
banking systems. We consider three asset risk measures: higher loans-to-assets, a higher
proportion of lending to households, and a higher proportion of mortgage lending. None of the
observed increases in these indicators is offset by declines in banking system leverage. We show
that increased asset risk explains at least part of the positive association between deposit
insurance and the likelihood and severity of systemic banking crises.

Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Sophia Chen
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
ychen2@imf.org

1. Introduction
Over the past three decades, a vast literature has developed on the adoption and expansion of
deposit insurance, and its role in increasing the systemic insolvency risk of banking systems.
That literature has shown that the installation of deposit insurance or an expansion of its
generosity, tend to be associated with higher asset risk, higher leverage, and a greater probability
of a banking crisis, suggesting that the rise of deposit insurance may be one of the contributors to
the pandemic of unprecedentedly frequent and severe banking crises around the world.2
There are also several studies that examine the origins of deposit insurance, the extent of
its coverage, and other design features of deposit insurance systems. Interestingly, however,
contributions to the two literatures—on the causes and consequences of deposit insurance,
respectively—have occurred largely independently from one another. For example, DemirgücKunt and Detragiache (2002) show how cross-country differences in deposit insurance coverage
predict differences in banking system crisis risk, while Demirgüc-Kunt, Kane and Laeven
(2008a, 2008b) identify key political characteristics of countries that tend to predict the timing
and generosity of deposit insurance implementation.
In this study, we show that it is useful to address the questions of causes and
consequences jointly within a common empirical model, which uses the identification of the
causal influences on asset risk of deposit insurance adoption and expansion to improve the
measurement of its consequences, especially consequences for systemic bank insolvency crises.

2

For a review of the evidence on the bank risk increases that are associated with the expansion of coverage in
historical and recent insurance systems, see Calomiris and Jaremski (2016), which surveys evidence for two
centuries and many countries. With respect specifically to the increased probability of a banking crisis associated
with the greater generosity of deposit insurance, see Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002), and Anginer,
Demirguc-Kunt and Zhu (2014). For a crisis database and an analysis of its severity in historical perspective, see
Laeven and Valencia (2013) and Calomiris and Haber (2014).

1

In doing so, we also seek to avoid endogeneity bias that can confound identification of the
impact of deposit insurance on risk. Studies of the consequences of deposit insurance for
increased crisis risk have relied on risk comparisons that fail to rule out endogeneity bias related
to omitted variables and reverse causality. It is conceivable that some of the observed
relationship between deposit insurance and risk taking could be driven by influences that
exogenously raise risk and which also raise (or initiate) deposit insurance coverage as a response
to increased risk.
To address that problem, we note that many of the drivers of deposit insurance adoption
and generosity identified by Laeven (2004), Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2008a, 2008b)
and others are international influences that can plausibly serve as instruments with respect to
measuring the risk-increasing consequences of deposit insurance. That is, these international
influences should not reflect local economic changes that could cause local risks to rise.
Theory suggests that deposit insurance can either increase or decrease banking system
risk. On the one hand, credible deposit insurance can make the banking system more stable by
reducing liquidity risk by removing the incentive of depositors to withdraw funds from banks
when bank risk increases. On the other hand, deposit insurance may be a source of “moral
hazard”—it may increase the risk appetite of banks because their ability to attract deposits no
longer reflects the risk of their portfolios. Deposit insurance can also cause “adverse selection”,
including as the result of unwitting increases in risk when the absence of market discipline
permits poor risk managers to operate banks. If the capital position and asset risk of banks are
not regulated and supervised carefully, the insurance-induced risk taking may increase
insolvency risk and undermine financial stability in the long run, despite the liquidity risk
reductions that deposit insurance creates.
2

To estimate risk-taking induced by deposit insurance and its consequences for systemic
insolvency risk, we construct a three-step model of the origins of deposit insurance, its changing
generosity over time, and the risk-taking consequences of deposit insurance, which treats all
three aspects as endogenous variables. In the first two steps of the model, international influences
predict the origins and generosity of deposit insurance coverage. We develop a new measure of
the generosity of deposit insurance coverage, which we use as the dependent variable in the
second step of the model. In the third step of the model, instrumented values of the predicted
generosity of deposit insurance are used to explain different measures of risk-taking that affect
the solvency of banking systems.
From the perspective of a theory of insolvency risk (such as the Black-Scholes-Merton
model), the likelihood of failure is increasing in leverage and asset risk, and asset risk is
increasing in the proportion of risky assets relative to cash assets, and in the riskiness of risky
assets (i.e., the riskiness of loans). We consider three complementary measures of bank
insolvency risk: the loans-to-assets ratio of a country’s banks in a given year, the extent of
household lending (or mortgage lending) of a country’s banks in a given year (measured by the
proportion of bank loans to households, or the proportion of bank loans that are mortgage loans),
and the debt-to-assets ratio of a country’s banks in a given year. The first is an assets-side
measure that captures risk increases resulting from a smaller proportion of low-risk, cash assets.
The second measure (mortgage lending or household lending) captures systemic loan
portfolio risk increases due to mortgage lending exposure. Data on household loans primarily
reflect mortgage lending and are available for a broader sample than narrowly defined mortgage
lending. Although mortgages may not be high-risk loans for individual banks during normal
times, there is substantial evidence that they are high-risk assets from the standpoint of systemic
3

insolvency risk. When real estate prices decline, such declines can have widespread and severe
implications for mortgage portfolios. For that reason, mortgage lending may entail greater
systemic risk to the banking system. Several recent studies point to the importance of mortgage
lending in promoting systemic risk, and our findings of a positive connection between mortgage
lending and crisis risk also corroborate that view.
Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2015a, 2015b) show that mortgage lending has been a
major contributor to systemic risk in the banking sector for a wide range of countries. Mortgage
lending exposes the banking system to increased systemic risk because the value of real estate is
highly correlated with the business cycle, and because real estate is hard for lenders to liquidate
in a downturn. The recognition of these facts led government regulation historically to
discourage heavy commercial bank involvement in real estate finance, but those limits became
increasingly relaxed in many countries during the last several decades. In recent decades,
governments have promoted bank involvement in mortgage lending through various means,
including favorable (low) risk-based asset weights for mortgages adopted by the Basel
Committee, and various government credit subsidies promoting mortgage lending (e.g., Federal
Home Loan Bank loans in the U.S.). Cournede and Denk (2015) show that the rising proportion
of household borrowing (which is largely mortgages) has tended to crowd out the financing of
other more productive types of investment, and therefore, is associated with adverse growth
consequences.3 Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2015a, 2015b) and Mian, Sufi and Verner (2016)
show that real estate lending has grown dramatically as a proportion of total lending in their
sample of developed countries since 1970, and real estate risk has been central to banking crises
around the world during that period, as well.
3

Chen, Hanson and Stein (2017) also note the decline in bank lending to small businesses in the U.S., and its
consequences for labor markets, which may also be related to this crowding out from greater mortgage lending.

4

Including the extent of household and mortgage lending in our analysis is useful for two
reasons. First, if a banking system’s debt-to-assets and loans-to-assets both rose, but the riskiness
of loans fell sufficiently, bank failure risk could remain unchanged. Thus, it is important to
consider loan risk alongside leverage and the loans-to-assets ratio when gauging changes in
banking system risk. Second, mortgage loans are not only systemically risky, they also are a
politically important category of lending. By tracking how mortgage loans respond to changes in
deposit insurance, we are able to consider the possibility that the politics of deposit insurance and
the politics of subsidizing mortgage credit interact. It is commonly recognized as standard
economic theory to consider deposit insurance, in the absence of sufficiently strong prudential
regulation, as providing a put option subsidy to banks, as originally modeled by Merton (1977).
The rents from that subsidy can be used to fund other subsidies that banks may be encouraged to
provide to borrowers. We hypothesize that the rise of deposit insurance (which, in the absence of
prudential safeguards, provides a subsidy for risk that accrues to banks) makes it easier for
governments to use banking systems as a means of subsidizing politically influential household
mortgage borrowers (because the government can pressure banks to share the deposit insurance
protection subsidy with a politically favored class of borrowers). By including the proportion of
household and mortgage lending in our model, we are able to test the hypothesis that rising
deposit insurance promotes increases in asset risk through multiple channels: (1) the rise in
loans-to-assets, and (2) the increased lending risk associated with the lack of loan diversification
and reduced loan liquidity associated with a greater focus on real estate lending. Our paper, we
believe, is the first to study the real estate lending channel of deposit insurance.
The third measure of systemic risk we examine is a liabilities-side measure that captures
bank risk increases that result from rising leverage in the banking system. In theory, of course, a
5

rise in any one of these measures may not increase bank insolvency risk if that rise is offset by a
sufficient decline in other measures. As we will show, however, the observed increases in
systemic insolvency risk measured by one or more indicators is not offset by declines in any
other risk measures.
We also considered controlling for cross-country differences in prudential regulation or
banking supervision that might affect the systemic risk-increasing consequences of deposit
insurance. Doing so may not be advisable, given that prudential regulation and banking
supervision are themselves endogenous variables that may respond to changes in deposit
insurance. Furthermore, existing data on prudential regulation or banking supervision are limited
in both time and country dimensions for our purpose. We found that it was not possible to
construct a usable cross-country measure of the strictness of minimum capital ratio requirements
across countries and over time. In general, expansions of deposit insurance protection likely have
been accompanied by stricter prudential regulation, intended to limit the moral-hazard and
adverse-selection costs of deposit insurance. If that is the case, then our estimates should be
regarded as conservative ceteris paribus measures of the impact of deposit insurance, because the
risk-increasing impact of insurance should be partly offset by stricter prudential regulation. Our
results show that endogenous strengthening of prudential regulation has not fully eliminated the
moral-hazard and adverse-selection consequences of deposit insurance.
Our analysis employs the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) International Financial
Statistics (IFS) database on aggregate banking system balance sheets, which covers many
countries and stretches back into the 1970s.4 We also use data for household loans and mortgage

4

Consistent with the IFS definition, the term "country" does not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state
as understood by international law and practice. The term also covers some territorial entities that are not states.

6

loans from Cerutti, Dagher, and Dell’Ariccia (2017), which cover a smaller set of countries. We
analyze countries as a panel of country years, combining data from advanced and emerging
countries. In our robustness analysis we also divide countries into two categories (advanced and
emerging) to explore possible differences in their responses.
Our findings can be summarized as follows. First, we find that (consistent with
Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2008a, 2008b) international influences on the expansion of deposit
insurance protection (captured by interactions among the proportion of countries that has adopted
deposit insurance, and measures that account for endorsement or mandate from the IMF, World
Bank, and the European Union) robustly predict the creation and expansion of deposit insurance
coverage. That is true both for advanced and emerging economies. We also find that it is
important to take into account other variables (which serve as controls in the three-step
regression model) that influence the propensity to enact or expand deposit insurance. In
particular, deposit insurance is more likely to be enacted or to expand during recessions and in
the wake of a major banking crisis.
Second, we find that instrumented increases in deposit insurance coverage predict
increases in the loans-to-assets ratio. When advanced and emerging economies are pooled, that
effect is positive and statistically significant.
Third, with respect to the effects of exogenous increases of deposit insurance on
mortgage lending, we find that exogenous increases in deposit insurance result in a higher
proportion of household loans or mortgage loans, and this is true both for advanced and
emerging or developing economies. This suggests that deposit insurance not only expands the
asset risk of banking systems, but that it does so in a way that favors risky household and
7

mortgage lending. Once deposit insurance frees banks from the constraints of market discipline,
governments may be more able to use the regulation of the banking system as a means of
targeting credit subsidies to household borrowers.
Fourth, we find that the asset risk-increases caused by deposit insurance expansion are
not offset by reductions in leverage. On the contrary, instrumented increases in deposit
insurance coverage tend to raise leverage ratios.
Having identified endogenous asset risk increases in response to increased deposit
insurance coverage, we then consider the macroeconomic significance of those increases, and
link them to the likelihood of crises. First, we find that exogenous increases in the generosity of
deposit insurance not only predict higher riskiness of bank assets, but also greater bank asset risk
as a proportion of GDP (measured either as loans-to-GDP, or household-loans-to-GDP, or
mortgage-loans-to-GDP). Second, consistent with prior literature, we find that (after controlling
for other factors), exogenously more generous deposit insurance tends to result in a significantly
greater likelihood and severity of crises. Third, we find that exogenous increases in asset risk
(measured as loans-to-GDP, household-loans-to-GDP, or mortgage-loans-to-GDP) produced by
greater international influences promoting deposit insurance also are associated with the greater
likelihood and severity of crises.
Given that our instruments rely in part on common global factors that vary over time
(which are reflected in the influence of the IMF, the EU, the World Bank, and the emulation of
other countries’ deposit insurance practices) we also consider whether our results are robust to
adding alternative time-varying factors to our model. We consider two alternative measures of
stock market volatility, or variables that capture the globalization of interbank borrowing or
8

global capital flows, or measures of financial liberalization. We find that these variables have
little effect on the estimated consequences of deposit insurance generosity for increases in bank
asset risk, or the likelihood or severity of banking crises.
Our results on asset risk should be interpreted as identifying a risk-taking effect on bank
assets that raises insolvency risk and crisis risk in response to increases in the generosity of
explicit deposit insurance.5 To the extent that our instrumentation strategy is valid, our
estimations capture the causal effect of increased deposit insurance generosity. Nevertheless, our
results are silent on whether the generosity of deposit insurance affects the liquidity risk of
banking systems.
Our results are generally robust to dividing the sample of countries into advanced and
emerging sub-groups, but statistical significance is reduced in some regressions, especially for
the effect of deposit insurance generosity on loans-to-assets. Nevertheless, the connections for
both sub-groups between exogenous variation in deposit insurance generosity and the increase in
systemic risk—which is reflected in various measures of asset risk, as well as the likelihood and
severity of systemic banking crises—lead us to conclude that the responses of the two subgroups of countries are broadly similar. To increase sample size, which affects the precision of
estimates, therefore, we emphasize our pooled regression results.
Our study is related to a large literature on deposit insurance (reviewed in Calomiris and
Jaresmki 2016). As we discussed earlier, deposit insurance has an ambiguous effect on banking
system risk from a theoretical perspective. The overall effect depends on the size of the moralhazard and adverse-selection risk-enhance effect compared to the liquidity risk-reducing effect.
5

Importantly, they should not be interpreted as comparing banking system risks between countries with and without
deposit insurance (the latter including possible cases of greater implicit government guarantees).

9

Calomiris and Jaremski (2016) conclude that the empirical literature on the overall consequences
of deposit insurance for bank risk consistently finds substantial net risk increases associated with
deposit insurance, implying that the moral-hazard and adverse-selection disadvantages of deposit
insurance tend to outweigh its liquidity risk-reducing advantages.
Our study makes several new contributions to the empirical literature. We believe we are
the first to link exogenous variation in the expansion of deposit insurance coverage with changes
in bank asset risk, and we are also the first to consider how deposit insurance coverage affects
banking systems’ propensity to provide mortgages. With respect to data contributions, we
construct a new measure to capture the changing generosity of deposit insurance over time.
Section 2 describes our data base. Section 3 presents our empirical methodology and our
regression models. Section 4 reports our empirical findings for the influence of exogenous
increases in deposit insurance coverage on bank risk. Section 5 explores the links among deposit
insurance generosity, asset risk and the probability and severity of crises. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data
2.1 Deposit insurance data
Our primary sources for deposit insurance coverage are Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and
Laeven (2005) and Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2014). This is a comprehensive, global
database of deposit insurance as of 2013. The original data have information on coverage and
coinsurance for all years since adoption until 2003, as well as data for 2010 and 2013. We
checked the existing data using national data sources, made some corrections, and extended the

10

data to cover all years through 2013. Figure 1 shows the timing of different countries’ adoption
of deposit insurance.
We measure the consequences of the changing generosity of deposit insurance. There are
two design features that affect the generosity of coverage—the breadth of deposit coverage and
the extent of coinsurance of the risk of loss—and this complicates the measurement of the
generosity of a deposit insurance scheme. Explicit deposit insurance schemes typically insure
deposits up to a statutory coverage limit. In some cases, government guarantees are offered on
top of statutory limits. With a full government guarantee in place, depositors essentially receive
“unlimited” coverage on their deposits. Some deposit insurance schemes also include
coinsurance, which insures depositors for a pre-specified portion of their deposits. Coverage and
coinsurance together determine how much depositors would receive from the deposit insurer. For
example, in a country with a statutory coverage limit of $10,000 and 20 percent coinsurance,
depositors with up to $10,000 deposits could receive 80 percent of their deposit amount.6 We
define deposit insurance score (DI score) as an index for the generosity of a deposit insurance
scheme. To calculate the DI score, we first convert all coverage amounts to US dollars using
market exchange rates and compute the ratio of coverage to GDP per capita. We then define
coverage score as an index between 0 and 1 based on the ratio of coverage to GDP per capita.7
This approach to scaling the measurement of coverage avoids distributions with extreme outliers.
We acknowledge that the coverage limit should also take into account other country specific
factors, such as the distribution of deposit size. But such granular data are not available for a
large set of countries. Finally, we define DI score as the coverage score if coinsurance is 0, as 0.5
6

Many countries used coinsurance in the earlier part of our sample period but it has become less popular over time.
Coverage score equals 0.2 if coverage to GDP per capita ratio ranges from 0 to 1, equals 0.4 if the ratio ranges
from 1 to 2; equals 0.6 if the ratio ranges from 2 to 6; equals 0.8 if the ratio ranges from 6 to 20; and equals 1 if the
ratio is greater than 20, or with full government guarantees (i.e. “unlimited” coverage).
7

11

times the coverage score if coinsurance is greater than 0 but smaller than 25 percent, and as 0 if
coinsurance is greater or equal to 25 percent, or if there is no deposit insurance.8

2.2. Bank balance sheet and macroeconomic data
We assemble a comprehensive database of aggregate bank balance sheet and
macroeconomic variables for the 1970-2013 period.9 Our main data source is the IMF’s IFS data.
We focus on two aggregate balance sheet variables: loans-to-assets ratio and debt-to-assets
ratio, both of which are expressed in logs (see Table 1 and Appendix A for details). The
macroeconomic variables we consider are CPI inflation and real GDP growth.
Using the IFS data to construct bank balance sheet variables has two advantages. First,
the data employ standardized formats and adjust for variations in accounting and auditing
conventions so they are reasonably comparable across countries. Second, the IFS has a wide
coverage of countries over our sample period, including advanced and emerging countries. The
weakness of the IFS data is that it does not provide disaggregated (bank-level) information.
Unfortunately, datasets with disaggregated information have more limited country and time
coverage.
Our primary source for household loans and mortgage loans is Cerutti, Dagher, and
Dell’Ariccia (2017), extended to 2013 when available. We define household loans-to-total-loans
ratio as the proportion of private sector loans to the household sector. We define mortgageloans-to-total-loans ratio as the proportion of private sector loans as mortgage loans. Both are
8

Some deposit insurance schemes apply different coinsurances to different deposit amounts. For example, during
2002-2008, Albania had no coinsurance for deposits up to 350,000 Albanian Lek and 15 percent coinsurance for
deposits from 350,000 to 700,000 Albanian Lek. In these cases, we use the highest coinsurance percentage to
calculation the DI score.
9
We start our sample period in 1970 because this is the year when the IFS data become available for the majority of
our sample countries. Our results are robust to including data starting from 1960. Using an earlier year would not
affect our results because only one country (the United States) adopted deposit insurance prior to 1960.

12

expressed as log ratios. Our household loans and mortgage loans data have the same country
coverage, although the former generally goes further back than the latter.10 The two are highly
correlated in our sample, with a correlation of 0.8. Although household loans are broader than
mortgage loans (including non-mortgage consumer credit), mortgage loans accounts for a large
proportion of household loans in our sample: 57 percent in all countries, 62 percent in advanced
economies and 39 percent in emerging economies. The higher percentage in advance economies
is not surprising because the mortgage markets in advanced economies are more developed.
Overall, we view household-loans-to-total-loans ratio as a good proxy for mortgage lending.
We discard all observations in which the balance sheet identity is not satisfied (see
Appendix A for details). To remove the effect of outliers, we winsorize all macroeconomic
variables and balance sheet ratios at the 1 and 99 percent. We end up with a final sample of
1,426 observations in 69 countries for our balance sheet ratios analysis, of which 32 countries
and 734 observations are in advanced economies, and 37 countries and 692 observations are in
emerging economies. For the analysis with household and mortgage loans, we have a sample of
774 and 575 observations, respectively. They cover 47 countries, 31 of which are advanced
economies and 16 of which are emerging economies (see Table 2 for details). Table 3 reports
summary statistics.

2.3. Crisis data
Our definition of banking crises follows Laeven and Valencia (2013).11 When we employ
a crisis dummy as a control in our regressions, we define Post crisis as a dummy variable for the

10

The few exceptions are Canada (2009-2011), Philippines (2000), and Switzerland (2005-2006), which has data for
mortgage loans but not household loans.
11
We could supplement the Laeven and Valencia (2013) data with other crisis datasets that go back to the beginning
of our sample period such as Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). But this would make little difference in our analysis

13

three years following the start of a banking crisis. When we define the occurrence of a crisis as a
dependent variable, we date the crisis using the first year of a systemic banking crisis. To avoid
double counting crisis events, when the occurrence of a crisis is our dependent variable, we drop
the next two years of data or until the end of a crisis, whichever is greater. We follow Laeven
and Valencia (2013) and measure the severity of a crisis by output loss, defined as the three-year
cumulative loss in GDP relative to a pre-crisis trend.

3. Empirical Methodology
3.1. Asset risk and deposit insurance
To examine bank risk responses to deposit insurance we employ an instrumental variable
(IV) methodology adapted for sample selection that estimates the effect of deposit insurance
generosity on risk. We consider two types of asset risk measures. First, we measure asset risk in
the aggregate balance sheet of banks, captured by the loans-to-assets ratio and the share of
household loans, or mortgage loans, in total loans. Because these measures capture loan risk
relative to the assets of the banking system, we call them “micro” measures of asset risk.
Second, we measure asset risk to the macroeconomy, captured by the credit-to-GDP
ratio, the household loans-to-GDP ratio, and the mortgages-to-GDP ratio. As we discussed in
Section 1, these latter two measures are motivated by the literature on the role of real estate
credit and real estate sector price fluctuations in propagating macroeconomic shocks in normal
times and crises. Because measures of credit risk relative to GDP capture the banking system
credit risk relative to the aggregate economy, we call them “macro” measures of asset risk. We
additionally examine the effect of deposit insurance on banking system leverage. Although

because only one banking crisis is identified in Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) between 1960 and 1969—Brazil in
1963—and Brazil did not adopt deposit insurance until 1995.

14

liability-side risk is not the focus of this study, it is useful to include leverage in our analysis to
examine whether asset-side risk increases are offset by reductions in liability-side risk.
The estimation consists of three steps. In the first step we estimate the probability of
enacting deposit insurance using the model specified in equation (1):

DI ct  I     Controlsct    Instrumentsct   ct  0 ,

(1)

where DI is a binary variable that takes a value of 1 if country c has deposit insurance in year t
and 0 otherwise. Controls are variables that we assume affect both the deposit insurance decision
and balance sheet variables, such as inflation and real GDP growth. We find that the influence of
inflation was different in emerging economies, and therefore, we include an interaction between
inflation and emerging country type to capture that difference. We also find that it is important to
control for the effects of the timing and severity of banking crises on deposit insurance design,
and so we include two controls for that purpose, one measuring the timing of crises and the offer
the loss severity of the crisis. Instruments are a set of variables that capture international
influence on the adoption or design of deposit insurance, which we will discuss in more detail.

I . is the indicator function and  ct is a normally distributed error term. The fitted probabilities
from the first step are then used to estimate the inverse Mills ratio, which we denote as ct in the
IV estimation.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio as
an additional control: Different measures of banking system risks are regressed on the
instrumented generosity of deposit insurance coverage. In other words, in the second step of the
model, the dependent variable is deposit insurance generosity; the independent variables are the
same set of exogenous instruments used to estimate equation (1). In the third step of the model,
predicted values of deposit insurance generosity are used to explain banking system risk.
15

More specifically, we estimate:

yct      DIscorect    Controlsct    ct  ct ,

(2)

where yct is loans-to-assets ratio, the household-loans-to-total-loans ratio, or the mortgageloans-to-total-loans ratio; DI score is the deposit insurance score that measures the generosity of
deposit insurance; and  ct is an error term. An important element in (2) is the inverse Mills ratio
estimated from step one of the model. Because we only observe the generosity of deposit
protection after a country adopts deposit insurance, our approach ensures that countries’
endogenous selection into deposit insurance is accounted for in steps two and three of the model.
We also include country fixed effects in (2) to control for persistent heterogeneity in the
aggregate banking system.12
Our estimation procedure follows Wooldridge (2002).13 We use the same set of
exogenous variables in (1) to predict DI score and the predicted values are used to estimate (2).
As noted by Wooldridge (2002), it is appropriate to include all instruments in both (1) and (2).
Note that a standard assumption (i.e., the rank condition) of sample selection models requires
that some instruments only affect the selection equation (1) but not the outcome equation (2).
This is true in our model, too, as we assume that the creation and expansion of deposit insurance
are influenced by exogenous instruments that are not included as direct influences on risk
measures; they only influence risk through their effect on deposit insurance. In our model,
adoption and expansion of deposit insurance are treated separately in the estimation, but as
Wooldridge (2002) points out, it is desirable to have the same set of instruments included in both

12

We do not include country fixed effects in the probit model (1) because once countries adopted deposit insurance,
they do not revoke it. Our results are robust to excluding country fixed effects from (2).
13
Wooldridge (2002), procedure 17.2, pg. 568.

16

the adoption and expansion specifications; doing otherwise is “dangerous and unnecessary.”14
We do not expect, however, that each of the international influences will have identical effects
on adoption and expansion of deposit insurance. For example, the IMF recommended in 1999
that countries adopt explicit deposit insurance but did not advocate a certain level of coverage.15
We use a set of instruments that capture international influences on deposit insurance, as
found in Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2008a, 2008b). Our instruments include IMF best
practice, Emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and Emulation, World Bank loan,
EU candidacy, and EU directive. IMF best practice is a dummy variable that takes a value of one
for the years 1999 and onwards. The year 1999 is when the IMF published a best-practice paper
on the design of deposit insurance and recommended explicit deposit insurance for developing
countries (Garcia, 1999). Emulation is the proportion of countries with explicit deposit insurance
in a given year. We interpret this value as a proxy for the extent to which deposit insurance is
considered to be best practice around the world. World Bank loan is a dummy variable that takes
a value of one during and following the year that the World Bank started an adjustment lending
program with a country that entailed the adoption of deposit insurance. The European Union
(EU) also mandated deposit insurance. The year 1994 was when the EU Directive on Deposit
Insurance came into force. EU directive is a dummy variable that takes a value of one for the
years 1994 and onwards for EU member (EU-15) countries. EU candidacy is a dummy variable
that takes a value of one for years 1994 and onwards for EU candidate countries. Figure 2 plots
the timing of these various measures of international influence and their importance over time.
14

This is because dropping some exogenous variables in either equation imposes exclusion restrictions on a
reduced-form equation (Wooldridge, 2002, pg. 569).
15
For example, the IMF suggested that “(m)ost effective schemes are ... limited to protecting small depositors and
do not cover large depositors and other creditors, including other banks, so as to create incentives for market
discipline to exert pressure on banks” (Folkerts-Landau and Lindgren, 1998, pg. 10). IMF staff suggested that
countries consider factors such as per capital income and the distribution of deposits when setting the coverage limit
(Garcia, 1999).

17

Our identification assumption is that these instruments only matter for the balance sheet
variables through their effect on deposit insurance adoption or design. Because IMF best practice
is defined based on a year (i.e., 1999), our assumption requires that it did not coincide with other
changes (e.g., actions from the IMF, or shocks to banking systems) that had a significant effect
on banking system risks of all countries independent of deposit insurance. That assumption
seems reasonable in light of the smooth growth and calm financial markets that characterized the
global economy in 1999 and 2000. A similar assumption must hold for EU member and
candidate countries in the year 1994. That seems reasonable, given that European growth and
financial markets were stable during this time.
The assumption that World Bank loan is unrelated to other economic changes in the local
economy is harder to defend; World Bank lending programs that entailed the adoption of deposit
insurance might have coincided with other significant economic shocks and may have reflected
other policy objectives, including those directly targeting the risk of the banking system,
independent of the effects of deposit insurance. To alleviate the concern that this may be the
case, we treat World Bank loan as a control variable in our robustness check.

4. Results
4.1 “Micro” Bank Risk
Before turning to our regression analysis, Figure 3 and plots the growth of loans-to-assets
and debt-to-assets, and Figure 4 plots household loans-to-total loans, and mortgages-to-total
loans. Figure 3 shows that loans-to-assets growth tends to be more positive later in the sample
period, although the same is not as apparent for debt-to-assets Figure 4 shows relatively rapid
growth in the fractions of loans to households or the fraction of mortgage loans. Thus, on
18

average, increases in systemic risk have coincided with increases in the spread of deposit
insurance and its generosity over time.
Table 4 reports the first step analysis of our model: probit model estimates of deposit
insurance adoption.16 Appendix Table B1-B4 reports the second step analysis of our model: the
prediction of the generosity of deposit insurance with exogenous instruments (with sample
selection correction, using the probit model results from Table 4). The instruments generally do
well in forecasting both the adoption of deposit insurance and its generosity. This is also true for
subsample splits of advanced and emerging economies, which are not reported here.
Tables 5 to 8 report the third step analysis of our model, which uses predicted deposit
insurance generosity from Table 4 to forecast banking system risk.17 Control variables (which we
will not discuss in detail) are often statistically significant. In Table 5, we report estimates for the
effect of instrumented deposit insurance generosity on banking system loans-to-assets ratio.
Estimates are positive and statistically significant. They are also large. A standard deviation
increase (0.25) in DI score results in a 0.50 increase in ln of loans-to-assets, which is roughly
1.25 of a standard deviation increase in loans-to-assets.

16

We estimate an unbalanced panel of country years, and report robust standard errors. The number of years per
country, and the number of countries per year are too small to reliably cluster errors either by country or by year. For
example, the median number of years per country in the mortgage sample is 9, and the median number of countries
per year in the mortgage sample is 5. Furthermore, we cannot reliably cluster standard errors by year in the presence
of country fixed effects: There is no guidance from the literature on what is the appropriate way to adjust the degrees
of freedom with fixed effects. In results not reported here, our findings regarding statistical significance are
generally robust to clustering errors by country, but results on mortgages are not robust to clustering by country.
17
Our results are estimated using a Limited-Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) estimator. We use the LIML
instead of the two-stage least squares (TSLS) estimator because we have many instruments (six) and the set of
instruments are somewhat weak in some specifications. For example, in models with loans-to-assets ratio as
dependent variable, the F statistics is 9.2 in the simplest specification, even though they are much stronger in models
with other dependent variables (the F statistics is above 20 in the above specification). LIML is a good alternative to
2SLS with weak instruments or many instruments because it is median-unbiased and consistent under manyinstrument asymptotics (Stock, Wright, and Yogo, 2002).

19

Table 6 reports results for the household-loans-to-total-loans ratio. We find that the
effect of instrumented deposit insurance generosity is positive and highly statistically significant
in predicting the household-loans-to-total-loans ratio. Table 7 reports similar findings for the
mortgage-loans-to-total-loans ratio. In both cases, the magnitudes of the effects are large. A
standard deviation increase in DI score raises the log of household-loans-to-total-loans ratio by
1.5 of its standard deviation, and raises the log of mortgage-loans-to-total-loans ratio by about
76 percent of its standard deviation.
Table 8 reports results for banking system debt relative to assets. Instrumented deposit
insurance generosity positively affects debt-to-assets. The effect is not highly statistically
significant. We are able to conclude, however, that leverage does not decline (e.g., due to
tightening prudential regulation) in reaction to expanded deposit insurance generosity. Leverage,
if anything rises with asset risk as insurance coverage expands, and does not offset the effects of
rising asset risk on the riskiness of the banking system. The magnitude of the estimated effect is
large. A standard deviation increase in DI score raises debt-to-assets by 41 percent of its
standard deviation.
In Tables 5-8 we also report tests of the instruments, including the Kleibergen-Paap
(2006) rk statistic for under-identification, the Cragg-Donald Wald (non-robust) and KleibergenPaap Wald (heteroskedasticity-robust) statistics for weak instruments. In all specifications, the
Kleibergen-Paap LM test rejects the null hypothesis that the equation is under-identified. The
weak instrument statistics also exceed the Stock and Yogo (2005) tabulation, suggesting that
weak instruments are not a concern.

20

As a robustness check, we treat World Bank loan as a control variable instead of an
exogenous instrument. As we discussed in Section 3, the purpose of this robustness check is to
alleviate the concern that World Bank loan may have a direct effect on bank risk independent of
deposit insurance. Appendix Tables B5-B9 report the results.18 Our results remain largely the
same.

4.2 “Macro” Bank Risk: The Asset Risk Channel of Banking Crises
Our findings in Tables 5-8 show that the increasing generosity of deposit insurance
promoted increased asset risk in banking systems, which is not offset by lower leverage. A
natural question to ask is to what extent the increased asset risk contributes to the positive
association between deposit insurance and the likelihood of banking crises, which was found in
prior studies? First, we examine whether increases in deposit insurance generosity affected credit
risk relative to GDP (which captures the macroeconomic significance of the effects). Second, we
estimate the impact of deposit insurance-induced increases in asset risk on the likelihood of
banking crises.
Tables 9-11 report results for instrumented regressions, identical in structure to those in
Tables 5-7, but which divide each of the three macro credit measures (loans, household loans and
mortgage loans) by GDP. DI score is positive and statistically significant in influencing all three
measures. In all three cases, the economic magnitudes of the effects are large. A one standard
deviation increase in DI score results in more than a standard deviation increase in each of the
macro credit measures.
18

Robustness tables for the mortgage-loans-to-total-loans ratio and mortgage-loans-to-GDP ratio are omitted
because they are identical to the baseline tables.

21

Next, we examine the impact of external influence on deposit insurance generosity, and
how this response affects the likelihood of crises and crisis severity. For the likelihood of crises,
we follow Wooldridge (2002, p. 623) in using linear estimation of the final-stage crisis risk
rather than a probit in the third stage of the model. When estimating these effects it is necessary
to decide how to treat the observations in the data base for the years of crises after the first year.
Including the second, third, fourth or fifth years of a crisis identified by Laeven and Valencia is
problematic: in the years of crisis after the first one, deposit insurance cannot contribute to the
risk that a crisis will occur. For this reason, as noted before, we delete the observations for
country years of crisis after the first year of crisis.
In Table 12, DI score is instrumented by the external influence variables. In Table 13, the
three macro asset risk measures (expressed relative to GDP) are instrumented by the external
influences on deposit insurance generosity. In Table 12, we show that exogenous increases in the
generosity of deposit insurance produce an increase in crisis risk and crisis severity. In Table 13,
we find that the exogenous influences that produce an increased risk of crisis through increases
in deposit insurance coverage also produce an increase in crisis risk and crisis severity through
their effects on all three of the macro asset risk measures. The magnitudes of the effects in
Tables 12 and 13 are large. In Table 12, a one standard deviation increase in DI score results in
an increase of roughly 40% of a standard deviation of crisis risk and crisis severity. In Table 13,
the magnitudes of the effects are also substantial. For loans-to GDP, a standard deviation
increase results in 24% of a standard deviation increase in crisis risk and 37% of a standard
deviation increase in crisis severity. For household-loans-to-GDP, the effect is 32% of a standard
deviation of crisis risk and 26% of a standard deviation of crisis severity, and for mortgageloans-to-GDP, the effect is 50% of a standard deviation of crisis risk and 43% of a standard
22

deviation of crisis severity. We conclude that exogenous increases in deposit insurance
generosity produce increases in crisis risk and crisis severity at least partly through their effects
on bank asset risk.

4.3 Robustness
In Table 14, we summarize the robustness of our result for separately estimating the two
subsamples for countries: advanced economies and emerging markets. We report results only for
the full model, which includes all controls. Many results remain statistically significant for both
subsamples when estimated separately, but there are exceptions. Given the smaller sample size it
is hard to determine whether the loss of statistical significance for some subsample estimates
reflect true differences between the two groups of countries or reduced precision of estimation
because of smaller sample sizes.
In the models with instrumented DI score as an explanatory variable for loans-to-assets,
loans-to-GDP, and household-loans-to-GDP, the results are not statistically significant for
advanced economies. For both advanced and emerging economies, the statistical significance of
DI score on debt-to-assets disappears when the sample is split. However, for both subsamples,
DI score is statistically significant in predicting household loans-to-total loans, mortgage loansto-total loans, and mortgage-loans-to-GDP. Furthermore, in emerging economies, exogenous
changes in external influence are not statistically significant for forecasting crisis risk, either
through their effects on DI score (as in Table 12) or through their effects on all three asset risk
measures relative to GDP (as in Table 13). Overall, despite the possibility of some differences
across types of countries, given the broad consistency across the two subsamples, we believe that
23

reduced precision from subsample splits rather than structural differences are the most likely
explanation for subsample differences in statistical significance. We believe treating all countries
together in our regression analysis is likely to result in more reliable estimation.
One potential concern about our instruments is that they may be capturing other global
factors that coincide with the international influences on deposit insurance. Potential global
factors that may affect bank risk during our sample period include: increased stock market
volatility, increased capital flows or globalization of interbank borrowing, and increased
financial liberalization.19 We consider the robustness of our results when controlling for these
factors in our model. We control for stock market volatility measured by the CBOE volatility
index (i.e. VIX) and the S&P 500 realized volatility. The former is available since 1986 and the
latter is available throughout our sample period (Figure 5). We control for global capital flows by
including changes in total external liabilities from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018). We control
for the globalization of interbank borrowing by including changes in the external liabilities of
“other investment” as a percentage of world GDP (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2018) (Figure 6).20

19

We also considered including a linear time trend as an exogenous control. We decided that doing so is not
appropriate, given that there is no obvious reason to expect that other omitted exogenous influences (unrelated to
any observable exogenous influence, such as deposit insurance generosity, global asset risk, capital flows, or
financial liberalization) should follow a common linear global trend of increased bank risk. When we include a
linear time trend as a control, the DI score coefficients remain positive and significant for all the “micro” and
“macro” asset risk measures, and for predicting banking crisis severity. But instrumented explanatory variables for
the likelihood of crises are no longer statistically significant. Given that our instruments capture common global
factors that have grown over time (most obviously, emulation), it is not surprising that some of our results diminish
in significance when a time trend is added. The effect of including a time trend highlights the fact that the power of
our instruments for forecasting banking crises depends to some extent on their correlation with common, timevarying global factors.
We use data on “other investment” as a proxy for global interbank borrowing because it is where bank loans
figure prominently. Changes in “other investment” is also closely related to cross-border activities of large
international banks (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2018).
20

24

We control for financial liberalization using the financial liberalization index for advanced and
emerging countries by Kaminsky and Schmukler (2008) (Figure 7).21
We summarize the robustness of our results in Table 15. When we control for VIX, stock
market volatility, or capital flow, all our results in Table 5-13 still hold. Results are similar when
we control for financial liberalization except in three cases (the loss of statistical significance for
the DI score coefficients in the loans-to-assets and debt-to-assets regression, and the householdloans-to-GDP coefficient in the crisis severity regression, although the coefficients are still
positive in all cases).

5. Conclusion
We model the origins and generosity of deposit insurance and show that international
influences on the expansions of deposit insurance promoted increased asset risk in banking
systems, which also increased the likelihood and severity of banking crises. We construct a new
measure of the generosity of deposit insurance over time for a large sample of countries and link
exogenous changes in the generosity of deposit insurance to changes in bank insolvency risk.
We consider three forms of bank insolvency risk: loans-to-assets, the proportion of
lending in mortgages (also proxied by greater household lending), and bank debt-to-assets.
Loans-to-assets, household loans-to-total-loans, and mortgage loans-to-total loans all respond
positively to the increase in the generosity of deposit insurance. The response of debt-to-assets to
a rise in the generosity of deposit insurance is positive and marginally statistically significant.
21

Kaminsky and Schmukler (2008) find that the amplitude of stock market booms substantially increases in the
aftermath of liberalization (defined as a 4-year window, and robust for 3- and 6-year windows). But markets
stabilize in the long run if liberalization persists. Therefore, to capture the risk enhance effect of liberalization, we
control for the average liberalization index in the 4 years prior.

25

More generally, none of the observed increases in risk measured by one or more indicators is
offset by significant declines in the other risk measures.
We also explore the connections between increased asset risk and the risk of banking
crises. Increased deposit insurance generosity results in increases in loans-to-GDP, and increases
in household-loans-to-GDP and mortgage loans-to-GDP. Exogenous increases in the generosity
of deposit insurance produce an increased likelihood of a banking crisis and greater crisis
severity, and the same exogenous external influences that produce an increased risk of crisis
through increases in deposit insurance coverage also produce an increase in crisis risk through
their effects on all three of the macro asset risk measures. In particular, these findings confirm
the view increases in mortgage lending promote greater systemic risk. We conclude that
exogenous increases in deposit insurance generosity produce increases in crisis risk at least
partly through their effects on bank asset risk.
While our data do not permit us to explore alternative explanations for why deposit
insurance should produce a robust increase in risky mortgage lending, we note two obvious
candidate explanations. First, it may be that high rates of mortgage lending entail liquidity risks
(and perhaps other risks) that would not be feasible for banks to bear without safety net
protection. Another way to think about the relationship between rising deposit insurance
generosity and the greater emphasis on mortgage lending by banks is that the two phenomena are
part of a political rent sharing arrangement. If rising deposit insurance generosity creates greater
rents for banks from enhanced protection, then political forces may respond through regulation
or other political influences to encourage banks to share those rents with mortgage borrowers.

26

References
Anginer, Deniz, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Min Zhu, 2014, “How Does Deposit Insurance Affect
Bank Risk? Evidence from the Recent Crisis,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 48: 312321.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, 2001, “Instrumental Variables and the Search for
Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(4): 69-85.
Barth, James; Caprio, Gerard; Levine, Ross, 2001, “The Regulation and Supervision of Banks
Around the World: A New Database,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services,
Robert E. Litan and Richard Herring, Editors, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press, 183-240.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Stephen H. Haber, 2014, Fragile by design: The political origin of
banking crises and scarce credit, The Princeton Economic History of the Western World,
Joel Mokyr, Series Editor.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Matthew Jaremski, 2016, “Deposit Insurance: Theories and Facts,”
Annual Review of Financial Economics, 8(1): 97-120.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Matthew Jaremski, 2018. “Stealing Deposits: Deposit Insurance,
Risk-Taking and the Removal of Market Discipline in Early 20th Century Banks,”
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Jihad Dagher, and Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, 2015, “Housing Finance and RealEstate Booms: A Cross-Country Perspective,” IMF Staff Discussion Note 15/12,
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Chen, Brian S., Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2017. The Decline of Big-Bank
Lending to Small Business: Dynamic Impacts on Local Credit and Labor Markets,”
Working Paper, Harvard Business School, March.
Čihák, Martin, Asli Demirgüc-Kunt, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Amin MohseniCheraghlou, 2012, “Bank Regulation and Supervision Around the World: A Crisis
Update (English)”, Policy Research working paper No. WPS 6286, Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Cournède, Boris, and Oliver Denk, 2015, "Finance and economic growth in OECD and G20
countries," OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 1223.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 2002, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
System Stability? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49:
1373-1406.
27

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Baybars Karacaovali, and Luc Laeven, 2005, “Deposit Insurance around
the World: A Comprehensive Database,” Policy Research Working Paper No. 3628,
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven, 2008a, Deposit Insurance Around the
World: Issues of Design and Implementation, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven, 2008b, "Determinants of depositinsurance adoption and design," Journal of Financial Intermediation 17: 407-438.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Edward Kane, and Luc Laeven, 2014, “Deposit Insurance Database,” IMF
Working Paper, No. 14/118, Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Federico, Pablo, Carlos Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, 2014, “Reserve Requirement Policy over
the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No 20612.
Folkerts-Landau, David, and Carl-Johan Lindgren, 1998, Toward a Framework for Financial
Stability, World Economic and Financial Surveys, International Monetary Fund,
Washington D.C.
Garcia, Gillian G., 1999, “Deposit Insurance: Actual and Best Practices.” IMF Working Paper
No. 99/54, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2015a, “Betting the house,” Journal of
International Economics 96: S2-S18.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2015b, “Leveraged bubbles,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 76, S1-S20.
Kaminsky, Graciela Laura, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2008, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain:
Financial Liberalization and Stock Market Cycles,” Review of Finance, 12: 253-292.
Laeven, Luc, 2004, "The political economy of deposit insurance," Journal of Financial Services
Research 26.3: 201-224.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia, 2013, “Systemic Banking Crises Database,” IMF Economic
Review, 61: 225–270.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2018.“The External Wealth of Nations Revisited:
International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,” IMF
Economic Review, 66: 189-222.
Merton, Robert C., 1977, “An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory,” Journal of Banking and
Finance, 1, 3-11.
28

Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner, 2016, “Household Debt and Business Cycles
Worldwide,” NBER Working Paper No. 21581, Revised July.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2011, “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis,”
American Economic Review, 101(5): 1676-1706.
Stock, James H. Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, 2002, “A Survey of Weak Instruments
and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business &
Economic Statistics, 20(4): 518-529.
Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression,” in James H. Stock and Donald W. K. Andrews, eds., Identification and
Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J Rothenberg, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Wooldridge, Jeffery M., 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
World Bank, 2012, “New Bank Regulation and Supervision Survey, 2012,”
http://go.worldbank.org/SNUSW978P0.

29

Figure 1. Deposit Insurance Adoption

Note: This figure plots the year of deposit insurance adoption by country. Data labels in the figure use International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Source: Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2005), Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2014), national sources, and
authors’ calculations.

30

Figure 2. International Influence and Deposit Insurance Adoption

Note: This figure plots the time series of international influence on deposit insurance adoption.
Source: Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2005), Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2014), national sources, and
authors’ calculations.

31

Figure 3. Growth in Loans-to-Assets and Debt-to-Assets

Note: This figure plots time series of annual growth in debt-to-assets and loans-to assets. Growth is computed as log
differences.
Source: IFS and authors’ calculations.

32

Figure 4. Growth in Household and Mortgage Loans

Note: This figure plots time series of annual growth in household loans as a fraction of total loans, and mortgage
loans as a fraction of total loans. Growth is computed as log differences.
Source: Cerutti, Dagher, and Dell’Ariccia (2017) and authors’ calculations.

33

Figure 5. Stock market volatilities

Note: This figure plots the CBOE volatility index (i.e. VIX) and the S&P 500 realized volatility. Realized volatility
is defined as the scaled sum of squared daily returns.
Source: Datastream and authors’ calculations.

34

Figure 6. Capital flows

Note: This figure plots total capital flows and the annual aggregated flow of external liabilities in the “other
investment” category (which consists largely of interbank borrowing) as a percentage of world GDP. Annual flow is
calculated as changes in annual stock.
Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018) and authors’ calculations.

35

Figure 7. Financial sector liberalization

Note: This figure plots the index of financial sector liberalization. The index takes a value of 3 for repression, 2 for
partial liberalization, and 1 for full liberalization. The index is a cross-country average for advanced economies and
emerging markets separately.
Source: Kaminsky and Schmukler (2008) and authors’ calculations.

36

Variable
ln(loans to assets)

Table 1. Variable Definitions
Definition
Ratio of bank loans to bank assets, in natural logarithm*

Source
IFS

ln(debt to assets)

Ratio of bank debt to bank assets, in natural logarithm*

IFS

ln(household
loans to total
loans)
ln(mortgage loans
to total loans)

Ratio of household loans to bank loans, in natural logarithm*

Cerutti et al.
(2017)

Ratio of mortgage loans to bank loans, in natural logarithm

Cerutti et al.
(2017)

DI (dummy)

Equals 1 if there is no deposit insurance. Equals 0 otherwise.

Coverage score

Equals 0.2 if coverage to GDP per capita ratio ranges from 0 to 1. Equals 0.4 if the
ratio ranges from 1 to 2. Equals 0.6 if the ratio ranges from 2 to 6. Equals 0.8 if the
ratio ranges from 6 to 20. Equals 1 if the ratio is greater than 20.
Deposit insurance coverage to GDP per capita

Demirgüç-Kunt et
al. (2014)
Demirgüç-Kunt et
al. (2014) and
national sources

Coverage ratio
DI score

Inflation

Index combining deposit insurance coverage and coinsurance. Equals coverage score
if coinsurance is zero. Equals 0.5 times coverage score if coinsurance is greater than
zero but smaller than 25%. Equals 0 if coinsurance is greater or equal to 25%.
Inflation, consumer price index (annual percent)

Demirgüç-Kunt et
al. (2014) and
national sources
IFS

GDP growth

Real GDP growth rate (in percent)

IFS

GDP per capita

GDP per capita (constant 2005 US dollars)

World Bank

Post crisis

Equals 1 for the three years following the start of a systemic banking crisis.

Crisis severity

The loss of GDP associated with banking crisis years.

IMF best practice

Dummy variable that takes a value of one for the years 1999 and onwards. The year
1999 was the year that the IMF endorsed deposit insurance by publishing a paper on
best practices and guidelines in deposit insurance.
Proportion of countries with explicit deposit insurance at a given year (in percent).

Laeven and
Valencia (2012)
Laeven and
Valencia (2012)
Garcia (2000)

Emulation
World Bank loan

EU candidacy

EU directive

VIX

Dummy variable that takes the value of one during and following the year that the
World Bank started an adjustment lending program with a country for reforms to
establish deposit insurance, and zero otherwise. The variable takes a value of one for
the following countries and periods: Albania (2002 and onward), Bolivia (1998 and
onward), Bosnia and Herzegovina (1996 and onward), Croatia (1995 and onward), El
Salvador (1996 and onward), Jordan (1995 and onward), Lithuania (1996 and onward),
Nicaragua (2000 and onward), Poland (1993 and onward), Romania (1996 and
onward), Russia (1997 and onward), Ukraine (1998 and onward).
Dummy variable that takes a value of one for the years 1994 and onwards for EU
member countries only (the EU-15), and zero otherwise. The year 1994 was when the
EU Directive on Deposit Insurance came into force.
Dummy variable that takes a value of one for the years 1994 and onwards for EU
candidate countries only (i.e. Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Slovenia), and zero
otherwise. The year 1994 was when the EU Directive on Deposit Insurance came into
force.
CBOE volatility index

S&P realized
volatility

The scaled sum of squared daily returns of the S&P 500 index

Globalization of
banking systems

The annual flow in the external liabilities of “other investment” as a percentage of
world GDP. Annual flow is calculated as changes in annual stock.

Financial sector
The index takes a value of 3 for repression, 2 for partial liberalization, and 1 for full
liberalization
liberalization. The index is a cross-country average for advanced economies
index
and emerging markets separately.
* See Appendix A for details.

Demirgüç-Kunt et
al. (2014)
World Bank
(2004)

Demirgüç-Kunt et
al. (2008)
Demirgüç-Kunt
et al. (2008)

Datastream
Datastream and
authors’
calculations
Lane and MilesiFerretti (2018)
Kaminsky and
Schmukler
(2008)

37

Table 2. Country Coverage
Group

Country

Panel A. Balance sheet ratios model
Advanced

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, United States

Emerging

Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Macedonia,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Oman, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela

Panel B. Household loans and mortgage loans model
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta,
Advanced
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United
States
Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Croatia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines,
Emerging
Poland, Russia, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine

38

Panel A: Sample for balance sheet ratios
model
ln(loans to assets)
ln(debt to assets)
Crisis (dummy)
DI (dummy)
DI score (censored)
Inflation
GDP growth
Crisis loss
IMF best practice
World Bank loan
Emulation
IMF best practice x emulation
EU candidacy
EU directive
Panel B: Household loans and mortgage
loans model
ln(household loans to total loans)
ln(mortgage loans to total loans)
ln(total loans to GDP)
ln(household loans to GDP)
ln(mortgage loans to GDP)
Crisis (dummy)
DI (dummy)
DI score
Inflation
GDP growth
Crisis loss
IMF best practice
World Bank loan
Emulation
IMF best practice x emulation
EU candidacy
EU directive

Table 3. Summary Statistics
Mean
S.D
Min

Median

Max

N

-0.653
-0.098
0.106
1.000
0.460
0.056
0.031
2.290
0.653
0.099
0.386
0.326
0.140
0.219

0.402
0.060
0.308
0.000
0.250
0.074
0.031
10.213
0.476
0.299
0.171
0.244
0.347
0.414

-3.320
-0.320
0.000
1.000
0.000
-0.007
-0.074
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.043
0.000
0.000
0.000

-0.566
-0.094
0.000
1.000
0.400
0.034
0.032
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.447
0.447
0.000
0.000

-0.092
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.632
0.140
106.000
1.000
1.000
0.590
0.590
1.000
1.000

1206
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255
1255

-1.029
-1.621
4.640
3.597
3.055
0.129
1.000
0.445
0.038
0.029
3.605
0.632
0.085
0.371
0.309
0.143
0.310

0.389
0.687
0.630
0.827
1.054
0.336
0.000
0.239
0.033
0.030
13.117
0.483
0.279
0.170
0.241
0.351
0.463

-2.673
-3.725
2.298
0.103
-0.539
0.000
1.000
0.000
-0.014
-0.089
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.043
0.000
0.000
0.000

-1.002
-1.466
4.767
3.771
3.300
0.000
1.000
0.400
0.029
0.029
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.426
0.426
0.000
0.000

-0.454
-0.686
5.933
4.816
4.566
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.225
0.170
106.000
1.000
1.000
0.585
0.585
1.000
1.000

774
570
774
762
564
774
774
774
774
774
774
774
774
774
774
774
774

39

Table 4. Step 1 Results: Probit Model for Deposit Insurance Adoption

IMF best practice
Emulation
IMF best practice X
emulation
World Bank loan
EU candidacy
EU directive
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth

(1)

(2)

(3)

-1.036***

-1.140***

-1.143***

[0.332]

[0.342]

[0.342]

2.271***

2.140***

2.150***

[0.475]

[0.493]

[0.494]

2.240***

2.572***

2.569***

[0.814]

[0.848]

[0.848]

1.126***

1.072***

1.074***

[0.141]

[0.148]

[0.148]

2.715***

2.642***

2.642***

[0.362]

[0.388]

[0.388]

1.814**

1.283

1.277

[0.763]

[0.786]

[0.785]

-3.182***

-2.739***

-2.719***

[0.722]

[0.742]

[0.743]

-4.252***

-4.332***

-4.325***

[0.839]

[0.861]

[0.861]

1.088***

1.061***

1.066***

[0.162]

[0.162]

[0.162]

0.450***

0.391**

[0.136]

[0.177]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.002
[0.004]

Observations

2,771

2,519

2,519

R2

0.278

0.221

0.221

Notes: This table shows step 1 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance
using a probit model. The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio estimated from the
first step as an additional control. The independent variable is the dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if a country has
adopted deposit insurance (see Table 1 for variable definitions). Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

40

Table 5. Dependent Variable: Log of Loans-to-Assets Ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

2.010**

1.984**

2.045**

[0.884]

[0.848]

[0.834]

Inflation

3.179***

3.153***

2.849***

[0.860]

[0.847]

[0.774]

Inflation x Emerging

-4.956***

-4.929***

-4.531***

[1.048]

[1.033]

[0.947]

1.971

1.944

2.265*

DI score

GDP growth
Lambda

[1.227]

[1.198]

[1.283]

0.245***

0.243***

0.236***

[0.064]

[0.062]

[0.060]

0.028

-0.121

[0.074]

[0.096]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.008**
[0.003]

Observations

645

645

645

Number of countries

62

62

62

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

11.84

11.01

9.979

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

9.687

9.867

9.648

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the loans-to-assets ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score
is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of exogenous instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term
of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All
variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in
brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

41

Table 6. Dependent Variable: Log of Household-Loans-to-Total-Loans Ratio
(1)
1.701***
[0.342]
-0.708
[0.439]
0.340
[1.165]
1.683***
[0.616]
-0.145***
[0.035]

(2)
2.281***
[0.499]
-0.609
[0.567]
1.708
[1.206]
0.998*
[0.595]
-0.186***
[0.045]
-0.384***
[0.098]

Observations
Number of countries
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

774
47
0.000

774
47
0.000

(3)
2.332***
[0.508]
-0.643
[0.567]
1.902
[1.198]
1.142*
[0.620]
-0.187***
[0.046]
-0.449***
[0.124]
0.002
[0.002]
774
47
0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)
Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

12.79
17.40

8.072
11.23

8.036
10.91

DI score
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda
Post crisis
Output losses

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the household-loans-to-total-loans ratio. Deposit
insurance (DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an
interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable
definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are
shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

42

Table 7. Dependent Variable: Log of Mortgage-Loans-to-Total-Loans Ratio

DI score
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda

(1)

(2)

(3)

1.686***

2.476***

2.234***

[0.490]

[0.766]

[0.722]

-0.083

0.365

0.005

[0.949]

[1.249]

[1.056]

1.459

2.625

4.399***

[2.190]

[2.124]

[1.651]

1.248

0.969

0.929

[0.773]

[0.816]

[0.801]

-0.349***

-0.342***

-0.412***

[0.076]

[0.077]

[0.082]

-0.344***

-0.397***

[0.114]

[0.144]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.004
[0.003]

Observations

575

575

570

Number of countries

47

47

47

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

20.93

13.36

11.79

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

31.190

21.540

20.900

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the mortgage-loans-to-total-loans ratio. Deposit
insurance (DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an
interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable
definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are
shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

43

Table 8. Dependent Variable: Log of Debt-to-Assets Ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.086*

0.102*

0.114*

[0.046]

[0.062]

[0.065]

Inflation

0.202***

0.223***

0.211***

[0.042]

[0.051]

[0.051]

Inflation x Emerging

-0.197***

-0.210***

-0.190***

[0.045]

[0.051]

[0.050]

0.153*

0.149

0.188*

DI score

GDP growth
Lambda

[0.083]

[0.093]

[0.102]

0.010***

0.008*

0.007

[0.004]

[0.005]

[0.005]

-0.012*

-0.031***

[0.007]

[0.011]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.001***
[0.000]

Observations

1,246

1,246

1,246

69

69

69

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

19.76

16.86

16.32

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

25.05

21.33

20.72

Number of countries

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the debt-to-assets ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score is
treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best
practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables
except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***,
**, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

44

Table 9. Dependent Variable: Log of Loans-to-GDP Ratio

DI score
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda

(1)

(2)

(3)

3.067***

4.277***

4.495***

[0.692]

[1.550]

[1.696]

-0.673

-0.562

-0.651

[0.770]

[1.101]

[1.117]

2.047**

2.790**

2.877**

[0.816]

[1.235]

[1.264]

1.686

1.224

1.641

[1.071]

[1.299]

[1.461]

-0.418***

-0.487***

-0.497***

[0.058]

[0.102]

[0.110]

-0.560**

-0.745**

[0.275]

[0.356]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.005
[0.004]

Observations

766

766

766

Number of countries

47

47

47

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

10.85

6.449

6.392

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

14.61

8.812

8.370

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the loans-to-GDP ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score is
treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best
practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables
except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***,
**, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

45

Table 10. Dependent Variable: Log of Household-Loans-to-GDP Ratio

DI score
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda

(1)

(2)

(3)

5.250***

6.816***

6.998***

[1.053]

[1.716]

[1.778]

-0.922

-0.752

-0.834

[1.272]

[1.691]

[1.699]

2.366

5.469*

5.880*

[2.770]

[3.182]

[3.267]

3.908**

2.377

2.818

[1.724]

[1.769]

[1.859]

-0.629***

-0.728***

-0.736***

[0.101]

[0.140]

[0.144]

-0.999***

-1.193***

[0.319]

[0.393]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.005
[0.006]

Observations

768

768

768

Number of countries

47

47

47

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

10.87

7.097

7.087

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

14.99

9.734

9.461

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the household-loans-to-GDP ratio. Deposit insurance
(DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term
of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All
variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in
brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

46

Table 11. Dependent Variable: Log of Mortgage-Loans-to-GDP Ratio

DI score
Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda

(1)

(2)

(3)

4.206***

5.316***

5.353***

[0.938]

[1.451]

[1.469]

0.996

1.621

1.745

[1.906]

[2.434]

[2.456]

5.301**

6.723**

7.126**

[2.593]

[3.043]

[3.060]

2.204

1.704

2.246

[1.506]

[1.579]

[1.652]

-0.628***

-0.617***

-0.620***

[0.128]

[0.135]

[0.136]

-0.527**

-0.771**

[0.221]

[0.311]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.009
[0.006]

Observations

568

568

568

Number of countries

46

46

46

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

19.55

12.57

12.01

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

30.51

21.17

21

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the mortgage-loans-to-GDP ratio. Deposit insurance
(DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term
of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All
variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in
brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

47

Table 12. Dependent Variable: The Likelihood and Severity of Crises
(1)

(2)

Likelihood of crises

Crisis severity

0.581**

23.416**

[0.232]

[9.898]

Inflation

1.663***

74.324**

[0.563]

[35.753]

Inflation x Emerging

-1.352**

-60.837*

[0.552]

[35.186]

-0.088

-12.752

DI score

GDP growth
Lambda
Observations
Number of countries

[0.342]

[19.124]

-0.096***

-3.536***

[0.027]

[1.270]

1,201

1,201

70

70

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

13.20

13.20

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

17.19

17.19

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The first dependent variable is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 in the first year of a system
banking crisis, and 0 in other years except for years immediately after the start of a banking crisis (the next two years or until the
end of a crisis, whichever is greater), which are treated as missing. Crisis severity is measured as GDP loss associated with
banking crisis years. Deposit insurance (DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best
practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive
(see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent.
Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10
percent, respectively.

48

Table 13. Dependent Variable: The Likelihood and Severity of Crises
Likelihood of crises
(1)
ln(loans/GDP)

(2)

Crisis severity
(3)

(4)

0.207***

7.718***

[0.054]

[2.011]

ln(household loans/GDP)

(5)

0.131***

4.189***

[0.037]

[1.448]

(6)

ln(mortgage loans/GDP)

Inflation
Inflation x Emerging
GDP growth
Observations
Number of countries
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.157***

5.303***

[0.038]

[1.172]

0.162

0.163

-0.191

32.673**

25.158*

88.883***

[0.228]

[0.242]

[0.458]

[15.227]

[14.444]

[32.958]

0.001

0.025

0.659

8.622

8.229

-84.929**

[0.255]

[0.535]

[0.560]

[23.063]

[29.457]

[33.626]

-1.263***

-1.111***

-1.364***

-39.833**

-48.611**

-49.739**

[0.283]

[0.294]

[0.346]

[18.640]

[21.478]

[23.531]

1,017

1,000

617

1,017

1,000

617

51

51

49

51

51

49

0

0

0

0

0

0

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

107.5

77.76

154.1

108.6

77.76

154.1

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

96.97

96.44

128.4

99.62

96.44

128.4

Notes: This table shows step 2 of a standard IV model. The dependent variable measuring the incidence of a crisis is a dummy
variable which takes a value of 1 in the first year of a system banking crisis, and 0 in other years except for years immediately
after the start of a banking crisis (the next two years or until the end of a crisis, whichever is greater), which are treated as
missing. The dependent variable of crisis severity measures the lost GDP associated with crisis years. The instrumented
endogenous variables are the natural logarithms of the loans-to-GDP ratio, the household-loans-to-GDP ratio, and the mortgageloans-to-GDP ratio. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and
emulation, World Bank loan, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the
exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

49

Table 14 – Subsample Robustness of Regression Results
Coefficient (full
Dependent Variable
All
Advanced
model)
Loans/assets
DI score
++
0

Emerging

Household loans/Total loans

DI score

+++

++

+++

Mortgage loans/Total loans

DI score

+++

++

+++

Debt/assets

DI score

++

0

+

Loans/GDP

DI score

+++

0

+++

Household loans/GDP

DI score

+++

0

+++

Mortgage loans/GDP

DI score

+++

+++

++

Likelihood of crisis

DI score

++

++

0

Loans/GDP

+++

+++

0

HH Loans/GDP

+++

+++

0

Mortgages/GDP

+++

+++

0

DI score

++

0

0

Loans/GDP

+++

+++

0

HH Loans/GDP

+++

+++

0

Mortgages/GDP

+++

+++

0

Crisis severity

+++

Notes: This table reviews results for regressions similar to those in Tables 5-13, but for separate subsamples of Advanced or
Emerging economies. 0 indicates that the estimated coefficient is not statistically significantly different from zero. + indicates
that the coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. ++ indicates that the coefficient is positive and
statistically significant at the 5 percent level. +++ indicates that the coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 1
percent level.

50

Table 15 –Robustness of Regression Results to Inclusion of Time-Varying Global Factors
Global
Global
Financial
Coefficient (full
S&P
Dependent Variable
VIX
capital
interbank
liberalizat
model)
volatility
flows
borrowing
ion
Loans/assets
DI score
++
++
0
++
++
Household loans/Total
DI score
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
loans
Mortgage loans/Total loans DI score
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
Debt/assets

DI score

++

++

++

++

Loans/GDP

DI score

++

++

+++

+++

0
+++

Household loans/GDP

DI score

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

Mortgage loans/GDP

DI score

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

Likelihood of crises

DI score

+++

+++

++

++

+++

Loans/GDP

+++

+++

+++

+++

+

HH Loans/GDP

+++

+++

+++

+++

++

Mortgages/GDP

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

DI score

+++

+++

++

++

++

Loans/GDP

+++

+++

+++

+++

+

Crisis severity

HH Loans/GDP
+
++
0
+++
+++
Mortgages/GDP
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
Notes: This table reviews results for regressions similar to those in Tables 5-13, but which add time-varying controls that capture
other global factors (which are the VIX, S&P realized volatility, capital flows, global interbank borrowing, or indices of financial
liberalization). 0 indicates that the estimated coefficient is not statistically significantly different from zero. + indicates that the
coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. ++ indicates that the coefficient is positive and
statistically significant at the 5 percent level. +++ indicates that the coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 1
percent level.

51

Appendix
A. Data source and definitions for balance sheet variables
The data source for aggregate banking system balance sheets is IMF’s International
Financial Statistics (IFS) database. We use the IFS’s monetary data on Other Depository
Corporations, which includes all depository corporations of a country except the central banks.
Our definition of bank assets and liabilities follows the IMF’s Monetary and Financial
Statistics Manual. We measure bank loans by claims on private sector (line 22d). We measure
bank assets as the sum of claims on central banks (line 20), claims on nonresidents (line 21),
claims on central government (line 22a), and claims on other sectors (line 22s). We measure
bank liabilities as the sum of demand deposits included in broad money (line 24), other deposits
included in broad money (line 25), securities other than shares included in broad money (line
26a), deposits excluded from broad money (line 26b), liabilities to nonresidents (line 26c),
liabilities to central government (line 26d), securities other than shares excluded in broad money
(line 26s), loans (line 22l), financial derivatives (line 26m), insurance technical reserves (line
26r). We measure bank equity using shares and other equity (line 27a). The IFS has a residual
item—other items (net) (line 27r)—to classify other unspecified, or country-specific amounts. To
minimize inconsistency due to misreporting, missing values, or other data issues, we check the
following balance sheet identity:
assets  equity  debt  residual ,

and delete all country-year observations in which the discrepancy is larger than 1 percent of bank
assets. 22
B. Additional tables

Inconsistency occurs primarily due to missing values for countries that have not adopted IMF’s standard reporting
forms. If an item from our standard definition is missing, we replace with the sum of detail components when
available.
22

52

Table B1. Step 2 Results: Predicting Deposit Insurance Generosity Through Exogenous Instruments
(Loans-to-Assets Regression Sample)
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.423***

-0.430***

-0.423***

(0.0509)

(0.0502)

(0.0500)

Emulation

0.463***

0.200

0.187

(0.147)

(0.142)

(0.141)

IMF best practice X emulation

0.768***

0.863***

0.855***

IMF best practice

EU candidacy
EU directive
World Bank loan
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda

(0.137)

(0.133)

(0.133)

-0.0678

-0.0564

-0.0399

(0.0433)

(0.0396)

(0.0450)

0.278***

0.204***

0.198***

(0.0447)

(0.0415)

(0.0413)

0.188***

0.139***

0.138***

(0.0464)

(0.0439)

(0.0440)

0.170

-0.105

-0.0802

(0.274)

(0.280)

(0.275)

-0.498

-0.185

-0.213

(0.331)

(0.329)

(0.326)

-1.784***

-1.455***

-1.490***

(0.189)

(0.200)

(0.203)

0.343***

0.255***

0.250***

(0.0484)

(0.0440)

(0.0435)

0.113***

0.144***

(0.0222)

(0.0292)

Post crisis
Output losses

-0.00118
(0.000834)

Observations
Number of countries

1,215

1,215

1,215

69

69

69

Notes: This table shows step 2 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the deposit insurance (DI) score. The set of exogenous instruments used to
predict DI score include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan,
EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are
winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance
at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

53

Table B2. Step 2 Results: Predicting Deposit Insurance Generosity Through Exogenous Instruments
(Household-Loans-to-Total-Loans Regression Sample)
IMF best practice
Emulation

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.464***

-0.435***

-0.436***

(0.0737)

(0.0745)

(0.0745)

0.273

-0.0586

-0.0830

(0.199)

(0.170)

(0.172)

IMF best practice X emulation

0.995***

1.016***

1.024***

(0.206)

(0.197)

(0.197)

World Bank loan

-0.146***

-0.0938**

-0.0947**

(0.0436)

(0.0448)

(0.0459)

EU candidacy
EU directive
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging
GDP growth

0.200***

0.0694

0.0567

(0.0664)

(0.0508)

(0.0502)

0.203***

0.131**

0.123**

(0.0638)

(0.0583)

(0.0582)

-0.207

-0.346

-0.351

(0.285)

(0.289)

(0.289)

-0.215

-0.430

-0.423

(0.434)

(0.439)

(0.439)

-1.169***

-0.567**

-0.553**

(0.247)

(0.232)

(0.235)

Lambda

4.95e-05
(0.000872)

Post crisis

0.266***

0.124**

0.110**

(0.0689)

(0.0516)

(0.0510)

0.135***

0.133***

Output losses

(0.0230)

(0.0335)

Observations

774

774

774

Number of countries

47

47

47

Notes: This table shows step 2 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the deposit insurance (DI) score. The set of exogenous instruments used to
predict DI score include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan,
EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are
winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance
at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

54

Table B3. Step 2 Results: Predicting Deposit Insurance Generosity Through Exogenous Instruments
(Mortgage-Loans-to-Assets Regression Sample)
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.481***

-0.461***

-0.472***

(0.0700)

(0.0716)

(0.0717)

Emulation

0.528***

0.252

0.224

(0.186)

(0.168)

(0.176)

IMF best practice X emulation

0.967***

0.974***

1.001***

(0.191)

(0.189)

(0.189)

EU candidacy

-0.142***

-0.120**

-0.123**

(0.0532)

(0.0520)

(0.0512)

0.443***

0.314***

0.270***

(0.0583)

(0.0539)

(0.0494)

-1.025***

-1.037***

-1.210***

(0.365)

(0.372)

(0.354)

0.360

0.175

0.429

IMF best practice

EU directive
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging

(0.492)

(0.500)

(0.480)

GDP growth

-1.292***

-0.866***

-0.825***

(0.193)

(0.190)

(0.185)

Lambda

0.376***

0.236***

0.241***

(0.0591)

(0.0513)

(0.0571)

0.0912***

0.122***

(0.0225)

(0.0318)

Post crisis
Output losses

-0.00113
(0.000870)

Observations

575

575

575

Number of countries

46

46

46

Notes: This table shows step 2 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the deposit insurance (DI) score. The set of exogenous instruments used to
predict DI score include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan,
EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are
winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance
at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

55

Table B4. Step 2 Results: Predicting Deposit Insurance Generosity Through Exogenous Instruments
(Debt-to-Assets Regression Sample)
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.431***

-0.441***

-0.436***

(0.0498)

(0.0490)

(0.0489)

Emulation

0.395***

0.147

0.135

(0.145)

(0.141)

(0.140)

IMF best practice X emulation

0.821***

0.917***

0.912***

IMF best practice

EU candidacy
EU directive
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging
GDP growth
Lambda
Post crisis

(0.138)

(0.135)

(0.135)

-0.0544

-0.0454

-0.0297

(0.0427)

(0.0400)

(0.0445)

0.269***

0.198***

0.193***

(0.0441)

(0.0413)

(0.0411)

0.181***

0.134***

0.133***

(0.0454)

(0.0432)

(0.0433)

-0.0697

-0.337

-0.314

(0.282)

(0.289)

(0.286)

-0.208

0.0953

0.0664

(0.339)

(0.337)

(0.337)

-1.666***

-1.366***

-1.403***

(0.185)

(0.196)

(0.199)

0.332***

0.248***

0.244***

(0.0466)

(0.0425)

(0.0421)

0.103***

0.134***

(0.0218)

(0.0286)

1,254

1,254

1,254

69

69

69

Output losses
Observations
Number of countries

Notes: This table shows step 2 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the deposit insurance (DI) score. The set of exogenous instruments used to
predict DI score include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, World Bank loan,
EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the exogenous instruments are
winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance
at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

56

Table B5. Step 3 Robustness: Estimates for Loans-to-Assets Ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.602**

0.779**

0.818**

[0.262]

[0.324]

[0.344]

Inflation

1.325***

1.459***

1.430***

[0.280]

[0.313]

[0.309]

Inflation X Emerging

-2.198***

-2.289***

-2.239***

[0.302]

[0.333]

[0.328]

GDP growth

0.943**

1.076**

1.182**

[0.465]

[0.503]

[0.543]

World Bank loan

0.241***

0.224***

0.221***

[0.040]

[0.046]

[0.048]

0.137***

0.121***

0.119***

[0.023]

[0.028]

[0.029]

-0.061

-0.112*

[0.041]

[0.062]

DI score

lambda
Post crisis
Output losses

0.002
[0.001]

Observations

1,215

1,215

1,215

Number of countries

69

69

69

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0

0

0

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

20.94

17.02

16.31

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

28.04

23.31

22.47

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the loans-to-assets ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score
is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best
practice and emulation, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the
exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

57

Table B6. Step 3 Robustness: Estimates for Household-Loans-to-Total-Loans Ratio
DI score
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging
GDP growth
World Bank loan
lambda

(1)
1.707***
[0.346]
-0.701
[0.441]
0.345
[1.167]
1.693***
[0.621]
-0.110
[0.102]
-0.146***
[0.035]

(2)
2.293***
[0.506]
-0.596
[0.571]
1.725
[1.212]
1.011*
[0.600]
-0.202
[0.141]
-0.188***
[0.046]
-0.386***
[0.099]

774
47
6.22e-09

774
47
7.63e-06

-0.188***
[0.046]
-0.450***
[0.124]
0.002
[0.002]
774
47
6.96e-06

13.73
20.73

7.963
13.29

8.022
12.95

Post crisis
Output losses
Observations
Number of countries
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)
Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

(3)
2.341***
[0.510]
-0.642
[0.569]
1.909
[1.200]
1.149*
[0.623]

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the household-loans-to-total-loans ratio. Deposit
insurance (DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an
interaction term of IMF best practice and emulation, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All
variables except for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in
brackets. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

58

Table B7. Step 3 Robustness: Estimates for Debt-to-Assets Ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.089**

0.105**

0.114**

[0.037]

[0.046]

[0.047]

Inflation

0.209***

0.230***

0.216***

[0.041]

[0.047]

[0.046]

Inflation X Emerging

-0.197***

-0.210***

-0.189***

[0.044]

[0.048]

[0.047]

GDP growth

0.174**

0.171**

0.205***

[0.071]

[0.074]

[0.079]

World Bank loan

-0.011**

-0.012**

-0.013**

[0.005]

[0.006]

[0.006]

0.009**

0.007*

0.006

[0.003]

[0.004]

[0.004]

-0.012**

-0.031***

[0.006]

[0.009]

DI score

lambda
Post crisis
Output losses

0.001***
[0.000]

Observations

1,254

1,254

1,254

69

69

69

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

0
22.70

0
19.12

0
18.47

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

30.09

25.58

24.84

Number of countries

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the debt-to-assets ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score is
treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best
practice and emulation, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the
exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

59

Table B8. Step 3 Robustness: Estimates for Loans-to-GDP Ratio

DI score
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging
GDP growth
World Bank loan
lambda

(1)

(2)

(3)

3.048***

4.237***

4.451***

[0.676]

[1.497]

[1.635]

-0.645

-0.533

-0.620

[0.766]

[1.091]

[1.107]

2.029**

2.761**

2.844**

[0.812]

[1.220]

[1.247]

1.677

1.214

1.628

[1.055]

[1.272]

[1.428]

-0.558***

-0.710**

-0.740**

[0.192]

[0.310]

[0.331]

-0.421***

-0.490***

-0.500***

[0.058]

[0.101]

[0.109]

-0.554**

-0.737**

[0.266]

[0.346]

Post crisis
Output losses

0.005
[0.004]

Observations

766

766

766

Number of countries

47

47

47

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

11.45

6.266

6.192

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

17.38

10.40

9.871

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the loans-to-GDP ratio. Deposit insurance (DI) score is
treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term of IMF best
practice and emulation, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except for the
exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

60

Table B9. Step 3 Robustness: Estimates for Household-Loans-to-GDP Ratio
(1)

(2)

(3)

5.250***

6.814***

6.994***

[1.049]

[1.702]

[1.762]

-0.882

-0.703

-0.783

[1.275]

[1.693]

[1.701]

2.408

5.527*

5.939*

[2.772]

[3.184]

[3.269]

GDP growth

3.924**

2.393

2.835

[1.723]

[1.764]

[1.853]

World Bank loan

-0.764**

-0.994**

-1.027**

[0.324]

[0.445]

[0.459]

-0.633***

-0.734***

-0.742***

[0.102]

[0.141]

[0.145]

-1.000***

-1.194***

[0.318]

[0.391]

DI score
Inflation
Inflation X Emerging

lambda
Post crisis
Output losses

0.005
[0.006]

Observations

768

768

768

Number of countries

47

47

47

Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid pval)

0.000

0.000

0.000

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid stat)

11.40

6.822

6.805

Cragg-Donald Wald (weakid stat)

17.82

11.49

11.16

Notes: This table shows step 3 results of a three-step model. The first step estimates the probability of enacting deposit insurance.
The second and third steps proceed as a standard IV model with the inverse Mills ratio (lambda) estimated from the first step as
an additional control. The independent variable is the natural logarithm of the household-loans-to-GDP ratio. Deposit insurance
(DI) score is treated as an endogenous variable. The set of instruments include IMF best practice, emulation, an interaction term
of IMF best practice and emulation, EU candidacy, and EU directive (see Table 1 for variable definitions). All variables except
for the exogenous instruments are winsorized at the 1 and 99 percent. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets. ***, **, and
* represent statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent, respectively.

61

