NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET EXPANDING OR MARKET STEALING? COMPETITION WITH NETWORK
EFFECTS IN BIKESHARING
Guangyu Cao
Ginger Zhe Jin
Xi Weng
Li-An Zhou
Working Paper 24938
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24938

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

Previously circulated as "Market Expanding or Market Stealing? Platform Competition in Bike-Sharing."
We thank ofo executives for sharing data with us and for tirelessly answering our questions. Cao personally
thanks the fund support for his PhD study from Guanghuaofo Center for Sharing Economy Research
and Will Hunting Capital. All data employed in this article are aggregated operating indices without
identifiable information on any individual user or any individual behavior. We are only authorized
to use these data and the ownership of the data is retained by ofo. We appreciate constructive comments
from Marc Rysman, Feng Zhu, Joe Wyer, Ying Fan, seminar attendants at Peking University, University
of British Columbia and Rice University, and conference attendants at the NBER IO conference, the
HBS Platform Strategy Conference, and the NBER workshop on Electric and Autonomous Vehicles.
All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Guangyu Cao, Ginger Zhe Jin, Xi Weng, and Li-An Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Market Expanding or Market Stealing? Competition with Network Effects in BikeSharing
Guangyu Cao, Ginger Zhe Jin, Xi Weng, and Li-An Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 24938
August 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. D22,L1,L4,L9,R4
ABSTRACT
Using staggered entry of two dockless bikesharing firms, we find the entrant expands the market for
the incumbent. The entry helps the incumbent to serve a greater number of trips, make more bike investment,
achieve higher revenue per trip, improve bike utilization rate, and form a wider and more evenly distributed
network. The market expansion effect on new users dominates a significant marketstealing effect on
old users. These findings, together with a theoretical model that highlights consumer search and network
effects, suggest that a market with positive network effects is not necessarily winnertakesall, especially
when users multihome across compatible networks.

Guangyu Cao
Guanghua School of Management
Guanghua-ofo Center
for Sharing Economy Research
Peking University
Beijing 100871
China
cgy1117@pku.edu.cn
Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3115F Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu

Xi Weng
Room 304, Guanghua New Bldg
Peking University
Beijing, China
wengxi125@gsm.pku.edu.cn
Li-An Zhou
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
CHINA
zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn

From telephone to online platforms, many markets feature direct or indirect network ef­
fects.1 It is of concern that positive network effects could lead to winner­takes­all, where
competing firms find it difficult to enter and survive even if they are more efficient than
the incumbent.2 In the meantime, multi­homing and compatibility could alleviate the anti­
competitive concerns.3 How do firms compete when they face positive network effects and
multi­homing users? To what extent does the entry of a competitor expand or steal the user
base of the incumbent? How do price, sales, and investment of the incumbent change as a
result of entry? Are there other competitive considerations besides the potential of winner­
takes­all?
We take these questions to the dockless bike­sharing market of China. ofo4 , the first bike­
sharing firm in China, was founded in 2015 by a student of Peking University (PKU). Due
to travel inconvenience on a large college campus, ofo started as a two­sided platform that
allowed students to share privately owned bikes via an online app. Soon after, the online­
to­offline (O2O) platform decided to supply the GPS­tracked dockless bikes itself and effec­
tively became one­sided. This shift accounts for a major difference between bike­sharing and
ride­sharing as of today, but research advance on autonomous vehicles could motivate ride­
sharing platforms (e.g. Uber or Lyft) to move towards a one­sided network similar to that
of bike­sharing. In this sense, what we observe in bike­sharing today could have important
implications for the future market of other transportation means.
As documented by a burgeoning literature5 , bike­sharing solves the “last­mile” problem
1

Telephone is a classical example of direct network effects: consumers are more willing to join a network
if they can reach more people in that network. Many two­sided platforms feature indirect network effects. For
example, sellers (buyers) are more willing to join eBay if eBay attracts more buyers (sellers) on the other side;
and firms are more willing to list in a yellow page if the yellow page can reach a larger number of consumers.
2
The main concern is that users may be reluctant to switch away from the incumbent because they all enjoy
the presence of other users in the same network. In some circumstances, users may coordinate on the wrong
(inferior) network, the incumbent firm may have incentives to develop a proprietary network to lock in users,
and the “excess inertia” may result in winner­takes­all. Even if multiple firms can compete to be the “winner”
of the market, such competition can be inefficient from the social planner’s point of view (see the review of
Farrell and Klemperer (2007)).
3
On multi­homing, Caillaud and Jullien (2003) and Halaburda and Yehezkel (2013) show that multi­homing
tends to intensify competition. But the recent work of Bryan and Gans (2019) suggests that competition equilib­
rium depends on whether multi­homing occurs on one or two sides of ride­sharing platforms. On compatibility,
Katz and Shapiro (1985) show that large, reputable firms tend to choose incompatibility while small, weak firms
tend to choose compatibility. Farrell and Saloner (1986) further show “excess inertia” and “excess momentum”
in a dynamic setting.
4
“ofo” is the trademark of the firm, symbolizing a person riding a bicycle. To keep the full meaning of the
trademark, we do not capitalize the first letter even if a sentence starts with “ofo.”
5
Kabra et al. (2018), Zheng et al. (2018) and O’Mahony and Shmoys (2015) have studied docked bike­
sharing in London, New York and Paris. Pan et al. (2018) study the dockless bike­sharing firm, Mobike, in
China. All of them focus on the operation of a single bike­sharing network, such as network effects, consumer
demand for bikes in the existing bike network, the optimal way to locate bike docks, and algorithms that could
reduce the imbalance between bike demand and bike supply.

1

of local transportation.6 There are positive network effects among bike riders because a
user who rides a bike from A to B makes the bike available for the next rider at point B.
Such “consumption­as­supply” is particularly attractive in dockless bike­sharing. It no longer
requires fixed docks at the origin and destination of a trip, which mitigates the potential
imbalance of demand and supply in different locations at different times.7 When thousands
of users ride ofo bikes in a small area, the wide availability of ofo bikes increases the expected
probability to find a bike at the needed time and location and therefore encourages more users
to use bike­sharing. In addition, more users on the road motivate ofo to put more bikes on the
market, which further increases each user’s willingness to use ofo.8 Thanks to these positive
network effects, ofo grew exponentially from a college campus to more than 250 cities in 20
countries by January 2018.9
ofo’s growth has attracted numerous competitors, of which Mobike is the biggest rival.
From the outset, ofo and Mobike were estimated to have more than 90% of the bike­sharing
market in China10 , making many cities a de facto monopoly or duopoly. If both entered the
city, most consumers multi­home because the two bikes are almost perfect substitutes at the
same time and location.11 In this sense, the two networks are compatible and users are free
to multi­home.
We first demonstrate the effects of Mobike’s entry on ofo, and then present a theoretical
model to explore the most likely explanations for the empirical facts. More specifically, we
track news reports12 and combine them with ofo’s proprietary data. This process identifies 59
cities that were first served by ofo and then joined by Mobike. We label them ofo First cities.
There are another 23 ofo Alone cities and 22 Mobike First cities.13 Because ofo started half
a year earlier than Mobike, it is natural to consider ofo as an incumbent and Mobike as an
entrant. With this sequence in mind, we apply difference­in­differences (DID) to the sample
of ofo Alone and ofo First cities, while taking Mobike’s city­specific entry as the “treatment.”
6

Most Chinese use bike for regular commute instead of leisure or entertainment. See more details in Section

I.
7

Dockless bike­sharing does not completely solve the imbalance problem. See more detailed discussion in
Section I.
8
This is similar to the positive feedback between demand and supply on a two­sided platform, though in our
case the supply side is integrated with the firm.
9
See the report from i­yiou at https://www.iyiou.com/p/64688, as of January 17, 2018.
10
Industry research reports from different sources (such as iResearch, TrustDada and Analysys) cross­validate
this number and some even claim that this number is estimated to be larger than 95%.
11
Both apps adopt Wechat Pay and Alipay, the two most widely accepted electronic payment systems in
China.
12
We track news reports from 9/7/2015 to 9/14/2017.
13
Our sample does not cover all the 200+ cities serviced by ofo, mostly because some cities do not have
complete city attribute data from the 2016 China City Statistical Yearbook. We will elaborate our sample
criterion and the definitions of ofo First, ofo Alone and Mobike First cities in Section II.D.

2

Simple regressions suggest that Mobike’s entry has expanded the market for ofo, driving
up ofo’s trip volume by 40.8% and ofo’s average revenue per trip by 0.041 RMB (listing
price is 1 RMB per trip). This result is robust to heterogeneous time trends, placebo test,
and an instrumental variable (IV) approach to address the potential endogeneity of Mobike
entry. The IV is the projected Mobike’s entry date in a city, where the projection uses the
timing of Mobike’s venture capital funding (eight rounds in total) and the city’s predetermined
attributes such as population, geographic feature and transportation infrastructure. When we
separate new and old users within ofo, we find that Mobike’s entry has reduced the percent of
old users that remain active on ofo, but this market stealing effect is dominated by expansion
in new users. Unlike other markets with positive network effects, bike­sharing firms can
directly influence the network size by bike investment. Analysis suggests that ofo has put
more bikes in the ofo First markets after Mobike’s entry, above and beyond the investment it
made in ofo Alone markets; and ofo’s bike utilization rate ­ measured by the number of trips
per ofo bike per day ­ has increased significantly upon Mobike entry.
Above all, competition seems to have motivated the incumbent to invest more and benefit
the incumbent in at least three dimensions (trip volume, revenue per trip, and bike utiliza­
tion). The effect on bike utilization rate is particularly interesting, because we cannot simply
explain it by the incumbent responding to entry by aggressive investment. Moreover, the ef­
fects on volume, price and utilization happen despite the fact that bike­sharing features pos­
itive network effects, multi­homing and network compatibility. This raises three immediate
questions: first, what mechanism leads to the overall market expansion for the incumbent?
Second, why didn’t the incumbent expand the network as much by itself before the second
firm entered? Third, why does the incumbent choose its post­entry investment such that the
bike utilization rate is higher after the entry than before the entry?
To answer these questions, we model bike­sharing in monopoly and duopoly respectively.
In both types of market, consumers decide whether to search for a bike, given the price of
each firm and the expected probability of finding a bike. In addition to price, firms also
decide on bike investment, which influences the matching probability subject to investment
costs. Naturally, congestion creates a negative network effect but if the matching technology
exhibits increasing return to scale, it also creates positive network effects, as more bikes on
the market and more consumers searching increase the matching efficiency. In light of these
network effects, we derive how firm(s) choose price and bike investment in a subgame perfect
equilibrium.14
Under weak conditions, the model predicts higher price in duopoly than in monopoly but
the comparison on trade volume, bike investment and bike utilization rate depends on a few
14

We only consider symmetric equilibrium in duopoly, given the similarity between ofo and Mobike.

3

factors. The first factor is positive network effects modeled as a matching technology with
increasing return to scale. When there is significant increasing return in matching, duopoly
competition will generate a market expansion effect that is large enough to dominate the
business stealing effect. In that case, each duopolist has incentive to make greater bike in­
vestment than the monopolist, and as a result serve more trips. When the increasing return
is high enough, duopoly could also feature a higher bike utilization rate than monopoly. An­
other factor is investment cost. If cost per bike is constant, positive network effects would
motivate the monopolist to invest in infinite bikes, leaving no room for entry. If cost per bike
is increasing – a realistic assumption because it requires more effort to balance and maintain
a large and diverse network of bikes – each firm must trade off the motive to expand due
to positive network effects and the cost of investment. When investment cost (per firm) is
convex enough, two firms investing at the same time is more cost­efficient than a single firm
making all the investment. With increasing return in matching, competitor’s investment also
make one’s own investment more efficient, in terms of persuading more consumers to search
and improving the matching rate. The monopolist alone cannot achieve the same efficiency,
because it must shoulder the full cost to get to the same scale and the cost might be too con­
vex to justify the investment.15 Towards the end of the paper, we articulate why alternative
stories – such as advertising, price war, investment war, and cost of the outside good – do not
explain why a competitive entry can expand the market and enhance the incumbent’s invest­
ment efficiency at the same time. Moreover, these alternative explanations are less consistent
with the facts, when we conduct further analyses in light of our model predictions.
Our work is closest to the literature of network economy. By focusing on a market with
potentially positive network effects, we show that competition expands the overall market.
The monopolist may not exhaust all the positive network effects by itself, because the entrant
extends the overall network of bikes and the incumbent can enjoy that positive spillover at
a lower cost through competitor’s investment than through its own investment. This impli­
cation departs from the typical concern of winner­takes­all. Moreover, the positive network
effects are reinforced by compatibility between competitors. Existing theories tend to focus
on the choice of (in)compatibility while setting the cost of operation independent of network
size (Katz and Shapiro 1985).16 In bike­sharing, firms take compatibility as given but choose
bike investment endogenously. Because bike investment affects the matching rate, it has a
direct impact on network size in equilibrium.
Our work also differs from the empirical literature of network markets. Instead of esti­
15

Our model further proves that decreasing return matching could not explain higher utilization rate post
entry, nor could constant or concave cost of investment.
16
Katz and Shapiro (1985) model compatibility through a fixed cost, but they assume the variable cost is
constant (zero) regardless of network size.

4

mating how the number of users affects user evaluation17 , we document the impact of entry
on the incumbent, with a focus on the incumbent’s strategic choices (in price and invest­
ment) as well as the incumbent’s market performance (in trade volume, utilization rate and
geographic network reach). In doing so, we identify the effect of competition from the data
directly, rather than inferring it from demand estimates and supply­side assumptions.
Finally, our results highlight competition with the outside good. Many theories of two­
sided markets, such as Armstrong (2006) and Bryan and Gans (2019), emphasize head­to­
head competition between platforms, but assume away competition between platforms and
the outside good. In our context, attracting new users to search for a bike is essential to market
expansion. The market expansion effect of competition is similar to what has been found
in industrial agglomeration and retailer clustering, although typical agglomeration does not
feature positive network effects within one or more firms.18 Because of positive spillovers
between bike­sharing firms, our work contrasts the market stealing effect documented in
other network markets (Seamans and Zhu 2013; Angelucci and Cagé forthcoming).
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section I describes the background. Section
II summarizes the data. Section III describes our main econometric specifications. Section IV
reports the baseline empirical results. Section V presents a theoretical model that highlights
consumer search and network effects. The model also clarifies how positive network effects
differ from alternative explanations. Section VI reports further data analysis in light of the
model. Section VII concludes with policy implications.
I. Background
Public transit and bicycle were the primary transportation means in China before private
ownership of automobile took off in 1990s. As a result, major city roads include dedicated
bike lanes and there is no requirement for bike helmet.19 Traditional bike­sharing systems
provide bike rental service through stations, which means that each bike is docked at a station,
17

The empirical literature has estimated network effects in many settings. For one­sided markets, the litera­
ture has estimated the direct network effects of spreadsheet, ATM, compact disk player, and VCR, and studied
strategic pricing and technology adoption in light of the network effects (Saloner and Shepard 1995; Gandal
1994; Gandal et al. 2000; Park 2004). For two­sided markets, the literature has documented the indirect net­
work effects in yellow pages, magazines, newspapers, video games, and online platforms, and examined the
implication of these network effects on pricing, advertising, product positioning, and market structure (Rysman
2004; Kaiser and Wright 2006; Kaiser and Song 2009; Dubé et al. 2010; Kim et al. 2014; Angelucci and Cagé
forthcoming).
18
Researchers have shown that competing retailers may choose to cluster at the same mall because it lowers
consumer search cost (Vitorino 2012), automobile dealers may locate near each other despite the intensified
competition (Murry and Zhou 2018), and industries may agglomerate in the same region to enjoy positive
spillovers in consumers, supplies, labors, and ideas (Ellison et al. 2010).
19
Bike­sharing systems have gone through a few generations, mostly driven by technological development
in electronically­locking racks, telecommunication systems, smartcards and fobs, mobile phone access, and
on­board computers (DeMaio 2003; DeMaio and Gifford 2004; DeMaio 2009; Zhang et al. 2015).

5

riders must pick up a bike from one station, and return it to this or another station within the
same network. The distance between stations and origins/destinations may be far and the
capacity of stations is limited, thus the coverage of traditional bike­sharing systems is often
restricted.
We focus on the emerging dockless bike­sharing platforms that originated in China. Users
can use smart phones to scan the QR code on the bike lock and reset it after finishing the trip
at any authorized area, which is well summarized by an ofo slogan “anytime and anywhere.”
From the second half of 2015, the whole bike­sharing industry has absorbed venture invest­
ment up to 4 billion USD and accumulatively placed more than 25 million bikes in hundreds
of Chinese cities. Anecdotes suggest that, in the cities with high penetration, most bike rid­
ers use dockless bike­sharing rather than private bikes. From ofo’s transactional data, we
observe two distinct spikes of bike usage, one at 8am and the other at 6pm throughout a day.
This pattern confirms that bike­sharing is largely used for daily commute rather than leisure
or entertainment. It is estimated that the boom of dockless bike­sharing has contributed 221.3
billion RMB to economic development, created more than 390,000 jobs, and led to a welfare
improvement equivalent to 175.9 billion RMB in 2017 (China Academy of Information and
Communications Technology 2018). There are also environmental benefits from dockless
bike­sharing, in terms of reduced petrol consumption and decreased CO2 and NOx emissions
(Zhang and Mi 2018).
ofo and Mobike are two leading firms in dockless bike­sharing, both originated in China
but now operating worldwide. As the first dockless bike­sharing firm, ofo was launched on
September 7, 2015 in Beijing with bikes colored yellow. At the very beginning, ofo restricted
its service within college campus and limited bike outflow in many cities, which offers an
opportunity for the placebo test described in Section VI. The campus­specific operation strat­
egy was eliminated on November 17, 2016 when ofo declared full embrace of city coverage.
Mobike is the main competitor of ofo, which originated in Shanghai on April 22, 2016 with
bikes colored orange. As of January 2018, ofo has placed dockless bikes in more than 250
cities in 20 countries. In comparison, Mobike had placed their bikes in 176 cities of 7 coun­
tries by the end of 2017. The quick growth of ofo and Mobike has encouraged more entry.20
However, various industry reports conclude that ofo and Mobike account for 90% to 95% of
the bike­sharing markets from the very beginning.21 That is why we focus on the competi­
tion between ofo and Mobike, especially how the new entrant (Mobike) affects the incumbent
20

Some estimates suggest that nearly 30 new bike­sharing platforms were established in 2016 alone. See the
report from National Business Daily: http://www.nbd.com.cn/articles/2017­01­05/1067671.html.
21
On October 25,2017, two second­tier bike­sharing firms, Youon and Hellobike, agreed to merge. On April
4, 2018, Meituan took the full control of Mobike at a price of 2.7 billion USD. These two market events may
shake the market structure profoundly, whereas both happened after our sample period.

6

(ofo).
A few bike­sharing studies have examined the network feature of docked bikes
23

the problem of bike rebalance.

22

and

Our paper focuses on platform competition while taking

the nature of network effects as given. Because dockless systems rely on consumers’ actual
demand to define bike accessibility and bike availability, the two competing systems are
substitutes and complements at the same time. On the one hand, if ofo and Mobike bikes
are available at the same location, they are perfect substitutes. But depletion of ofo bikes
can be complemented by the remaining Mobike bikes, hence having the competitor’s bikes
at the same place could increase bike availability and enhance consumer willingness to use
bike­sharing. On the other hand, if ofo and Mobike bikes are placed at different locations,
the overall network of bike­sharing is expanded. More consumers will find bikes accessible
near the origin, and their usage will increase bike availability at the destination. It can even
expand the overall network to new locations. Because of these features, it takes a full model to
describe how consumer search and network effects affect each firm’s pricing and investment
decisions, and whether competition would have a net market expanding or market stealing
effect on the incumbent.
Although dockless bike­sharing facilitates “consumption­as­supply”, the cost of bike main­
tenance and rebalance is non­trivial. According to ofo executives, average cost per bike is
U­shaped. There is some economy of scale at the beginning, but two factors contribute to
the turning point. The first one is geographic scope of bike rebalance. Imagine a circle city
in which bikes are diffused from city center to the edge. The cost of rebalancing bikes to
the center increase quadratically as the circle expands. On top of this, the cost of managing
bicycle mechanics also increases with bike usage. On the one hand, it is more difficult to
monitor mechanics as the number of mechanics increases, leading to an increase in moral
hazard. On the other hand, mechanics are allocated by geographic grids. When bikes (and
bike use) per grid rise rapidly, “effective intervention” of mechanics cannot catch up in the
same speed. These managerial difficulties suggest that average cost per bike could increase
22

Zheng et al. (2018) set up a structural demand model to estimate consumer preference for docked bikes in
the London bike­sharing system. They demonstrate that the existing station network is far from ideal. Using
data from a similar bike­sharing system in Paris, Kabra et al. (2018) stress that both station accessibility and
bike availability are important for consumer demand. Dockless bike­sharing can mitigate accessibility and
availability problems because it is possible to find a dockless bike near one’s home or workplace. However,
less constraint on parking location may also make bikes more dispersedly distributed and reduce bike availability
at a particular location. In this sense, consumption­as­supply becomes more important in a dockless system,
as consumers rely more on other consumers to “supply” a bike in an accessible hotspot. It also changes the
nature of the network effect from a fixed network of bike stations to an evolving network of bikes “floating”
throughout the city.
23
Both docked and dockless bike­sharing face the problem of bike rebalance, which has been the focus of a
few studies (O’Mahony and Shmoys (2015), Pan et al. (2018))

7

with the number of bikes, even if firms may enjoy volume discount from bike manufacturers.
Both ofo and Mobike charge consumers by trip and time spent in the trip. ofo’s listing
price is 1 RMB per hour, while Mobike’s listing price is 1 RMB per 30 minutes. The two
prices are essentially identical, because ofo data indicates that more than 99% of the trips
end in less than 30 minutes. On top of the listing price, both firms engaged in aggressive
marketing campaigns such as trip coupons, free riding day, and monthly card for 1 RMB.
While some marketing campaigns target new users (e.g. the first three rides free), most
promotional activities apply to both old and new users. Thanks to marketing, the average
transaction price per trip can be significantly lower than the listing price. Probably because
price per trip is low as compared to the average GDP per Capita (66990 RMB per year in
our sample), ofo executives told us that users do not price shop at the time of consumption.
More important are accessibility and availability (of any bike). For this reason, many users
multi­home. Both publicly available reports24 and internal evaluation from ofo estimate that
30­40% users simultaneously adopt ofo and Mobike. This number underestimates the degree
of multi­homing, because it is derived from Android apps only and all smartphone users
can access bike­sharing in many other ways (e.g. inside WeChat, Alipay, and Didi apps).
Moreover, it is computed nationwide while obviously one does not need both apps if only
one of them operates in a city.
II. Data and Sample Construction
We combine data from several resources: ofo aggregates transactional data by time and
geography, a few online platforms provide data about weather and air quality, and the 2016
China City Statistical Yearbook reports city attributes. Below we first explain each data
source, and then describe our sample construction.
A.Transactional Data from ofo
ofo has kept full records of consumer usage, including the start and end times of each
trip, longitude and latitude of the origin and the destination, listing price for the ride, and the
amount actually paid after coupon redemption. From the first usage time of each physical
bike, we can also calculate ofo’s bike placement in each city over time. To protect user
privacy, consumer data are aggregated to grid or city level.
We start with daily trip volume qgct , defined as the total number of ofo bike trips con­
sumed in city c, day t and grid g. Grids are defined according to the longitude and latitude
of the origin up to two decimal places. For example, trips originating from (23.1632◦ N,
113.3578◦ E) and (23.1677◦ N, 113.3529◦ E) will be counted as trips within the same grid
24

See the “Industry Research Report on Bike­Sharing (2017)” released by QuestMobile and “Industry Re­
search Report on Bike­Sharing Development (2017Q1&Q2)” issued by Trustdata.

8

∑
(23.16◦ N, 113.35◦ E). Aggregating it to the city level, we have log(Qct ) = log( g qgct ) for
city c at day t.
Daily trip volume also provides an opportunity to describe the spatial distribution of bike
trips. We construct two measures: one is log(#Gridsct ), namely the total number of unique
grids covered by (the origin) of any ofo bike trips in a city­day. This measure aims to describe
the width of the spatial network of ofo bikes as realized by consumption. The second measure
aims to describe how evenly the consumption is distributed in this network. In particular, we
follow the definition of the Gini Coefficient, whereas “inequality” refers to trip distribution
among grids instead of income distribution among population. Adopting the same method
as Alesina et al. (2016), we define the base as all grids that are ever covered by ofo within a
city throughout our sample period. If at day t city c no trip occurs in grid g, then qgct = 0.
Assuming that there are n grids in the city and g = 1 to n are
in the non­decreasing
]
[ indexed∑
order, we define the Gini Coverage Index as Ginict =

1
n

n+1−2

n
g=1

(n+1−g)qgct
∑n
g=1 qgct

. An­

other way to define Ginict is conditional on the grids that ofo has already covered in the city
before Mobike’s entry, which is a subset of the base used in the first version. We will report
results on both measures of Ginict .
As detailed in Section I, ofo’s listing price is 1 RMB per hour, while Mobike’s listing
price is 1 RMB per 30 minutes. The two prices are essentially identical because more than
99% of the trips end in less than 30 minutes. Since marketing campaigns led to fluctuations
in price actually paid, we define two variables to capture the transaction price: the first is
average revenue per trip (pct ), which is the simple average of total amount actually paid per
ride within a city­day. It is a proxy for the average transaction price per trip. Considering that
many consumers can ride for free because of coupons or other marketing activities, we also
compute percent of free trips (%Freect ) as an alternative measure of price within a city­day.
We define U tilizationct as the trip volume of a city­day divided by the total number of
ofo bikes on the market at that city­day. Because bike investment is sparse, we aggregate
the number of new bikes that ofo places in city c of month m as Investmentcm , thus the
regressions on bike investment are organized by city­month instead of city­day.
To examine market expansion and market stealing, it is important to distinguish old and
new users of ofo. If user i registers on the ofo app at day t, she is a new user on day t
and becomes an old user in any day after t. From all users’ registration history, we define
log(#N ewU sersct ) based on the total number of new users that register on ofo in that par­
ticular city­day. We also define %ActiveOldct as the percent of old users that have used any
ofo bike in that city­day, and #T rips_perOldct as the ratio between the total trips initiated
by old users and the total count of old users.
As mentioned in Section I, in some cities ofo started on a college campus and gradually
9

expanded to the rest of the city. We define the dummy 1campus equal to 1 if ofo restricts its
operation within the college campus and 0 otherwise.
B.Weather Data and Air Quality
Weather conditions and air quality have profound impacts on the choice of travel means.
Long before the emergence of bike­sharing, researchers had examined the effects of weather
on bike use (Hanson and Hanson 1977; Hopkinson et al. 1989; Nankervis 1999) and explored
the impact of air pollution exposure on commuting modes (Hertel et al. 2008; Chertok et al.
2004). We use a website crawler to obtain relevant data from two open­source databases.
China Meteorological Data Service Center (CMDSC) provides an inquiry interface for hourly
data from meteorological stations, which is averaged within each calendar day and completed
through co­kriging interpolation if data from some stations are missing.25 China Air Quality
Online Monitoring and Analysis Platform collects historical air quality data from the Ministry
of Ecology and Environment and makes it available to the public. We choose Air Quality
Index as the measure of air quality in a city­day.26
C. Predetermined City­Level Attributes
From media report and published executive interviews, we identify four groups of city
attributes that may affect whether a platform enters a city: (i) economic development and
overall population size are the principal determinants of potential market scale; (ii) pub­
lic transportation such as bus and taxi27 may complement bike­sharing; (iii) penetration of
mobile Internet and smartphones are fundamental because bike­sharing relies on real­time
communication among the electronic lock of the bike, the user’s mobile phone app, and the
platform’s system servers; (iv) topography (e.g. steep slope) and land forms (e.g. unpaved
roads) could restrict the usage of bikes, because bikes provided by the platforms are all non­
automatic.
To control for the first three aspects, we collected seven city­level variables from the 2016
China City Statistical Yearbook28 : log of population, GDP per capita, the number of taxis, the
number of buses, road surface, the number of mobile phones, and the number of households
that have access to the Internet, which are all rescaled by total population except for log
25

Please see Vicente­Serrano et al. (2003) for detailed introduction of co­kriging interpolation.
One potential threat to this measure lies in that air quality data disclosed by China government is under
suspicion of being manipulated. However, Liang et al. (2016) finds that data from the U.S. diplomatic posts
and the nearby Ministry of Environmental Protection sites produced highly consistent air quality assessment in
five major cities.
27
Unfortunately, the 2016 China City Statistical Yearbook does not include data on subway. But all our
specifications include city fixed effects, which will absorb any time­invariant effect of subway and other omitted
public transportation means.
28
The 2016 China City Statistical Yearbook reports statistics by the end of 2015, thus predetermined for our
sample.
26

10

population itself. To measure terrain ruggedness, we utilize Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
to calculate the average gradient for each city. All these attributes are summarized in Panel
B of Table 1 and hereinafter referred to as city attributes.
D. Sample Construction
The original data extracted from ofo spans from September 7, 2015 to September 14, 2017.
Besides, we collect Mobike’s entry data from media reports, and cross­validate it with post­
ings on Mobike’s Weibo home page.29 The data is further cleaned in a few steps: first, we
exclude all autonomous prefectures and administrative districts, because they are not included
in the 2016 China City Statistical Yearbook. Second, we exclude the 6 cities that Mobike en­
tered but with missing entry dates. Without a specific entry date, we cannot confirm the entry
sequence of ofo and Mobike and thus cannot define the dummy of post entry, which is the
core independent variable of interest and will be introduced in the next Section. Third, we
exclude Beijing from the sample. Because Beijing is the birthplace of ofo, ofo had experi­
mented with its pricing and operation strategies in Beijing extensively before it entered the
second city, Shanghai. Thus, Beijing is hardly comparable to any other cities. After data
cleaning, we arrive at a sample of 19,631 city­day observations, which cover 104 cities from
May 29, 2016 to September 14, 2017.
Cities in our sample could be further divided into three groups based on the sequence of
ofo and Mobike’s entry. If Mobike enters the city after ofo’s entry, then the city is categorized
as “ofo First.” If ofo enters the city after Mobike’s entry, it is categorized as “Mobike First.”
If only ofo enters, it is “ofo Alone.” In total, our sample consists of 104 cities, of which 59
are ofo First, 23 are ofo Alone, and 22 are Mobike First. Table A1 lists the names of cities in
our sample. Figure A1 plots them on the map of China and depicts the expansion process of
bike­sharing.
Table 1 summarizes the sample in two panels: one for variables at the city­day level and
the other for variables at the city level. We report both panels by full sample first and then by
ofo First, ofo Alone and Mobike First cities. To protect ofo’s business secrets, we mask the
mean of trip volume and revenue per ride in Panel A. But from Panel B, it is obvious that ofo
First cities are bigger than ofo Alone cities in almost all dimensions, including population,
public transportation, and mobile/internet access. ofo First cities also have higher GDP per
capita, better air quality index and lower average gradient than ofo Alone cities. Mobike First
cities are more similar to ofo First cities than to ofo Alone cities. These summary statistics
are consistent with the facts that bike­sharing firms tend to enter bigger and more developed
cities first. Such selection prompts us to pay close attention to the comparability between
29

Weibo is one of China’s biggest Twitter­like microblogging platforms operated by Sina.

11

ofo First and ofo Alone cities. We will deal with it in the next section. We do not report
summary statistics on bike investment and bike utilization rate, because ofo designates them
confidential.
III. Econometric Framework
Our main specification is difference­in­differences (DID), where we define Mobike’s entry
as the “treatment” in ofo First cities, and use ofo Alone cities to control for the organic growth
of ofo. In principle, we could include Mobike First cities in the control group as well, and
transform the comparison into monopoly­vs­duopoly as in the theoretical model. However,
we do not observe Mobike’s data before ofo’s entry into the Mobike First cities, nor can we
use instrumental variable to address the endogeneity of ofo entry because we do not have
data for the time that ofo had not entered. For this reason, our main specification focuses on
ofo First and ofo Alone cities only, and we do not include Mobike First cities until robustness
check.
Specifically, the baseline specification is:
(1)

′

′

Yct = αc + γt + βP ostEntryct + Xct π + (Sc × f (t)) θ + µGc · t + ϵct

where Yct represents outcome variables at city c and date t, such as log(Qct ), pct , %F reect , and
U tilizationct ; αc and γt denote city and time fixed effects respectively; Xct denotes weather
and air quality variables; Sc denotes city attributes as of 2016; and ϵct is the error term. It is
noteworthy that γt contains two sets of time fixed effects: the first set represents calendar date
fixed effects. They aim to capture nationwide shocks on specific dates, including national
holiday, nationwide news about bike­sharing, and nationwide advertising campaigns initiated
by any bike­sharing platform. The second set of γt captures the intrinsic growth of ofo and
is therefore defined by the number of days since ofo began operation in city c. We refer to
them as relative day fixed effects.
P ostEntryct is the key regressor of interest, which takes the value of one if Mobike exists
in city c on date t. For ofo First cities, P ostEntryct is zero before Mobike’s entry and
becomes one at and after Mobike’s entry. For ofo Alone cities, P ostEntryct is always zero.
For Mobike First cities, P ostEntryct is always one. Therefore, data on Mobike First cities do
not help us identify changes pre­ and post­entry, though they could sharpen our understanding
of ofo performance when it competes against Mobike. As stated before, we only include
Mobike First cities for robustness check.
To address the possibility that bike­sharing may diffuse differently in different types of
cities, we follow Duflo (2001) to interact city attributes (Sc ) with multiple functions of time

12

(f (t)).30 In particular, f (t) includes: (i) a third­order polynomial function of the relative
days since ofo’s entry; (ii) calendar date fixed effects, and (iii) relative day fixed effects.
In addition, we also control for linear time trends specific to ofo First cities by adding the
interaction between linear time trend t and a dummy variable indicating ofo First cities (Gc ).
DID relies on the assumption of parallel pre­treatment trends, which could be checked by
a standard event­study regression (e.g., Jacobson et al. 1993; Autor 2003). Specifically, we
use the following equation to test pre­treatment trends:
(2)

Yct = αc + γt +

14
∑

′

′

λ−k Ack + Xct π + (Sc × f (t)) θ + µGc · t + ϵct

k=2

where Ack is a set of dummies indicating that date t is (2k − 1) to 2k days before Mobike’s
entry into city c. Effectively, we define every two days as an interval and pool all days more
than 4 weeks before Mobike’s entry as k = 14, and choose the two days immediately before
Mobike’s entry (i.e., k = 1) as the omitted default category.31 Thus, conditional on a sample
of pre­entry observations, the coefficients {λ−k }k=14
k=2 test the comparability between ofo First
and ofo Alone cities for every 2 days up to 4 weeks before Mobike’s entry. If the two groups
of cities are statistically comparable, each λ should be indistinguishable from zero. We will
report the pre­treatment trend tests when we describe the baseline results.
Although including time trends and allowing them to be heterogeneous by city attributes
could mitigate the concern of omitted variable bias, reverse causality is still a key identifica­
tion challenge. If Mobike’s entry decision is a strategic response to ofo’s performance in a
specific city, the coefficient of P ostEntryct could reflect the endogenous entry decision and
does not represent the causal effect of competition on ofo. To address this concern, we need
an instrumental variable that is correlated with Mobike’s entry into a city but independent of
ofo’s market performance in that city. We construct the instrument based on the predicted
Mobike entry date, which is the date on which we predict Mobike to enter city c according
to Mobike’s VC funding rounds and c’s pre­determined city attributes.
In particular, we assume Mobike could enter any city since its company establishment
date (November 1, 2015). Thus, the time span between November 1, 2015 and Mobike’s
actual entry date into city c is the “survival time” in a typical duration model. This is well
defined for every ofo First city. For ofo Alone cities, since Mobike has not entered the city
by the end of our sample, we treat the survival time as censored at 683, exactly the number of
30

City attributes alone will be absorbed by city fixed effects.
We choose 28 days as the cutoff and pool all days more than 4 weeks before Mobike’s entry together
because the time gap between ofo entry and Mobike entry is less than 28 days in 20 of the 59 ofo first cities.
This means that we have significantly less statistical power to look at specific days beyond the cutoff.
31

13

days between November 1, 2015 and September 14, 2017. We then fit the survival time in a
proportional hazard duration model, where the explanatory variables are predetermined city
attributes, the timing and amount of the 8­round Mobike financing from venture capital, and
a new variable describing the cumulative number of days since Mobike’s latest round of VC
finance. From the estimates of the duration model, we then predict the median survival time
for each city and add it to the starting date (November 1, 2015). This defines the predicted
entry date of Mobike. From the predicted entry date, we can compute a new post­entry
\ ct ) as the IV for P ostEntryct .
dummy (P ostEntry
We argue that the predicted Mobike entry date is likely exogenous to city­specific un­
knowns, because city attributes are all pre­determined and Mobike’s VC funding is not driven
by a particular city. More specifically, Mobike’s VC funding may depend on ofo’s nationwide
performance, which is controlled by calendar date fixed effects in the main specification, but
we assume it is independent of ofo’s performance in a particular city at a particular time.
These assumptions are reasonable, because Mobike entered cities in a stunning speed, some­
times as fast as 10 cities on a single day. To the extent that VC investors demanded a plan of
expansion before investment, it is conceivable that they care more about bigger cities. Thus
in one robustness check, we classify the sampled Mobike entries by city size below or above
median within each round of VC funding. By this definition, the effects of Mobike entry turn
out to be more conspicuous in below­median cities , suggesting that the effects are unlikely
driven by VC investors endogenously dictate which city to enter. We will report detailed
statistical tests on the IV when we present the baseline results.
We apply the same specifications to bike investment, but at the city­month level instead
of city­day. Accordingly, we redefine P ostEntry as % of days in month m that Mobike is
present in city c. Weather and air quality variables are aggregated into monthly average, and
the control of time fixed effects is monthly instead of daily.
IV. Baseline Empirical Results
This section reports two sets of baseline results: the first set is on trip volume, revenue per
ride, bike investment and bike utilization rate, including results with instrument and robust­
ness checks. The second unpacks market stealing and market expanding effects by new and
old users.
A.Baseline Results
Following Equation (1), Table 2 reports the baseline DID results, where the key dependent
variables are total trip volume (log(Qct )), revenue per ride (pct ), and percent of free trips
(%F reect ). For each dependent variable, we report the coefficient of P ostEntryct from a
series of OLS regressions. The simplest one includes only city and time fixed effects (Column
14

1), the middle ones add interactions between f (t) and city attributes (Columns 2 to 4), and the
most sophisticated ones add linear time trends specific to the ofo First group (Columns 5 to 7).
All these columns convey the same message: Mobike’s entry has increased ofo’s trip volume
and boosted ofo’s revenue per ride. If we take Column 7 as the preferred specification, it
suggests that ofo’s trip volume goes up 40.8% after Mobike’s entry, ofo’s revenue per ride
goes up by 0.041 RMB, and the percent of free trips goes down by 3.7 percentage points.
These findings suggest a strong market expanding effect from Mobike’s entry. As shown in
Appendix Table A2, similar results can be achieved when we drop ofo Alone cities from the
sample (which effectively reduces the DID into just before­after comparison), or add Mobike
First cities into the sample (which increases observations for post entry).
To test pre­treatment trends, Figure 1 plots the point estimates of {λ−k }k=14
k=2 from Equation
(2), along with the estimated 95% confidence intervals. The first three panels of Figure 1
correspond to the three key dependent variables (log(Qct ), pct , and %F reect ). All these
estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero.32 This suggests that, after our control
of observables, ofo Alone and ofo First cities follow statistically similar trend before Mobike’s
entry, although the two sets of cities differ in absolute population and other attributes.
To further address the concern of endogenous entry, we use the predicted entry date to
construct an IV for P ostEntryct . Table 3 first reports the first stage (Column 1) and then the
IV results for log(Qct ), pct , and %F reect (Column 2 to 4). The Kleibergen­Paap F Test is
over 8000, suggesting that our IV is strongly correlated with P ostEntryct . After using the
IV, the key coefficients of P ostEntryct (β) have the same sign and similar magnitudes as in
the OLS regressions.
Table 3 Column 5­8 report the OLS and IV results for the effect of entry on bike utiliza­
tion rate and bike investment. The utilization regressions are at the city­day level, while the
investment regressions are at the city­month level. For the OLS columns, we use the speci­
fication that includes the most extensive set of controls, as in Column 7 of Table 2. For the
2SLS columns with IV, we use the same instrument as before, except that the instrument is
aggregated into a monthly average, i.e. % of days in month m that we predict Mobike to be
present at city c. Both OLS and 2SLS results suggest that Mobike’s entry have motivated ofo
to place more bikes in the city and enjoy a significant boost in bike utilization.
We perform three robustness checks on the IV results in Appendix Table A3 and Appendix
Table A4. First, since the proportional hazard model relies on the functional form of baseline
hazard, we confirm that results are stable when we use Weibull (reported), log­normal, or
log­logistic distribution for baseline hazard. Second, Mobike was established on November
1, 2015 but did not enter the first city (Shanghai) until April 22, 2016. We have tried to use
32

If we test these coefficients jointly, they are not different from zero with 95% confidence.

15

December 1, 2015, January 1, 2016, February 1, 2016, March 1, 2016 and April 1, 2016 as
alternative starting dates. Results under these alternatives are similar to what is reported in
Table 3, except that the results on bike investment lose statistical significance at the 90%
level if we assume the baseline hazard distribution is log­logistic or lognormal. One possible
explanation is that investment is sparse and therefore sensitive to functional form. However,
even in these marginal results, the coefficient of P ostentryct has the same sign and similar
magnitude as in the baseline result. Third, one may still be concerned that VC investors may
condition investment on the cities that Mobike would enter. If so, the plan to enter big cities
should be more important than small cities, because the level of investment is likely depen­
dent on city population. To address this, we use entry and finance dates to classify ofo First
cities within each of the eight finance rounds of Mobike. In each round, we sort cities by
population and divide them into above­median and below­median groups. We then pool all
above­median cities and compare them to ofo Alone cites in OLS and 2SLS. In separate re­
gressions, we also pool all below­median cities and compare them to ofo Alone cities. Results
in Table A4 suggest that the effects of Mobike entry are more conspicuous in below­median
cities than in above­median cities, which refutes the argument that the effects are driven by
endogenous entry upon differential attention of VC investors.
Above all, we find that Mobike’s entry has increased ofo’s trip volume and revenue per
trip, has encouraged the incumbent to place more new bikes on the market, and has helped ofo
to enjoy a higher bike utilization rate. Robustness checks further suggest that these effects
are unlikely driven by omitted variable bias or endogenous entry.
B.New and Old Users
If entry has led to an increase in revenue per trip and trade volume at the same time, it
suggests market expansion. However, since Mobike and ofo bikes are almost perfect substi­
tutes at the same time and location, the entry could have a market stealing effect as well. We
examine this possibility by separating new and old users within ofo. Note that both new and
old are from ofo’s point of view, as we do not know whether a user has also downloaded the
Mobike app or not.
Results are presented in Table 4. The OLS results suggest that Mobike’s entry has increased
the number of new users (for ofo) by 65.2%, and this effect is even greater if we use the
instrument (73.5%). However, percent of active old users declines 4.1­4.4 percentage points
post entry, which is a significant fraction of the sample mean.33 Because every new user
becomes an old user after the registration day, the pool of old users is cumulative over time.
Thus 4.1­4.4% of this pool is a significant market stealing effect if all of them switch to
33

We are not allowed to report the sample mean because it is a business secret.

16

Mobike. Conditional on active old users, Columns 5­6 show that the average number of trips
they take on ofo does not change significantly post Mobike entry. This could happen even
if Mobike’s entry distracts some active old users from ofo, because users may increase the
frequency of overall bike use, ofo has invested in more bikes post Mobike entry, or Mobike
could differentiate its bike locations from those of ofo. As shown in Columns 7­10, Mobike’s
entry has increased revenue per trip for both new and old users, at a similar magnitude. In
short, we observe market expansion into new users and market stealing of old users, the sum
of which gives rise to the overall market expansion effects documented in the baseline results.
To summarize, Mobike’s entry has created a net market expansion for ofo, despite some
market stealing effects on old users. A potential explanation is that Mobike’s marketing cam­
paign, including the sight of orange bikes on the road, may have motivated more consumers
to use bike­sharing. Both Mobike and ofo have issued coupons to lure new users, which
could contribute to market expansion as well. However, the entry has a significant, positive
effect on price, suggesting that the market expansion is not solely driven by the price com­
petition between the two firms. What is the mechanism behind such price­boosting market
expansion? Why does ofo find it worthwhile to put even more bikes on the market after
Mobike has entered the market with many orange bikes? If bike investment is just another
form of marketing, how could bike utilization rate increase post entry? And if the higher
bike utilization rate implies that bike investment is effective in attracting more users, why
didn’t ofo make the extra bike investment until Mobike entered? We attempt to answer these
questions in a theoretical model.
V. Theoretical Model
In this section, we develop a theoretical model to explain the empirical findings presented
in the previous section. Our goal is to use the simplest model to explain how entry could
generate higher price, higher trip volume, higher investment and higher utilization rate in a
unified framework. It is not difficult to come up with a story to explain higher price and higher
trip volume, or even higher investment. For example, Mobike’s marketing campaign can be
one of the potential explanations. But the real challenge is to explain why bike utilization rate
is higher post entry. As detailed below, this requires a particular combination of consumer
search, network effects and investment cost.
A.Model Setup
We consider a market consisting of measure 1 of consumers. Each consumer has to finish
a trip with value normalized to 1. A consumer can use either bike­sharing or his own way to
finish this trip (the outside good). If he uses his own way such as buying his own bike, driving
his private car or calling a taxi, the private cost is distributed on the interval [0, 1] according to
17

the distribution function F (c) = 1−(1−c)θ where θ > 0 is common knowledge. Obviously,
when θ = 1, this distribution function is the same as the uniform distribution. When θ > 1,
the density function is decreasing in c; while when θ < 1, the density function is increasing
in c.
If a consumer uses bike­sharing, he pays a price for the service. However, the consumer
may not find a bike nearby. We assume that the probability of finding a bike is determined by
an aggregate matching function. In particular, if there are measure u of consumers searching
for a bike and there are measure v of bikes in the market, then the total measure of matches
is given by m(u, v) = Av α uβ with 1 ≥ α, β > 0. This Cobb­Douglass matching function
is widely used in the literature. It is usually assumed that the matching function exhibits
constant return to scale: α+β = 1. But we do not impose this assumption here, and also allow
decreasing or increasing return to scale.34 An increasing return matching technology could
reflect the positive network effect in the bike­sharing industry: the consumers are actually
transporting bikes for the firm when they are using the service of bike­sharing. Therefore,
as more consumers are using bike­sharing, it is more likely for other consumers to find a
bike. In comparison, the multiplier A is another parameter that governs matching efficiency.
Since A is a constant independent of the number of bikes (v) and the numbers of searching
consumers (u), it captures network­neutral technology factors such as consumer awareness
of bike­sharing and the quality of bike­sharing apps.
Under the above matching function, the probability for a consumer to find a bike is given
by q =

m(u,v)
u

= Av α uβ−1 . We assume that a consumer only searches once. If he could

not find a bike, then he receives an outside value of 0. This assumption reflects the fact the
bike­sharing aims to solve the “last mile” problem for the consumer. If a consumer cannot
find a bike for the trip, he usually will try other ways of transportation instead of keeping
searching bikes.35
We will consider two cases. In the first case, there is one monopolist operating in the
market; while in the second case, there are two duopoly firms competing in the market. In
both cases, the sequence of move is that first, the firms set up the prices and total measures
of bikes put into the market; and then the consumers choose between bike­sharing and their
34

Such an assumption is also adopted in many other studies, e.g., Gan and Zhang (2006), Petrongolo and
Pissarides (2006), Gavazza (2011), Bleakley and Lin (2012).
35
In reality, a consumer that could not find a bike may still use alternative transportation to complete the trip,
but there is a delay as compared to using the alternative transportation at the very beginning. For example, one
may get to work on time if she calls a taxi at time t or searches for a bike at time t and rides the bike at time t+1.
However, she will be late for work if she calls a taxi at time t + 1. Our assumption on the value of ride­sharing
and alternative transportation (before search) is just a normalization. In the above example, it is equivalent to
assuming the value of getting late to work is 0, the value of biking to work on time is 1, and the value of calling
taxi to work on time is 1 − c.

18

own ways to finish the task. If a consumer chooses bike­sharing, he finds a bike with some
probability. If he finds a bike, he will use it as long as the price charged is lower than 1.
Otherwise, he will take the outside option.
In the first monopoly case, it is the monopoly firm who sets the price p and the total measure
of bikes v put into the market. We assume that the investment cost function is ψ(v) = γ1 ϕv γ
with γ > 0 capturing the concavity/convexity of the cost function. In the second duopoly
case, we assume that firm 1 is the same as the monopoly firm while firm 2 is a new entrant
with the same cost function ψ(v).36 In this case, the two duopoly firms simultaneously choose
the measures of bikes put into the market (v1 , v2 ) and the prices (p1 , p2 ). Given v1 and v2 ,
1
the probability for a consumer to find a firm 1’s bike is given by q1 = A(v1 + v2 )α uβ−1 v1v+v
,
2

where A(v1 + v2 )α uβ−1 is the probability of finding a bike and

v1
v1 +v2

is the probability that

this bike belongs to firm 1. Consistent with user pattern described by ofo executives, the
underlining assumption is that search is purely random and the consumers cannot target which
bike to search. Similarly, the probability for a consumer to find a firm 2’s bike is given by
2
.
q2 = A(v1 + v2 )α uβ−1 v1v+v
2

We aim to solve the subgame perfect equilibria of this model. In the first monopoly case,
the key is to solve the monopoly price pm and bike investment v m in equilibrium, while in
the second duopoly case, the key is to solve the price and investment of firm 1 pd1 and v1d
in equilibrium. The final step is to investigate the impact of firm 2’s entry by comparing
(pm , v m ) with (pd1 , v1d ).
B.Equilibrium Analysis
Monopoly Case.–We solve the subgame perfect equilibrium in the monopoly case by back­
ward induction. Given p and v, a consumer will choose bike­sharing if
q ∗ (1 − p) ≥ 1 − c,
or
c ≥ 1 − q ∗ (1 − p),
where q ∗ is the equilibrium probability that a consumer finds a bike. Hence, under the
distributional assumption of c, the total measure of searching consumers is given by u =
(q ∗ (1 − p))θ . This together with the condition q =

m(u,v)
u

= Av α uβ−1 pins down q ∗ :

q ∗ = Av α ((q ∗ (1 − p))θ )β−1 ,
36

In general, there is no need to assume that the firms have the same cost function. But the symmetric case is
easy to solve theoretically. Moreover, in reality, the two leading bike­sharing firms, ofo and Mobike, are quite
symmetric.

19

which implies
θ(β−1)

α

1

q ∗ = A 1+θ(1−β) v 1+θ(1−β) (1 − p) 1+θ(1−β) .
When the monopolist sets the price and total measure of bikes, the objective is to maximize:
Av α (q ∗ (1 − p))θβ p − ψ(v),
where Av α (q ∗ (1 − p))θβ is the total measure of matches and for each match, the monopolist
receives a revenue of p. Plugging the expression of q ∗ into the above maximization problem
yields
1+θ

α(1+θ)

θβ

A 1+θ(1−β) v 1+θ(1−β) (1 − p) 1+θ(1−β) p − ψ(v).
Clearly, on the one hand, by putting more bikes into the market, the total revenue will
increase by generating more matches, but the cost also increases. On the other hand, by
setting a higher price, the revenue for each match will increase, but the total measure of
matches also decreases as fewer consumers choose bike­sharing. Based on this tradeoff, the
monopoly chooses the amount of total investment and price, v m and pm are solved from the
first order conditions. First of all, the monopoly price is given by
θβ
p m = 1 − pm ,
1 + θ(1 − β)
which implies that
pm =

1 + θ(1 − β)
< 1.
1+θ

α(1+θ)
Second, when 1+θ(1−β)
< γ, the optimization problem is concave in v, and hence the monopoly

investment v m satisfies
α(1+θ)
θβ
1+θ
α(1 + θ)
A 1+θ(1−β) v 1+θ(1−β) −1 (1 − pm ) 1+θ(1−β) pm = ϕv γ−1 ,
1 + θ(1 − β)

which implies
[
vm =

α(1 + θ) A
1 + θ(1 − β)

1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

(1 − p )
ϕ
m

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

p

m

]

γ−

1
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

.

The above result can be summarized by the following lemma:
Lemma 1 Assume that

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

< γ. Then, there exists a unique subgame perfect equilib­

20

rium in the monopoly case. In this equilibrium, the price is
pm =

(3)

1 + θ(1 − β)
1+θ

and the investment is
[

(4)

θβ

1+θ

α(1 + θ) A 1+θ(1−β) (1 − pm ) 1+θ(1−β) pm
vm =
1 + θ(1 − β)
ϕ

Notice that the condition

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

]

γ−

1
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

.

< γ does not rule out the possibility of γ < 1. For

example, if α + β = 1, there exists γ < 1 satisfying the above condition. Moreover, for
γ ≥ 1, the above condition is satisfied when
α+β <1+
So there exists α + β > 1 satisfying

γ − α + θ(γ − 1)(1 − β)
.
θ

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

< γ.

Duopoly Case.–Now we move to the duopoly case. In this case, we also first solve the
consumer’s problem of whether to choose bike­sharing or not. Denote q1∗ to be the equilib­
rium probability that a consumer finds bike 1, and q2∗ to be the equilibrium probability that
a consumer finds bike 2. Recall that given v1 and v2 , these two probabilities are given by
1
2
q1 = A(v1 + v2 )α uβ−1 v1v+v
and q2 = A(v1 + v2 )α uβ−1 v1v+v
.
2
2

A consumer will choose bike­sharing if
q1∗ (1 − p1 ) + q2∗ (1 − p2 ) ≥ 1 − c,
or
c ≥ 1 − q1∗ (1 − p1 ) − q2∗ (1 − p2 ).
Similar to the monopoly case, we can solve the equilibrium probabilities as:
q1∗ = A(v1 + v2 )α (q1∗ (1 − p1 ) + q2∗ (1 − p2 ))θ(β−1)

v1
v1 + v2

q2∗ = A(v1 + v2 )α (q1∗ (1 − p1 ) + q2∗ (1 − p2 ))θ(β−1)

v2
.
v1 + v2

and

Firm 1’s profit then can be written as:
A(v1 + v2 )α

v1
(q1∗ (1 − p1 ) + q2∗ (1 − p2 ))θβ p1 − ψ(v1 ).
v1 + v2
21

Compared with the profit in the monopoly case
Av α (q ∗ (1 − p))θβ p − ψ(v),
we can observe two opposing effects. The first business stealing effect comes from the obser­
1
vation that (v1 + v2 )α v1v+v
< v1α for any v2 > 0. Basically, the operation of firm 2 decreases
2

firm 1’s total measure of matches for a given v1 , because some of the consumers are stolen
by firm 2. The second market expansion effect comes from the term q1∗ (1 − p1 ) + q2∗ (1 − p2 ).
The existence of firm 2 attracts more consumers into the market, and hence increases the total
measure of matches for firm 1.
We can first solve q1∗ and q2∗ as functions of v1 , v2 , p1 , p2 . Plugging these functions into the
firms’ profits yields:
1+θ

(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

[(1 − p1 ) +

θβ
v2
(1 − p2 )] 1+θ(1−β) p1 − ψ(v1 ),
v1

1+θ

(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

[(1 − p2 ) +

θβ
v1
(1 − p1 )] 1+θ(1−β) p2 − ψ(v2 ).
v2

π1 = A 1+θ(1−β) v11+θ(1−β) (v1 + v2 )−
1+θ

and
π2 = A 1+θ(1−β) v21+θ(1−β) (v1 + v2 )−
1+θ

The firms simultaneously choose (v1d , pd1 ) and (v2d , pd2 ) to maximize profits. We will focus
on the symmetric equilibrium: v1d = v2d and pd1 = pd2 .
First, the first order condition with respect to p1 is:
θβ
v2
p1 = (1 − p1 ) + (1 − p2 ).
1 + θ(1 − β)
v1
In the symmetric equilibrium, it is straightforward to derive
pd1 = pd2 = pd =

2
2+

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

.

Second, we can take first order conditions with respect to v1 in the firm 1’s profit function.
The equilibrium investments v1d and v2d can be solved by plugging pd1 and pd2 into the first
order conditions. In the symmetric equilibrium, we obtain v1d = v2d = v d , with v d satisfying:
A

1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

[

]
α(1+θ)
1+θ
(1 + θ)(1 − α)
θβ
−
−
ω = ϕv γ− 1+θ(1−β) ,
1 + θ(1 − β) 2[1 + θ(1 − β)] 2[1 + θ(1 − β)]

22

where
ω=2

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

θβ

(1 − pd ) 1+θ(1−β) pd .

The above result can be summarized by the following lemma:
α(1+θ)
< γ. Then, there exists a unique symmetric subgame perfect
Lemma 2 Assume that 1+θ(1−β)

equilibrium in the duopoly case. In this equilibrium, both firms set prices to be
pd =

(5)

2
2+

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

and investments to be
(6)

[
d

v = A

1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

[

1
] ] α(1+θ)
1+θ
(1 + θ)(1 − α)
θβ
ω γ− 1+θ(1−β)
−
−
.
1 + θ(1 − β) 2[1 + θ(1 − β)] 2[1 + θ(1 − β)] ϕ

C.Equilibrium Comparison
In this section, we compare the unique subgame perfect equilibrium in the monopoly case
with the unique symmetric subgame perfect equilibrium in the duopoly case. We aim to com­
pare prices, investments, trip volumes, and utilization rates in different cases. Trip volume
is defined as the total measure of successful matches for firm 1. In the monopoly case, it is
vd

1
T V m = m(um , v m ), while in the duopoly case, it is T V d = m(ud , v1d + v2d ) vd +v
d . Utilization

rate is defined as the average number of match per bike. It is rm =
case, and rd =

TV d
v1d

TV m
vm

1

2

in the monopoly

in the duopoly case.

Our first observation is the following:
Proposition 1 In equilibrium, it is always the case that pd > pm .
Proof From equations (3) and (5), we obtain
pd =

2
2+

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

> pm =

1
1+

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

.

□

The above proposition claims that the duopoly price is always higher than the monopoly
price. This result is very intuitive. When there is only one firm in the market, raising price
will reduce the number of searchers and this negative impact is fully incorporated in the
monopolist’s pricing decision. If the prevailing price is already optimal for the monopolist,
the marginal benefit of the price hike (higher profit per match) is equal to the marginal cost of
the hike (fewer consumers searching). In contrast, if the firm faces competition in duopoly, its
23

price hike will affect the number of searchers as before but this hurts both firms. Since each
firm does not incorporate the negative externality its price hike imposes on the competitor,
competition reduces the marginal cost of price hike, while the marginal benefit remains the
same. In other words, competition blunts the negative impact of price hike for each firm’s
individual demand. This is equivalent to reducing the demand elasticity facing each firm,
creating an extra incentive to raise price. For this reason, the model shows that price increases
when the market moves from monopoly to duopoly, regardless of the shape of the private cost
distribution or the efficiency of the matching technology.
Note that we are not the first one finding price increase with competition. In a model of
price search, Stahl (1989) shows that the equilibrium price approaches monopoly price when
the number of firms increase, because the probability of finding the lowest price decreases ex­
ponentially with the number of firms. In a market where each seller faces loyal and switching
consumers, Rosenthal (1980) shows that competition may reduce each seller’s share of the
switching group and therefore incentivize it to charge higher price among the remaining loyal
consumers. Allowing product differentiation in terms of product quality or idiosyncratic con­
sumer tastes, Cachon et al. (2008), Chen and Riordan (2008) and Kotowski and Zeckhauser
(2017) all show that price may increase when market becomes more competitive. The reason
can be due to sufficiently diverse and negatively correlated consumer preferences as in Chen
and Riordan (2008) or a “market­expansion effect” tied to search activity as in Cachon et al.
(2008) and Kotowski and Zeckhauser (2017). Our model differs from all of them, because
we assume consumers only search once (per episode) and therefore price shopping does not
occur within the bike search.
Our next results focus on the comparison of the utilization rates rd and rm . By definition,
we obtain

α(1+θ)

1+θ

θβ

A 1+θ(1−β) (v m ) 1+θ(1−β) (1 − pm ) 1+θ(1−β)
.
r =
vm
m

And the first order condition with respect to v m implies that

α(1+θ)
r m pm
1+θ(1−β)

which implies
rm =

(7)

ϕ(v m )γ−1
α(1+θ)
pm
1+θ(1−β)

.

Similarly, we derive
(8)

rd = [

ϕ(v d )γ−1
1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

−

(1+θ)(1−α)
2[1+θ(1−β)]

24

−

θβ
2[1+θ(1−β)]

]

.
pd

= ϕ(v m )γ−1 ,

The above equations imply that the comparison of rd and rm does not depend on A. Hence,
we can even allow A to increase in the duopoly market and get the same result. The increase
of A could occur if the entry of the second firm makes more consumers aware of bike­sharing
or leads to a higher consumption value to the consumers (e.g., Mobike’s marketing cam­
paign).37 Although the increase in A will lead to a higher investment, it cannot lead to a
higher utilization rate. To obtain higher utilization rate in equilibrium, we need the following
condition:
Proposition 2 It is possible to have both higher investment v d > v m and higher utilization
rate rd > rm in equilibrium only when γ > 1. And when γ > 1, rd > rm is satisfied only if
vd > vm.
Proof From equations (7) and (8), we obtain rd > rm if
v d γ−1
pd
< ( m)
pm
v

1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

−

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)
(1+θ)(1−α)
2[1+θ(1−β)]

−

θβ
2[1+θ(1−β)]

.

Rearranging terms implies that
(

v d γ−1 α(1 + θ) + (1 + θ) − θβ
> 1.
)
>
vm
α[2(1 + θ) − θβ]

Therefore, if v d > v m , the above inequality can be satisfied only when γ > 1. Moreover,
□

when γ > 1, in order to get rd > rm , we must have v d > v m .

The above proposition implies that higher investment and higher utilization rate can both
exist only when the investment cost function is convex. So we will make the assumption that
γ > 1 in the subsequent analysis. Since a higher investment is a prerequisite for a higher
utilization rate, our next proposition investigates when the equilibrium investments satisfy
vd > vm.
Proposition 3 The equilibrium investments satisfy v d > v m if
θβ

(9)

2

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

(1 − pm ) 1+θ(1−β) pm
2α(1 + θ)
>
.
θβ
α(1 + θ) + 1 + θ(1 − β) (1 − pd ) 1+θ(1−β)
pd

Moreover, when θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α) ≤ 0, we must have rd < rm .
37

For example, consider the case that the total measure of consumers increase from 1 to η > 1 due to the
fact that more consumers are aware of bike­sharing. This is equivalent to an increase in the matching efficiency
from A to Aη β > A.

25

Proof Condition (9) directly comes from equation (4) and (6). v d > v m if
[

]
θβ
1+θ
(1 + θ)(1 − α)
θβ
α(1 + θ)
−
−
ω>
(1−pm ) 1+θ(1−β) pm ,
1 + θ(1 − β) 2[1 + θ(1 − β)] 2[1 + θ(1 − β)]
1 + θ(1 − β)

which implies condition (9). From equations (7) and (8), we know that the comparison of rd
d

and rm depends on the comparison of ( vvm )γ−1 and
pd
Ω≜ m
p

1+θ
1+θ(1−β)

−

(1+θ)(1−α)
2[1+θ(1−β)]
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

−

θβ
2[1+θ(1−β)]

=

α(1 + θ) + (1 + θ) − θβ
> 1.
α[2(1 + θ) − θβ]

From equation (4) and (6), we derive
[
] γ−1
d
α(1+θ)
θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
θβ
γ−
1
−
p
v d γ−1
1+θ(1−β)
1+θ(1−β) Ω
= 2 1+θ(1−β) (
)
.
( m)
v
1 − pm
d

Therefore, the comparison of ( vvm )γ−1 and Ω is equivalent to the comparison of
[
Γ≜ 2

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

θβ
1 − pd 1+θ(1−β)
(
)
1 − pm

and
1−

Ω

γ−

γ−1
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

]
γ−

γ−1
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

.

Notice that whenever θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α) ≤ 0, we must have
2
and

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

≤1

α(1 + θ)
θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α)
=1+
≤ 1.
1 + θ(1 − β)
1 + θ(1 − β)

So it is straightforward to see that Γ < 1 since we have 1 − pd < 1 − pm from Proposition 1,
and
1−

Ω
since Ω > 1 and 1 −

γ−1
α(1+θ)
γ− 1+θ(1−β)

γ−

γ−1
α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

≥1

≥ 0. As a result, whenever θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α) ≤ 0, we

d

should get ( vvm )γ−1 < Ω, which implies that rd < rm .

□

Condition (9) in the above proposition gives the condition under which the equilibrium
investments satisfy v d > v m . Intuitively, the term 2
26

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

in condition (9) measures the

joint effects of the market expansion and business stealing effects. From the expressions of
the firms’ profit functions, it is easy to see that in the symmetric equilibrium, the business
stealing effect is proportional to 2−
to 2

θβ
1+θ(1−β)

. So the term 2

(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)

while the market expansion effect is proportional

measures the joint effects. And this term becomes

larger as the market expansion effect becomes stronger than the business stealing effect. The
second part of Proposition 3 implies that when the business stealing effect dominates the
≤ 0), it is impossible to achieve a higher utilization
market expansion effect ( θβ−(1+θ)(1−α)
1+θ(1−β)
rate in the duopoly case. Therefore, we need to further consider the case of a sufficiently
degree of increasing return to scale α + β > 1 +

1−α
θ

to satisfy θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α) > 0.

Notice that this condition rules out the case of constant return to scale: α + β = 1. In other
words, we should always get a lower utilization rate under constant return to scale.
Our last observation claims that it is possible to generate both v d > v m and rd > rm when
both α + β and θ are sufficiently large.
Proposition 4 Suppose that both α and β go to one, and θ goes to infinity. Then we must
have both v d > v m and rd > rm .
Proof Consider the extreme case of α = β = 1. In this case, the left­hand side of condition
θβ

θ

(9) is 2 while the right­hand side is

2(1+θ) (1−pm ) 1+θ(1−β) pm
.
θβ
(1+θ)+1
(1−pd ) 1+θ(1−β) pd

Clearly, when θ goes to infinity,

the left­hand side goes to infinity as well while the right­hand side stays bounded. As a
result, condition (9) is satisfied. Moreover, from the proof of Proposition 2, rd > rm if
d

( vvm )γ−1 >

α(1+θ)+(1+θ)−θβ
.
α[2(1+θ)−θβ]

Notice that the right­hand­side of the above inequality is one

when α = 1, while the left­hand­side goes to infinity as θ goes to infinity. Therefore, we
□

must have both v d > v m and rd > rm .

Figure 2 illustrates how the parameter values α and β affect the comparison of rd and rm
when we fix θ = γ = 2. We can see several interesting features from Figure 2. First of
all, the dashed line in Figure 2 is an upper bound on the value of β. This comes from the
requirement

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

< γ. Second, the region between the solid line and the dashed line

represents the parameter values of α and β under which we have rd > rm . From Proposition
2, in this region we have v d > v m , which also implies T V d = v d rd > T V m = v m rm . Notice
that there is a sufficient degree of increasing return to scale in this region: α + β > 1. In
particular, this region exists only when α > 0.5. This is because from Proposition 3, we
require θβ > (1 + θ)(1 − α). So α cannot be too low such that the above inequality is
satisfied for some β ≤ 1. Finally, as α goes to one, α + β on the solid cutoff line decreases
to be lower than 1.2, which implies that a small degree of increasing return to scale is enough
to generate v d > v m .
27

Although it is difficult to conduct theoretical comparative static analyses, Figures 3 and
4 numerically investigate how the change in parameters affects the equilibrium outcomes
in monopoly and duopoly cases. Figure 3 compares the equilibrium outcomes in monopoly
and duopoly cases when we change parameter z = α + β while keeping the ratio

α
β

to be a

constant. So in this numerical exercise, α and β change with z at the same rate. Consistent
with Proposition 1, we always have pd > pm as seen in Figure 3 Panel A. Figure 3 Panel B
plots how v m and v d change with z, and shows that v m > v d when z is low and vice versa.
This is consistent with our discussion of condition (9). Figures 3 Panel C and Panel D show
that both trip volumes and utilization rates follow similar patterns: they are higher in the
duopoly case only when z is sufficiently large. This is also consistent with Figure 2: we need
the degree of increasing return to scale to be sufficiently large to guarantee rd > rm , v d > v m
and T V d > T V m .
Figure 4 compares the equilibrium outcomes in monopoly and duopoly cases when we
change the distribution parameter θ. The findings are similar to the ones in Figure 3. In
particular, we find that when we fix other parameters, it is also possible to have rd > rm ,
v d > v m and T V d > T V m when θ is sufficiently large. Moreover, although sufficiently high
θ and sufficiently high z are both consistent with our baseline results, an increase in θ always
decreases bike investment in the monopoly case while an increase in z always increases bike
investment in the monopoly case. This is very intuitive. An increase in θ implies a smaller
measure of consumers with high cost c and hence makes the market unattractive. A monopoly
firm will optimally respond by lowering its bike investment. On the contrary, an increase in
z implies a larger degree of increasing return to scale and hence makes the market more
unattractive. A monopoly firm will optimally respond by increasing its bike investment.
To summarize, we find that it is possible that investment, trip volume and utilization rate all
increase in the duopoly case when θ or z are sufficiently large. A high z can be interpreted as
a large enough increasing return to scale in the matching function. A high θ can be interpreted
as the density of the private cost of the outside good (c) decreasing at a sufficiently high speed
as c increases. In both situations, the market expansion effect is sufficiently large to dominate
the business stealing effect, which implies the following testable implications:
1. After the entrant’s entry, the incumbent’s price goes up;
2. After the entrant’s entry, some of the incumbent’s old customers are stolen by the en­
trant while the incumbent can get new customers due to market expansion;
3. After the entrant’s entry, the incumbent’s bike investment may increase when θ is suf­
ficiently high or z = α + β is sufficiently high;
4. After the entrant’s entry, both the incumbent’s trip volume and utilization rate can also
go up when θ is sufficiently high or z = α + β is sufficiently high.
28

D.Discussion of the Model
The model highlights a few important features of bike­sharing: consumer search, matching
technology, investment cost and the outside good. We now discuss the importance of each
respectively.
Consumer Search.– Using bike­sharing requires the consumer to initiate a bike search. As­
suming the search is random and once­for­all, we downplay competition within the search
process. As a result, competition only affects the search result through bike investment
(which affects the matching probability), and the number of consumers that decide to search
(which depends on the expected matching rate, consumer’s private cost of using the outside
good, and the price of each bike­sharing firm). Because of these assumptions, competition
tends to reduce the demand elasticity facing each firm, which naturally leads to our Proposi­
tion 1: entry increases the equilibrium price.
The assumption that search is once­for­all might seem strong at the first glance. It nonethe­
less reflects an important feature at the current stage of bike­sharing: the scarcity margin is
more important than price margin. That is to say, most consumers use bike­sharing for com­
mute (rather than recreation) and they care more about finding a bike than the relatively small
price differential. Therefore, they will not continue searching as in standard search models.
Our model remains appropriate as long as there is a keen concern of not finding a bike in
time. It is also possible to develop a more complete model incorporating search cost, but we
choose not to do so for three reasons. First and foremost, ofo executives confirm the modeled
search pattern in today’s world. Secondly, the results in a fully­fledged model allowing price
shopping within search are likely similar to those in the current model.38 Thirdly, a very
detailed model of consumer search might blur the main purpose of our model, which is to
explain the bigger puzzle in higher utilization rate post entry. We do not even need a compli­
cated search model to explain why price and investment increase after entry (e.g. Mobike’s
marketing campaign alone could achieve it), but the real challenge is explaining the increase
in utilization rate while keeping the changes in price and investment consistent with the facts.
For this purpose, we believe our current model of consumer search provides the simplest and
most realistic way to illustrate the main driving force behind the data.
Network Effects in the Matching Technology versus Investment Cost.–The second key fea­
ture is network effects. Given a fixed supply of bikes, the more consumers search for a bike,
the less likely each consumer gets matched to a bike. This is a negative network effect of
congestion. However, if bikes and searchers increase proportionally, the matching rate will
increase or decrease depending on the matching technology. When the matching technology
38

For example, due to positive search cost, the famous Diamond paradox claims that firms will charge
monopoly price, which is quite close to the equilibrium price in our current model.

29

has increasing return to scale (z = α+β > 1), two million consumers searching for 2N bikes
will have a higher matching rate than the first million consumers searching for N bikes, and
the improved matching efficiency will encourage more consumers to join the search. This
creates a positive network effect. Furthermore, because matching rate improves by scale,
each bike has a higher rate of utilization as the numbers of consumers and bikes increase. If
investment cost per bike does not increase as fast as the utilization rate, firm(s) has incentive
to invest in more bikes. This creates a second positive feedback in the system, similar to
what we have seen on two­sided platforms (e.g. more sellers attract buyers, and more buyers
attract sellers).
If the network effect is positive, it could have an important impact on market structure.
For instance, if the positive network effects are always large enough to swamp any increase
in investment cost, the market is winner­takes­all, because the monopolist has incentive to
invest in infinite bikes, leaving no room for other firms to enter. This possibility is ruled
out in our model when we impose the assumption

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

< γ. Under this assumption, the

cost of investment will eventually dominate the expanding incentive driven by the positive
network effects.
When the positive network effects are sufficiently large but not too large to trigger winner­
takes­all, each duopolist will engage in more bike investment than the monopolist. This is
because each duopolist free­rides on the competitor’s investment. Every bike invested by
firm 2 costs nothing to firm 1, but expands the overall market and benefits firm 1. In this
sense, it is more cost­efficient than firm 1’s own investment. While free­riding incentive often
exists in duopoly, it is magnified when the market enjoys large, positive network effects. With
such network effects, competitor’s investment will make one’s own investment more efficient
in persuading more consumers to search and improving the matching rate. The monopolist
alone cannot achieve the same efficiency, because the monopolist must invest at its own cost
to get to the same scale and its cost function might be too convex to justify the investment.
In that situation, we believe there is no first mover or second mover advantage, though the
model has not addressed sequential entry explicitly. Since monopoly profit is greater than
zero and duopoly profit is greater than monopoly profit, entry is always preferred to no entry.
Note that this can only occur when the investment cost is sufficiently convex. It is intuitive
to conceive that market equilibrium only depends on the relative comparison between match­
ing returns­to­scale and the curvature of investment cost. According to our model, when cost
convexity dominates the increasing return­to­scale of the matching technology, we could
observe higher price, volume, investment and utilization rate per firm in duopoly than in
monopoly. Is it also possible to observe the same phenomena if the matching technology has
a sufficiently decreasing return to scale but the investment cost is linear or concave? The an­
30

swer is a sure no. If the cost is linear or concave (γ ≤ 1), the condition

α(1+θ)
1+θ(1−β)

< γ implies

θβ − (1 + θ)(1 − α) < 0, which leads to lower utilization rate under duopoly (rd < rm ) ac­
cording to the second part of Proposition 3. In other words, both convex cost and sufficiently
large increasing returns­to­scale are critical to support our empirical findings.
In contrast, when the network effects are positive but relatively small, the model predicts
that each duopolist invests less than the monopolist. If all past investments are sunk, the
monopolist may find it over­invested when the second firm enters. As a result, the entrant
enjoys extra free ride from the monopolist’s over­investment, which implies a first­mover
disadvantage and a second­mover advantage. It is difficult to test whether this strategic con­
cern applies to our data, but we have addressed the potential endogeneity of Mobike entry in
the empirical analysis. The fact that we find ofo invests more after Mobike’s entry suggests
that this regrettable situation (for the monopolist) is unlikely in our setting.
Competition with the Outside Good.–The extent to which competition expands the market
also depends on the outside good, namely the distribution of consumers’ private cost of using
the outside good (c). The higher the private cost, the more attractive is bike­sharing relative
to the outside good (private bike, private car, taxi, bus, etc.). Since the monopolist must
first attract consumers of higher private cost, returns from the next batch of bike investment
(which increases matching probability) will depend on the private cost of the next group of
consumers. When the private cost distribution has a declining density (θ > 1), the same
improvement in matching probability will persuade more consumers to search for a bike, and
this effect increases with the number of consumers already in bike­sharing. It amounts to
a market expanding effect, which speeds up the incentive in bike investment as long as the
extra return in such investment exceeds the extra cost of investment.
E. Alternative Explanations
To summarize, the model points out a few potential explanations for market expansion:
(1) an increasing­return matching technology that generates large enough positive network
effects (z = α + β > 1); (2) a declining density distribution of private cost that makes it
easier to persuade the next batch of users to join bike­sharing (θ > 1); and (3) an awareness
marketing campaign that is equivalent to enhancing the multiplier in the matching technology
(A) while keeping the same return­to­scale.
However, market expansion alone is not enough to explain the incumbent’s increase in
investment and utilization; we also need mechansims that make the incumbent’s investment
more efficient upon a competitive entry. An awareness marketing campaign cannot achieve
this: in fact, bike utilization rate is independent of A, regardless whether the matching tech­
nology is increasing or decreasing return to scale. More specifically, while ad­driven ex­
31

pansion encourages the incumbent to invest in more bikes, more bikes and the improved
matching efficiency (due to a higher A) also invite more users to adopt bike­sharing. In our
model, the two forces cancel out each other, resulting in no change in bike utilization rate.
An even simpler explanation for volume expansion is price or investment war. By defini­
tion, price war should lead to lower price post entry, which contradicts our data. An invest­
ment war could lead to a higher price, as more bikes available make bike­sharing more at­
tractive to consumers. But investment war alone – without other elements such as increasing
return­to­scale in matching and convex investment cost – does not explain why the incum­
bent did not make that investment until the competitive entry, especially if that investment
could benefit the incumbent in price, volume and utilization rate.
A more plausible explanation of market expansion lies in the outside good. If the density
of the cost of using the outside good is downward sloping (θ > 1), an increase in θ could
make the next batch of investment (introduced by the entrant) more effective in persuad­
ing consumers to join bike­sharing than the existing batch invested by the monopolist, thus
generating a market expansion effect.
Note that the two key parameters, θ for the distribution of the cost of the outside good and
z = α + β for returns­to­scale of the matching technology, give us different comparative
statistics. As shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, the monopolist will invest more as z increases
but invests less as θ increases. This is because higher θ means a steeper density function of
private cost hence for a given threshold of private cost (above which consumers will search
for bike) the monopolist can only attract a smaller fraction of the population. This reduces the
investment incentive in monopoly. On the contrary, as z increases, the matching technology
becomes more efficient, thus the monopolist can attract a higher fraction of consumers by
investing more. This will increase the monopolist’s investment incentive.
The difference offers an opportunity to test whether the observed variations in market ex­
pansion is mainly driven by z or by θ. In particular, some ofo First cities had more bikes on
the road than other ofo First cities, before Mobike entered. Assuming these cities are com­
parable in everything else, if the difference in θ drives this difference, the cities with a higher
pre­entry ofo investment should have a lower θ, which implies that they should experience
smaller market expansion effects upon Mobike’s entry. On the contrary, if z drives the initial
ofo investment, the first set of cities should have a higher zs, and therefore greater market
expanding effects post entry. We will test this empirically.
VI. Further Data Analysis Motivated by the Model
It is difficult to estimate our model directly in the real data, due to lack of search informa­
tion. Unlike ride­sharing (by Uber or Lyft), bike­sharing users often search for a bike first
32

and then open the relevant app to unlock the bike. This is mostly because the GPS location
on the phone screen is not accurate enough for consumers to find a specific bike. Given
this user experience, it is difficult to measure how many users have searched for a bike but
could not find one at any time of the day. This also prevents us from estimating the bike­user
matching directly, even if ofo is the only bike­sharing platform in a city­day. To be more
precise, a few recent papers overcome the lack of observability in potential users, but none
of their techniques is applicable in our context.

39

In light of this difficulty, we explore three

sets of reduce­form analyses to test model predictions.
First, the model suggests that market expands because of the competition. In particular,
the entrant’s bike investment enhances the matching rate and encourages more consumers to
search for a generic bike once they start to search. This mechanism is most evident when ofo
and Mobike bikes mingle together. Though we do not know exactly where Mobike puts its
bikes within a city, we are fortunate to observe competition intensity variations within ofo
First cities. This occurs because ofo had experienced a “campus period” when it restricted
its operation within a college campus while Mobike always regards the whole city as the
target market. Therefore, according to the model, the competition effects should be weaker
if ofo was still in the “campus period” when Mobike entered the city. To test this prediction,
we decompose P ostEntryct into 1campus · P ostEntryct and (1 − 1campus ) · P ostEntryct ,
and estimate their coefficients separately. Table 5 Panel A shows the OLS and IV results
on log(Qct ), pct and %F reect . Compared with the baseline results, we find that the market
expanding effects are solely driven by the time when ofo expanded into the city. This finding
confirms that the market expansion effects occur because ofo and Mobike compete head­in­
head in the city.
Our second set of analysis follows the comparative statistics implied by variations in z and
θ. Greater market expansion effects could be driven by a higher θ, but higher θ implies greater
reluctance to invest before the entry. This implies that we should observe greater market
expansion in the ofo First cities that had less bike investment before entry. In contrast, greater
market expansion effects could be driven by a higher z and a higher z implies more investment
before entry. This contrast leads us to include an interaction of pre­entry investment and the
39

For instance, Buchholz (2019) estimates a matching function between taxi drivers and passengers. He
identifies the matching function by mapping the observed spatial distribution of matches into optimal policy
functions of vacant taxis across the day. In our case, there is no driver in bike­sharing. Bikes can move by
consumption, maintenance or rebalancing. Using aggregate ofo data by grid­city­day, we cannot separate these
factors, or model the “optimal” strategy of each bike mechanic. Alternatively, Brancaccio et al. (2019) propose
a generic method to estimate the matching function between “buyers” and “sellers” when researchers observe
only realized matches. To achieve identification, they assume (a) the number of buyers and sellers unchange
over time, and (b) the distribution of buyers is known up to a parameter. These assumptions do not hold in bike­
sharing: platforms’ investment decision will endogenously change the number of “sellers”, and it is crucial to
account for changes in the number and types of searchers.

33

post entry dummy on the right hand side. Note that pre­entry investment only describes the
cross­sectional variations across ofo First cities. To the extent that z and θ depend on pre­
determined city attributes, pre­entry investment alone is absorbed by city fixed effects. As
shown in Table 5 Panel B, the positive price effect of entry is stronger when there had been
more pre­entry investment in a city. The trip volume effect of entry goes the same direction,
but the coefficient is only marginally significant. As articulated in the model, we need z and
θ to work together to satisfy the conditions for higher investment and higher utilization rate
post entry. Table 5 Panel B does not reject this interdependence. Rather, it shows that the
differential market expansion effects (in price and trip volume) is more likely due to variations
in the extent of increasing return of matching (z) rather than variations in the distribution of
consumers’ private cost (θ).
The third analysis explores detailed geographic information in our dataset. Although our
model abstracts away from geography within a city, one can imagine that residents at different
parts of the city have different costs of using alternative transportation. For example, living
on a street right next to a bus or subway station may make bike­sharing unnecessary. In
contrast, living one kilometer away from the station could make bike­sharing much more
attractive. Similarly, people working at the city­center, where it is easy to call a taxi or walk
to a bus station, could be more reluctant to use bike­sharing than those working at a less
convenient location. These variations give us a geographic interpretation of the distribution
of the private cost c. As shown in the model, the monopolist first attracts those with the
highest c and stops at a threshold c that makes the marginal consumer indifferent between
searching for a bike and taking alternative transportation. If the monopolist knows where the
high­c people are, it will place bikes near them. When the entrant enters the market, it will
place its bikes near the next batch of consumers that have the highest c among those that have
not chosen bike­sharing yet. To the extent that c might vary across people even if they live at
the same location (for example some residents in an apartment may have private cars while
others do not), the entrant could also place some bikes close to where the incumbent’s bikes
have occupied before and enhance the probability of matching in the nearby area. Either way,
entry could persuade people of lower c to join bike­sharing and these people may use either
brand of bike depending on which is handy when they search. If they ride ofo bikes, these
bikes will be available for the next rider at the destination. As a result, market expansion
could geographically manifest in a network expansion of ofo bikes.
We use three variables to describe the geographic network of ofo bikes: #Gridsct describes
the total number of unique grids covered by (the origin) of any ofo bike trips in a city­day;
Ginict describes how evenly distributed the origin of ofo bike trips is in the city­day; and
a second version of Ginict is conditional on the grids that ofo has reached before Mobike’s
34

entry. The last one depends on Mobike’s entry, so we can only compare it before and af­
ter the entry, without any control group. For the first two variables, we use the same DID
specification as Equation (1).
Table 6 reports the OLS and IV results for these three variables. They suggest that Mo­
bike’s entry allows ofo bikes to reach more grids in the city and makes the ofo bikes dis­
tributed more evenly throughout the city.40 The network is also more evenly distributed
within the grids that ofo has covered before the entry. Combined with other evidence, the
geographic expansion confirms that Mobike’s entry attracts more users, enhances the reach
of the ofo bike network, and boosts the average bike utilization rate.
VII. Conclusion
Using proprietary data from a major bike­sharing firm, we document how entry affects the
market performance of the incumbent. Since bike­sharing features positive network effects
but the market is city­specific, we have a rare opportunity to study competition with network
effects. We find that the entrant expands the market, resulting in higher trip volume, higher
price, higher bike investment, better bike utilization, and a wider, flatter network for the
incumbent. However, the entrant also steals a significant fraction of the old users away from
the incumbent, which in part justifies the entry decision.
Our findings challenge the classical “winner­takes­all” concern in a market with network
effects. According to that concern, positive network effects would enable the incumbent to
become a natural monopoly and then abuse its monopoly power to the harm of consumers.
In our context, entry creates positive spillovers on the incumbent, which helps the incum­
bent to better explore the positive network effects. This occurs for a couple of reasons: first,
multi­homing consumers search for a generic bike, implying that one firm can motivate con­
sumers to search but there is no guarantee that the search would lead to its own bike rather
than the competitor’s bike. Second, the cost of investing and maintaining a diverse network
of bikes is convex, thus it is more cost­efficient to free ride on the competitor’s investment
than making all the investment on its own. In our model, the spillovers are mutual, which
explains why the entrant finds it worthwhile to enter even if the incumbent has already oper­
ated in a market with positive network effects, and why the incumbent is willing to share the
(expanded) market with the entrant. Furthermore, our work highlights the importance of the
outside good in a network market. Since entry could generate market expansion, competition
with the outside good is as important as within­market competition, for at least bike­sharing.
These findings could have significant implications for policy makers, as they conduct merger
40

Please note that the more evenly distributed network does not imply that the booming usage volume is
purely driven by expansion to new grids. Table A5 provides further discussion.

35

reviews or consider entry policies in a market with positive network effects.
REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, “Ethnic Inequality,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (2), 428–488.
Angelucci, Charles and Julia Cagé, “Newspapers in Times of Low Advertising Revenues,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.
Armstrong, Mark, “Competition in Two­sided Markets,” RAND Journal of Economics,
2006, 37 (3), 668–691.
Autor, David H, “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to the
Growth of Employment Outsourcing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2003, 21 (1), 1–42.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin, “Thick­Market Effects and Churning in the Labor Market:
Evidence from US Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2012, 72 (2­3), 87–103.
Brancaccio, Kalouptsidi, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Theodore Papageorgiou, “A Guide to
Estimating Matching Functions in Spatial Models,” 2019.
Bryan, Kevin A and Joshua S Gans, “A Theory of Multihoming in Rideshare Competition,”
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2019, 28 (1), 89–96.
Buchholz, Nicholas, “Spatial Equilibrium, Search Frictions and Dynamic Efficiency in the
Taxi Industry,” 2019.
Cachon, Gérard P, Christian Terwiesch, and Yi Xu, “On the Effects of Consumer Search
and Firm Entry in a Multiproduct Competitive Market,” Marketing Science, 2008, 27 (3),
461–473.
Caillaud, Bernard and Bruno Jullien, “Chicken & Egg: Competition among Intermedia­
tion Service Providers,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2003, 34 (2), 309–328.
Chen, Yongmin and Michael H Riordan, “Price­Increasing Competition,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 2008, 39 (4), 1042–1058.
Chertok, Michael, Alexander Voukelatos, Vicky Sheppeard, and Chris Rissel, “Com­
parison of Air Pollution Exposure for Five Commuting Modes in Sydney­Car, Train, Bus,
Bicycle and Walking,” Health Promotion Journal of Australia, 2004, 15 (1), 63–67.
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology, “The Social and Eco­
nomic Impacts of Bike­Sharing 2017,” Technical Report 2018.
DeMaio, Paul, “Smart Bikes: Public Transportation for the 21st Century,” Transportation
Quarterly, 2003, 57 (1), 9–11.

36

, “Bike­sharing: History, Impacts, Models of Provision, and Future,” Journal of Public
Transportation, 2009, 12 (4), 3.
and Jonathan Gifford, “Will Smart Bikes Succeed as Public Transportation in the United
States?,” Journal of Public Transportation, 2004, 7 (2), 1.
Dubé, Jean­Pierre H, Günter J Hitsch, and Pradeep K Chintagunta, “Tipping and Con­
centration in Markets with Indirect Network Effects,” Marketing Science, 2010, 29 (2),
216–249.
Duflo, Esther, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in In­
donesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review,
2001, 91 (4), 795–813.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L Glaeser, and William R Kerr, “What Causes Industry Agglom­
eration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review, 2010,
100 (3), 1195–1213.
Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner, “Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation, Product
Preannouncements, and Predation,” American Economic Review, 1986, 76 (5), 940–955.
and Paul Klemperer, “Coordination and Lock­in: Competition with Switching Costs
and Network Effects,” in Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial
Organization, Vol. 3 2007, chapter 31, pp. 1967–2072.
Gan, Li and Qinghua Zhang, “The Thick Market Effect on Local Unemployment Rate
Fluctuations,” Journal of Econometrics, 2006, 133 (1), 127–152.
Gandal, Neil, “Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test for Network
Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1994, 25 (1), 160–170.
, Michael Kende, and Rafael Rob, “The Dynamics of Technological Adoption in Hard­
ware/Software Systems: the Case of Compact Disc Players,” RAND Journal of Economics,
2000, 31 (1), 43–61.
Gavazza, Alessandro, “The Role of Trading Frictions in Real Asset Markets,” American
Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1106–43.
Halaburda, Hanna and Yaron Yehezkel, “Platform Competition under Asymmetric Infor­
mation,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2013, 5 (3), 22–68.
Hanson, Susan and Perry Hanson, “Evaluating the Impact of Weather on Bicycle Use,”
Transportation Research Record, 1977, 629, 43–48.
Hertel, Ole, Martin Hvidberg, Matthias Ketzel, Lars Storm, and Lizzi Stausgaard, “A
Proper Choice of Route Significantly Reduces Air Pollution Exposure?A Study on Bicycle
and Bus Trips in Urban Streets,” Science of the Total Environment, 2008, 389 (1), 58–70.
37

Hopkinson, PG, OM Carsten, and MR Tight, “Review of Literature on Pedestrian and
Cyclist Route Choice Criteria,” 1989.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert John LaLonde, and Daniel Gerard Sullivan, “Earnings Losses
of Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (4), 685–709.
Kabra, Ashish, Elena Belavina, and Karan Girotra, “Bike­share Systems: Accessibility
and Availability,” Technical Report 15­04, Chicago Booth Research Paper 2018.
Kaiser, Ulrich and Julian Wright, “Price Structure in Two­Sided Markets: Evidence from
the Magazine Industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 2006, 24 (1),
1–28.
and Minjae Song, “Do Media Consumers Really Dislike Advertising? An Empirical
Assessment of the Role of Advertising in Print Media Markets,” International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 2009, 27 (2), 292–301.
Katz, Michael L and Carl Shapiro, “Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibil­
ity,” American Economic Review, 1985, 75 (3), 424–440.
Kim, Jin­Hyuk, Jeffrey Prince, and Calvin Qiu, “Indirect Network Effects and the Quality
Dimension: A Look at the Gaming Industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organi­
zation, 2014, 37, 99–108.
Kotowski, Maciej H and Richard J Zeckhauser, “If Many Seek, Ye Shall Find: Search
Externalities and New Goods,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2017, 9
(4), 42–73.
Liang, Xuan, Shuo Li, Shuyi Zhang, Hui Huang, and Song Xi Chen, “PM2.5 Data Re­
liability, Consistency, and Air Quality Assessment in Five Chinese Cities,” Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 2016, 121 (17), 10–220.
Murry, Charles and Yiyi Zhou, “Consumer Search and Automobile Dealer Co­Location,”
2018.
Nankervis, Max, “The Effect of Weather and Climate on Bicycle Commuting,” Transporta­
tion Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 1999, 33 (6), 417–431.
O’Mahony, Eoin and David B Shmoys, “Data Analysis and Optimization for (Citi) Bike­
sharing,” in “Twenty­ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence” 2015.
Pan, Ling, Qingpeng Cai, Zhixuan Fang, Pingzhong Tang, and Longbo Huang, “A Deep
Reinforcement Learning Framework for Rebalancing Dockless Bike Sharing Systems,”
Technical Report arXiv:1802.04592, arXiv 2018.
Park, Sangin, “Quantitative Analysis of Network Externalities in Competing Technologies:
The VCR Case,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (4), 937–945.
38

Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher Pissarides, “Scale Effects in Markets with Search,”
Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (508), 21–44.
Rosenthal, Robert W, “A Model in which an Increase in the Number of Sellers Leads to a
Higher Price,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1980, pp. 1575–1579.
Rysman, Marc, “Competition between Networks: A Study of the Market for Yellow Pages,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2004, 71 (2), 483–512.
Saloner, Garth and Andrea Shepard, “Adoption of Technologies with Network Effects: An
Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 1995, 26 (3), 479–501.
Seamans, Robert and Feng Zhu, “Responses to Entry in Multi­Sided Markets: The Impact
of Craigslist on Local Newspapers,” Management Science, 2013, 60 (2), 476–493.
Stahl, Dale O, “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American Eco­
nomic Review, 1989, 79 (4), 700–712.
Vicente­Serrano, Sergio M, M Angel Saz­Sánchez, and José M Cuadrat, “Comparative
Analysis of Interpolation Methods in the Middle Ebro Valley (Spain): Application to An­
nual Precipitation and Temperature,” Climate research, 2003, 24 (2), 161–180.
Vitorino, Maria Ana, “Empirical Entry Games with Complementarities: An Application to
the Shopping Center Industry,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2012, 49 (2), 175–191.
Zhang, Lihong, Jun Zhang, Zheng yu Duan, and David Bryde, “Sustainable Bike­sharing
Systems: Characteristics and Commonalities across Cases in Urban China,” Journal of
Cleaner Production, 2015, 97, 124–133.
Zhang, Yongping and Zhifu Mi, “Environmental Benefits of Bike­sharing: A Big Data­
based Analysis,” Applied Energy, 2018, 220, 296–301.
Zheng, Fanyin, Pu He, Elena Belavina, and Karan Girotra, “Customer Preference and
Station Network in the London Bike Share System,” Technical Report 18­20, Columbia
Business School Research Paper 2018.

39

Panel A. Log(Trip Volume)

Panel B. Average Revenue per Trip

Panel C. Percent of Free Trips

Panel D. Log(Bike Utilization Rate)

Panel E. Bike Investment

FIGURE 1. TEST OF COMMON PRE­TREND ASSUMPTION
Notes: Point estimates of {λ−k }k=14
k=2 in Equation (2) as well as corresponding 95% confidence inter­
vals are plotted with relative days before Mobike’s entry on the horizontal axis. The two days before
Mobike’s entry are omitted as base and days more than 4 weeks before the entry are all counted as
k = 14. Similar notations apply to the last panel with time unit changed into month. All these
estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero. They are not different from zero with 95%
confidence as well when tested jointly. Standard errors are clustered at the city level.

40

1
upper-bound
of -

0.9
0.8
rd>rm

0.7

-

0.6
0.5

rd<rm

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

,

FIGURE 2. COMPARISON OF rd AND rm (θ = γ = 2)
Notes: This graph plots how the parameter values α and β affect the comparison of rd and rm when
we fix θ = γ = 2.

41

Panel A. Price as a function of z

Panel B. Investment as a function of z

0.8
p

3.5

d

vd

pm

vm

0.75

3

0.7
2.5

v

p

0.65
2

0.6
1.5
0.55
1

0.5

0.45

0.5
1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1

1.1

1.2

z

1.4

1.5

1.6

z

Panel C. Trade volume as a function of z
4.5

Panel D. Utilization rate as a function of z
1.3

42

tvd
tvm

4

rd
rm

1.2
1.1

3.5

1

utilization rate

3

total volume

1.3

2.5
2

0.9
0.8
0.7

1.5
0.6
1

0.5

0.5

0.4

0

0.3
1

1.1

1.2

1.3

z

1.4

1.5

1.6

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

z

FIGURE 3. COMPARION OF MONOPOLY AND DUOPOLY EQUILIBRIUMS UNDER DIFFERENT z = α + β
Notes: Panels in this graph plot how the equilibrium prices, investments, trade volumes and utilization rates change with z = α + β in both monopoly
and duopoly cases.

Panel A. Price as a function of θ

Panel B. Investment as a function of θ

1
p

1.5

d

pm

vd
vm

1.4

0.9
1.3
0.8

1.2
1.1

v

p

0.7

0.6

1
0.9
0.8

0.5

0.7
0.4
0.6
0.3

0.5
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0

0.5

3

1.5

2

3

Panel C. Trade volume as a function of θ

Panel D. Utilization rate as a function of θ
0.75

1.2

43

tvd

rd
rm

0.7

tvm

1

0.65
0.6

utilization rate

0.8

trade volume

1

0.6

0.4

0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35

0.2

0.3
0.25

0
0

0.5

1

3

1.5

2

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

3

FIGURE 4. COMPARION OF MONOPOLY AND DUOPOLY EQUILIBRIUMS UNDER DIFFERENT θ
Notes: Panels in this graph plot how the equilibrium prices, investments, trade volumes and utilization rates change with θ in both monopoly and
duopoly cases.

TABLE 1 – SUMMARY STATISTICS
Full Sample
ofo First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
Mean Std. Dev Mean Std. Dev Mean Std. Dev Mean Std. Dev

44

Sample
Variables
Panel A City­Day Level Variables
Sample Size
Dummy for Post­Entry Status
Log (Trip Volume)
Average Revenue per Trip (RMB)
Percent of Free Trips (0­100)
Log (# of New Users)
Percent of Active Old Users
Average # of Trips per Old User
Log (# of Grids Covered by ofo)
Gini Coverage Index
Dummy for ofo Operation within Campus
Speed of Wind
Temperature
Precipitation
Relative Humility
AQI (Air Quality Index)
Panel B City Level Variables
Sample Size
Logarithmic Population (10,000)
GDP per Capita (10,000 RMB)
Number of Taxis
Number of Buses
Road Surface (10,000 Square Meters)
Number of Mobile Phone Users (10,000)
Number of Internet Households (10,000)
Average Gradient (‰)

19631
0.616 0.486
NA
2.124
NA
0.207
NA 22.774
NA
1.997
NA 13.668
NA
0.388
5.469 1.21
0.864 0.09
0.163 0.369
2.677 0.883
21.276 7.69
0.171 0.486
73.831 16.31
84.196 47.688

13560
0.639 0.48
NA
2.074
NA
0.195
NA 23.716
NA
1.974
NA 12.955
NA
0.41
5.539 1.265
0.882 0.086
0.22 0.415
2.661 0.901
20.167 8.164
0.152 0.455
72.662 16.786
87.795 51.345

104
6.101 0.632
6.699 3.356
5076 6903
3030 4475
3281 3189
688
586
142
160
459
571

59
0.558
3.254
6265
4871
3476
603
185
548

6.196
6.94
6351
3775
3952
807
171
447

Notes: Mean of key outcomes are masked by “NA” for confidentiality

2633
0
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
4.709
0.788
0
2.679
23.515
0.208
74.259
77.956

0
1.386
0.229
19.869
1.789
16.471
0.351
0.862
0.092
0
0.861
5.708
0.519
16.763
37.909

5.814
5.981
2041
942
1628
367
71
597

23
0.818
3.118
1951
731
1268
218
44
745

3438
1
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
5.777
0.852
0.061
2.74
23.935
0.219
78.115
74.782

0
1.968
0.23
20.276
1.648
13.905
0.305
0.959
0.067
0.24
0.823
5.838
0.567
12.99
36.304

6.143
6.804
4829
3215
3212
706
141
345

22
0.535
3.885
10326
5073
3249
689
146
391

45

TABLE 2 – COMPETITION EFFECTS ON USAGE VOLUME AND PRICE
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A Dependent Variable
Log (Trip Volume)
PostEntry
0.370*
0.439** 0.535*** 0.491** 0.346** 0.402**
0.408**
(0.211)
(0.181)
(0.199)
(0.207)
(0.166)
(0.181)
(0.185)
2
0.104
0.233
0.106
0.111
0.241
0.12
0.117
Within Adjusted R
Average Revenue per Trip
Panel B Dependent Variable
PostEntry
0.029*** 0.027*** 0.030*** 0.035*** 0.031*** 0.031*** 0.041***
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.011)
Within Adjusted R2
0.075
0.122
0.049
0.057
0.123
0.049
0.059
Panel C Dependent Variable
Percent of Free Trips (0­100)
PostEntry
­2.288** ­2.311** ­3.132** ­3.589** ­2.170** ­2.717** ­3.695***
(1.131)
(1.117)
(1.487)
(1.563)
(0.971)
(1.287)
(1.399)
2
Within Adjusted R
0.085
0.14
0.073
0.07
0.14
0.074
0.07
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Dummy for Operation within Campus
Weather Condition
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Air Quality
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
City Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Calendar Date Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Relative Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Duopoly Group Trend
YES
YES
YES
Linear Time Trend
YES
YES
City Attributes×Date Fixed Effects
YES
YES
City Attributes×Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
Number of Clusters
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
Number of Observations
16193
16193
16193
16193
16193
16193
16193
Notes: Column 1 only controls for city fixed effects and time fixed effects. Column 2 adds the interaction between predetermined
city attributes and a third­order polynomial function of the relative days since ofo’s entry. Column 3 and 4 interact the city attributes
with calendar date fixed effects and relative day fixed effects respectively. Column 5­7 further include the linear time trend specific
to the ofo First cites. The specification of Column 7 is taken as benchmark setting in the following analyses. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered at the city level and ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level respectively, the same
hereinafter.

46

TABLE 3 – 2SLS ESTIMATES AND COMPETITION EFFECTS ON BIKE UTILIZATION RATE AND BIKE INVESTMENT
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Average Revenue Percent of
Log (Bike
PostEntry Log (Trip Volume)
Dependent Variables
Bike Investment
per Trip
Free Trips Utilization Rate)
Models
First­Stage
2SLS
2SLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
Predicted PostEntry
0.949***
(0.011)
PostEntry
0.478**
0.045***
­3.999*** 0.392** 0.457** 57.526** 58.384**
(0.199)
(0.012)
(1.493) (0.185) (0.198) (27.789) (27.391)
Benchmark Setting
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Kleibergen­Paap F Test 8000.251
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Number of Clusters
82
82
82
82
79
79
79
79
Number of Observations 16193
16193
16193
16193
15770 15770
616
616
Notes: (1) The instrument variable Predicted PostEntry is derived from a duration model which treats the time span between Mobike entry dates
and November 1, 2015 as “survival time” and uses city attributes and VC finance of Mobike as regressors. We assume that the baseline hazard
follows Weibull distribution. Further robustness checks of starting date choice and the assumption of baseline hazards are reported in Appendix
Table A3. (2) Every two columns of Column 5­8 under the same outcome variable report OLS and 2SLS estimates separately which adopt the
benchmark setting in Table 2 Column 7. Because of the lumpiness bike investment, we aggregate the investment data to month level and PostEntry
is defined as the percent of days that Mobike operates in the city c and month m. We also reconstruct all weather and air variables as monthly
average, and control for monthly time fixed effects instead of daily fixed effects.

47

TABLE 4 – MARKET EXPANDING VS. MARKET STEALING EFFECTS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Average # of Average Revenue Average Revenue
Log (# of
Percent of
Trips per
per Trip
per Trip
Dependent Variables
New Users)
Active Old Users
Old User
(New Users)
(Old Users)
Models
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS 2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
PostEntry
0.652*** 0.735*** ­4.126*** ­4.353*** ­0.005 ­0.003 0.029*** 0.030*** 0.032*** 0.034***
(0.228) (0.243) (1.446) (1.551) (0.036) (0.039) ­0.007 ­0.008 ­0.008 ­0.009
Benchmark Setting
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2
Within Adjusted R
0.265
/
0.075
/
0.006
/
0.007
/
0.041
/
Number of Clusters
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
Number of Observations 16193 16193
16193
16193 16193 16193 16193 16193 16193 16193
Notes: Every two columns under the same outcome variable report OLS and 2SLS estimates separately which adopt the benchmark setting in
Table 2 Column 7. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the city level.

48

TABLE 5 – FURTHER DATA ANALYSIS MOTIVATED BY THE MODEL
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Average Revenue
Dependent Variables
Log(Trip Volume)
per Trip
Models
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
Panel A Placebo Test Using ofo Campus Period
PostEntry×Dummy for Operation within Campus
­0.176
­0.008
0.024
0.041
(0.300) (0.285)
(0.025)
(0.026)
PostEntry×Dummy for Operation in the Whole City 0.482** 0.533** 0.044*** 0.045***
(0.202) (0.215)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Within Adjusted R2
0.122
/
0.060
/
Number of Clusters
82
82
82
82
Number of Observations
16193
16193
16193
16193
Panel B Competition Effect Heterogeneity to Pre­Entry Bike Investment
PostEntry
0.121
0.198
0.017
0.021
(0.216) (0.233)
(0.013)
(0.014)
PostEntry×Pre­Entry Bike Investment
0.036*
0.034
0.003*** 0.003***
(0.021) (0.021)
(0.001)
(0.001)
2
0.129
/
0.068
/
Within Adjusted R
Number of Clusters
81
81
81
81
Number of Observations
16140
16140
16140
16140
Benchmark Setting
YES
YES
YES
YES

(5)
(6)
Percent of
Free Trips
OLS
2SLS
­1.795
(4.113)
­3.935***
(1.463)
0.070
82
16193

­3.063
(4.011)
­4.105***
(1.550)
/
82
16193

­1.429
(1.500)
­0.296*
(0.149)
0.077
81
16140
YES

­1.765
(1.625)
­0.288*
(0.149)
/
81
16140
YES

Notes: (1)In Panel A, the key independent variable P ostEntryct is decomposed into 1campus · P ostEntryct and (1 − 1campus ) · P ostEntryct ,
where 1campus is the dummy for operation within campus in benchmark setting. Every two columns under the same outcome variable report OLS
and 2SLS estimates separately. (2)In Panel B, the Pre­Entry Bike Investment is calculated as the average number of accumulative bike investment
over 10 days before Mobike’s entry. If the time gap between the entry of ofo and Mobike is shorter than 10 days, this index is still constructed
over all the gap days thought from less observations. To make the magnitude of coefficients suitable for understanding , we divide the number of
pre­entry investment by 1,000. Bike investment data is missing for one of ofo First cities and the number of clusters thus decreases to 81.

49

TABLE 6 – COMPETITION EFFECTS ON GEOGRAPHICAL REACH OF BIKE­SHARING NETWORK
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Log (# of Grids
Gini Coverage Index
Dependent Variables
Gini Coverage Index
covered by ofo)
of Pre­Entry Grids
Models
OLS
2SLS
OLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
PostEntry
0.195** 0.225** ­0.035*** ­0.038*** ­0.027** ­0.031***
(0.081) (0.086)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.011)
Dummy for Operation within Campus
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Weather Condition
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Air Quality
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
City Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Calendar Date Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Relative Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Duopoly Group Trend
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
City Attributes×Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Within Adjusted R2
0.202
/
0.112
/
0.041
/
Number of Clusters
82
82
82
82
59
59
Number of Observations
16193
16193
16193
16193
13560
13560
Notes: “Pre­Entry Grids” could not be defined for ofo Alone group cities, which are excluded in Column 5 and 6 and the number of clusters
decreases to 59 (i.e., the number of ofo Frist group cities). Every two columns under the same outcome variable report OLS and 2SLS estimates
separately which adopt the benchmark setting in Table 2 Column 7.

For Online Publication
Appendix A:. Additional Figures and Tables
Panel A. September 30, 2016

Panel B. December 31, 2016

Panel C. March 31, 2017

Panel D. June 30, 2017

FIGURE A1. EXPENSION PROCESS OF OFO AND MOBIKE
Notes: This figure depicts the expansion process of ofo and Mobike in our sample cities. Beijing
and the 6 cities without detailed entry sequence are excluded. The base map of China comes from
Resource and Environment Data Cloud Platform (http://www.resdc.cn).

50

TABLE A1 – LIST OF CITIES
City Name
Tianjin
Shijiazhuang
Tangshan
Qinhuangdao
Handan
Baoding
Langfang
Taiyuan
Datong
Jinzhong
Xinzhou
Hohhot
Wuhai
Erdos
Shenyang
Dalian
Shanghai
Nanjing
Wuxi
Suzhou
Nantong
Yangzhou
Zhenjiang
Hangzhou
Ningbo
Wenzhou
Jiaxing
Jinhua
Taizhou
Hefei
Wuhu
Maanshan
Anqing
Fuzhou
Xiamen
Quanzhou

Administrative
ofo Entry Date
Area Code
120000
27­Aug­16
130100
31­Aug­16
130200
1­Apr­17
130300
28­Apr­17
130400
14­Apr­17
130600
9­Mar­17
131000
20­Apr­17
140100
17­Aug­16
140200
3­Mar­17
140700
6­May­17
140900
10­Jul­17
150100
1­May­17
150300
30­Jun­17
150600
9­Jun­17
210100
8­May­17
210200
26­Jun­17
310000
9­May­16
320100
14­Jun­16
320200
2­Mar­17
320500
15­Jan­17
320600
29­Apr­17
321000
20­Apr­17
321100
28­Apr­17
330100
12­Sep­16
330200
14­Jan­17
330300
14­May­17
330400
6­Apr­17
330700
31­Mar­17
331000
18­May­17
340100
24­Aug­16
340200
16­Mar­17
340500
28­Dec­16
340800
6­Dec­16
350100
19­Aug­16
350200
17­Dec­16
350500
14­Mar­17

51

Mobike Entry Date

Group

12­Feb­17
6­Mar­17
17­Apr­17
12­Jun­17
6­May­17
19­Jun­17
17­May­17
14­May­17
27­Jun­17
17­May­17
/
/
/
8­May­17
17­May­17
16­Apr­17
22­Apr­16
12­Jan­17
3­Mar­17
18­Jun­17
/
9­Mar­17
/
16­Apr­17
6­Dec­16
8­Apr­17
27­Apr­17
20­May­17
1­Jul­17
13­Feb­17
26­Mar­17
11­May­17
/
7­Feb­17
20­Dec­16
8­Mar­17

ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo Alone
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo Alone
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First

Zhangzhou
Ningde
Nanchang
Jiujiang
Ganzhou
Shangrao
Jinan
Qingdao
Zibo
Zaozhuang
Yantai
Weifang
Jining
Tai’an
Weihai
Rizhao
Dezhou
Zhengzhou
Kaifeng
Luoyang
Puyang
Xuchang
Sanmenxia
Wuhan
Shiyan
Yichang
Xiangyang
Ezhou
Xiaogan
Huanggang
Xianning
Changsha
Zhuzhou
Xiangtan
Guangzhou
Shaoguan
Shenzhen
Zhuhai
Shantou
Jiangmen

350600
350900
360100
360400
360700
361100
370100
370200
370300
370400
370600
370700
370800
370900
371000
371100
371400
410100
410200
410300
410900
411000
411200
420100
420300
420500
420600
420700
420900
421100
421200
430100
430200
430300
440100
440200
440300
440400
440500
440700

13­Mar­17
25­Apr­17
20­Aug­16
20­Apr­17
20­Apr­17
14­May­17
29­Aug­16
21­Feb­17
3­Apr­17
29­Jun­17
5­May­17
28­Apr­17
17­Jun­17
10­Apr­17
25­Apr­17
29­Apr­17
23­May­17
11­Aug­16
17­May­17
20­Apr­17
22­Jul­17
4­Jun­17
19­Jun­17
18­Apr­16
19­Aug­17
9­Apr­17
2­Apr­17
16­May­17
10­May­17
15­May­17
6­Jun­17
26­Aug­16
24­Apr­17
24­Apr­17
8­Jun­16
1­Jun­17
11­Sep­16
20­Oct­16
12­Apr­17
10­Apr­17
52

9­Mar­17
/
24­Feb­17
20­May­17
16­Jun­17
/
25­Jan­17
7­May­17
/
17­May­17
/
/
17­May­17
23­May­17
7­May­17
19­Mar­17
27­Apr­17
6­Mar­17
17­May­17
10­Apr­17
11­Aug­17
/
/
29­Dec­16
/
7­Apr­17
1­May­17
16­Jul­17
/
25­Aug­17
12­Jun­17
14­Feb­17
/
/
27­Sep­16
/
16­Oct­16
21­Jan­17
19­Feb­17
27­Mar­17

Mobike First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo Alone
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First

Heyuan
Dongguan
Zhongshan
Jieyang
Nanning
Guilin
Haikou
Chengdu
Deyang
Mianyang
Leshan
Nanchong
Meishan
Ziyang
Guiyang
Liupanshui
Zunyi
Kunming
Xi’an
Xianyang
Weinan
Yan’an
Yulin
Lanzhou
Xining
Yinchuan
Urumqi
Karamay

441600
441900
442000
445200
450100
450300
460100
510100
510600
510700
511100
511300
511400
512000
520100
520200
520300
530100
610100
610400
610500
610600
610800
620100
630100
640100
650100
650200

9­Jun­17
24­Feb­17
7­Apr­17
17­Apr­17
7­Sep­16
1­Mar­17
28­Feb­17
22­Aug­16
22­Apr­17
17­Mar­17
10­May­17
8­May­17
8­Jul­17
1­Jun­17
6­Mar­17
6­May­17
27­Apr­17
27­Aug­16
27­May­16
29­Apr­17
20­May­17
22­May­17
23­May­17
25­Aug­16
8­May­17
25­Apr­17
5­Jul­17
22­Aug­17

/
13­Jan­17
16­Jun­17
/
21­Feb­17
30­May­17
17­Feb­17
16­Nov­16
9­Mar­17
6­Mar­17
17­May­17
17­May­17
23­Jun­17
23­May­17
9­Apr­17
/
21­May­17
8­Jan­17
19­Feb­17
17­May­17
21­May­17
16­Aug­17
3­Aug­17
10­Jul­17
/
25­Apr­17
7­Jul­17
/

ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo First
Mobike First
Mobike First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone
ofo First
ofo First
ofo Alone

Notes: This list only includes cities in our final sample. Beijing and the 6 cities without detailed
entry sequence are excluded. Administrative Area Code is a unique number to identify adminis­
trative area, which is issued by the China central government. / means that entry dates are missing
for ofo Alone cities.

53

54

TABLE A2 – ROBUSTNESS CHECK OF DIFFERENT SUBSAMPLES
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(1)
Dependent Variables
Log (Trip Volume)
Average Revenue per Trip
Percent of Free Trips
Subsamples
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
Excluded
Included
Excluded
Included
Excluded
Included
Models
OLS 2SLS OLS 2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
PostEntry
0.401**0.473** 0.373* 0.428**0.044***0.048***0.039***0.042***­3.245**­3.510**­3.600***­3.804***
(0.192) (0.206) (0.190) (0.202) (0.013) (0.014) (0.011) (0.012) (1.307) (1.387) (1.297) (1.376)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Dummy for Operation within Campus YES YES YES YES
Weather Condition
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Air Quality
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
City Fixed Effects
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Calendar Date Fixed Effects
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Relative Day Fixed Effects
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Duopoly Group Trend
NO
NO YES YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
City Attributes×Day Fixed Effects
YES YES YES YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2
Within Adjusted R
0.103
/
0.133
/
0.074
/
0.053
/
0.079
/
0.061
/
Number of Clusters
59
59
104
104
59
59
104
104
59
59
104
104
Number of Observations
13560 13560 19631 19631 13560 13560 19631 19631 13560 13560 19631
19631
Notes: This table further examines the robustness of results in Table 2 and 3. Column 1,2,5,6,9 and 10 drop ofo Alone cities and re­estimate the
coefficients under the benchmark specification, resulting from the concern that our list of controls could not fully guarantee the comparability
between ofo First and ofo Alone cities. The other columns include the Mobike First group which is equivalent to the “always­treated” group
in the context of DID framework and make full use of the data sample.

55

TABLE A2 – ROBUSTNESS CHECK OF DIFFERENT SUBSAMPLES (Continued)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(13)
Dependent Variables
Log (Bike Utilization Rate)
Bike Investment
Mobike First
ofo Alone
Mobike First
Subsamples
ofo Alone
Excluded
Included
Excluded
Included
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
Models
OLS
PostEntry
0.397** 0.464** 0.357* 0.409**
(0.193) (0.206) (0.192) (0.202)
Percent of Duopoly Days (1­100)
51.669* 52.144* 40.842* 43.024*
(30.894) (30.413) (21.713) (22.03)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Dummy for (Percent of) Operation within Campus
Weather Condition
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Air Quality
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
City Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Calendar Date(Month) Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Relative Day(Month) Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Duopoly Group Trend
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
City Attributes×Day(Month) Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2
Within Adjusted R
0.103
/
0.109
/
0.01
/
0.002
/
Number of Clusters
58
58
101
101
58
58
101
101
Number of Observations
13507
13507
19208
19208
515
515
754
754

TABLE A3 – ROBUSTNESS CHECK OF 2SLS ESTIMATES
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Starting Dates
12/1/15
1/1/16
2/1/16
3/1/16

Distribution
Panel A Dependent Variables
Weibull
Loglogistic
Lognormal

0.484**
(0.201)
0.450**
(0.198)
0.456**
(0.199)

Panel B Dependent Variables
0.045***
Weibull
(0.012)
Loglogistic
0.043***
(0.012)
Lognormal
0.044***
(0.012)
Panel C Dependent Variables
­4.023***
Weibull
(1.502)
Loglogistic
­3.796**
(1.496)
Lognormal
­3.872**
(1.489)

Log (Trip Volume)
0.480** 0.487** 0.498**
(0.202)
(0.204)
(0.205)
0.456** 0.464** 0.469**
(0.199)
(0.200)
(0.201)
0.459** 0.461** 0.469**
(0.201)
(0.202)
(0.204)
Average Revenue per Trip
0.045*** 0.046*** 0.046***
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.013)
0.044*** 0.044*** 0.045***
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
0.043*** 0.043*** 0.043***
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.013)
Percent of Free Trips
­4.031*** ­4.101*** ­4.153***
(1.508)
(1.522)
(1.534)
­3.804** ­3.889** ­3.962**
(1.506)
(1.508)
(1.519)
­3.832** ­3.804** ­3.851**
(1.505)
(1.517)
(1.533)

(5)
4/1/16
0.505**
(0.206)
0.479**
(0.205)
0.477**
(0.207)
0.046***
(0.013)
0.046***
(0.013)
0.043***
(0.013)
­4.158***
(1.537)
­4.017**
(1.542)
­3.837**
(1.554)

Notes: The five panels experiment with instrument variables constructed from duration models
that use December 1, 2015, January 1, 2016, February 1, 2016, March 1, 2016 and April 1, 2016
as starting dates of Mobike, under different assumptions for the functional form of baseline hazard
(that is, Weibull, log­log and log­normal distributions). For each outcome variable, there are 5×3
= 15 estimates of β. This table provides further support to Table 3 in the sense that results are not
driven by the choice of starting dates or distribution function.

56

TABLE A3 – ROBUSTNESS CHECK OF 2SLS ESTIMATES (Continued)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Starting Dates
12/1/15 1/1/16 2/1/16 3/1/16 4/1/16
Distribution
Log (Bike Utilization Rate)
Panel D Dependent Variable
Weibull
0.461** 0.457** 0.463** 0.473** 0.480**
(0.200) (0.200) (0.202) (0.203) (0.204)
Loglogistic
0.428** 0.434** 0.440** 0.445** 0.454**
(0.196) (0.198) (0.198) (0.200) (0.202)
Lognormal
0.433** 0.436** 0.437** 0.444** 0.452**
(0.198) (0.200) (0.200) (0.202) (0.205)
Panel E Dependent Variable
Bike Investment
Weibull
52.342* 52.066* 51.285* 51.632* 51.866*
(30.428) (30.571) (30.217) (30.292) (30.321)
Loglogistic
47.565 47.501 47.696 47.436 46.338
(29.457) (29.515) (29.486) (29.285) 46.338
Lognormal
48.052 47.765 46.609 47.315 46.894
(29.610) (29.754) (29.490) (29.435) (29.289)

57

58

TABLE A4 – SUBSAMPLE REGRESSION FOR TEST OF IV VALIDITY
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Average Revenue
Percent of
Log (Bike
Dependent Variables
Log (Trip Volume)
per Trip
Free Trips
Utilization Rate)
Models
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
Panel A ofo Alone and Above­Median ofo First Cities
0.018 0.027** 0.026** ­1.913 ­1.945 0.004 ­0.001
PostEntry
0.016
(0.154) (0.164) (0.010) (0.011) (1.405) (1.489) (0.159) (0.167)
2
0.1
/
0.059
/
0.065
/
0.062
/
Within Adjusted R
Number of Clusters
54
54
54
54
54
54
51
51
Number of Observations 10159 10159
10159 10159 10159 10159 9736
9736
Panel B ofo Alone and Below­Median ofo First Cities
PostEntry
0.627* 0.764** 0.053** 0.061*** ­4.813* ­5.391* 0.544 0.682*
(0.365) (0.378) (0.020) (0.021) (2.721) (2.888) (0.388) (0.402)
2
Within Adjusted R
0.21
/
0.058
/
0.092
/
0.153
/
Number of Clusters
51
51
51
51
51
51
49
49
Number of Observations 8567
8567
8567
8567
8567
8567 8197
8197
Benchmark Setting
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

(9)

(10)

Bike Investment
OLS

2SLS

82.709* 81.497*
(43.572) (42.634)
0.091
/
51
51
382
382
45.397** 45.868**
(19.021) (18.371)
0.05
/
49
49
331
331
YES
YES

Notes: We use entry and finance dates to classify ofo First cities within each of the eight finance rounds of Mobike. In each round, we sort cities
by population and divide them into above­median and below­median groups. We then compare above­median and below­median cities with ofo
Alone cites in OLS and 2SLS, which are reported in Panel A and B respectively.

59

TABLE A5 – COMPETITION EFFECTS ON USAGE VOLUME WITHIN PRE­ENTRY & NON­CAMPUS GRIDS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent Variable
Log (Trip Volume)
Models
OLS
2SLS
OLS
2SLS
PostEntry
0.386** 0.451** 0.440** 0.490**
(0.190) (0.205) (0.194) (0.210)
YES
YES
YES
YES
Dummy for Operation within Campus
Weather Condition
YES
YES
YES
YES
Air Quality
YES
YES
YES
YES
City Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
Calendar Date Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
Relative Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
Duopoly Group Trend
NO
NO
NO
NO
City Attributes×Day Fixed Effects
YES
YES
YES
YES
Within Adjusted R2
0.101
/
0.045
/
Number of Clusters
59
59
53
53
Number of Observations
13560
13560
9170
9170
Notes: To investigate whether the booming usage is mainly driven by expansion to new grids, we first restrict to grids which are already covered
by ofo before Mobike’s entry and re­compute usage volume. ofo Alone and Mobike First cities are thus excluded and estimates are reported in
Column 1 and 2. To eliminate potential effects from campus, we further restrict to non­campus grids among those old grids which are employed
in the regression for Column 1 and 2. Please note that some cities of ofo First group have been covered by ofo completely during the campus
period, i.e., ofo does not strictly enforce the within­campus strategy. We could not define non­campus grids for them and the number of clusters
decreases to 53 in Column 3 and 4.

Appendix B:. Mathematical Appendix

60

