                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               LONG-TERM CARE HOSPITALS:
                                 A CASE STUDY IN WASTE

                                          Liran Einav
                                         Amy Finkelstein
                                         Neale Mahoney

                                       Working Paper 24946
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24946


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 2018, Revised April 2019




We thank Jeremy Kahn, Mark Miller, Hannah Wunsch, and many seminar participants for helpful
comments. We are grateful to Abby Ostriker and Anna Russo for excellent research assistance.
Einav and Finkelstein gratefully acknowledge support from the NIA (R01 AG032449). Mahoney
acknowledges support from the Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago and the
National Science Foundation (SES-1730466). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24946.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Care Hospitals: A Case Study in Waste
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 24946
August 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. H51,I11,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

There is substantial waste in U.S. healthcare, but little consensus on how to identify or combat it.
We identify one specific source of waste: long-term care hospitals (LTCHs). These post-acute
care facilities began as a regulatory carve-out for a few dozen specialty hospitals, but have
expanded into an industry with over 400 hospitals and $5.4 billion in annual Medicare spending
in 2014. We use the entry of LTCHs into local hospital markets and an event study design to
estimate LTCHs’ impact. We find that most LTCH patients would have counterfactually received
care at Skilled Nursing Facilities –post-acute care facilities that provide medically similar care to
LTCHs but are paid significantly less – and that substitution to LTCHs leaves patients unaffected
or worse off on all dimensions we can objectively measure. Our results imply that Medicare
could save about $4.6 billion per year – with no harm to patients – by not allowing for discharge
to LTCHs.

Liran Einav                                       Neale Mahoney
Stanford University                               Booth School of Business
Department of Economics                           University of Chicago
579 Serra Mall                                    5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                           Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                          and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                               Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
1     Introduction
Healthcare spending is one of the largest fiscal challenges facing the U.S. federal government. In 2014,

the U.S. federal government spent $1.1 trillion on public healthcare programs (BEA, 2016) and the

CBO projects that spending will grow to $2 trillion by 2026 (CBO, 2016).

      An idée fixe in health policy is that there is significant “waste” in the U.S. healthcare system,

with the widely repeated claim that 30% of U.S. healthcare spending is wasteful (e.g., Orszag, 2009;

McGinnis et al., 2013).1 Prominent stylized facts in support of this view are that the U.S. spends a much

higher fraction of GDP on healthcare relative to other OECD countries but obtains only middling

health outcomes (e.g., OECD, 2017; Anderson et al., 2005; Papanicolas, Woskie and Jha, 2018), and

the Dartmouth Atlas findings of large unexplained variation in Medicare spending within the U.S.

that is not correlated with better health outcomes (e.g., CBO, 2008; Skinner, 2011). While there is no

universal definition, commentators typically use the term waste to refer to healthcare spending that

does not improve patient health. Waste thus includes both transfers (e.g., excess payments to drug

manufacturers) and deadweight loss (e.g., from use of an expensive technology that does not improve

health).

      The near-consensus on the existence of waste is, unfortunately, not matched by any agreement on

how to reduce that waste. For example, Doyle, Graves and Gruber (2015) write: “There is widespread

agreement that the United States wastes up to one-third of health care spending, yet pinpointing the

source of the waste has proven difficult.” In a similar spirit, Cutler (2010) notes: “Analysts from the

left and right sides of the political spectrum agree that health care costs could be greatly reduced.

There is, however, less agreement about the best strategy for reducing them.”

      Cutting healthcare spending is easy – closing down hospitals would do the trick. Cutting health-

care spending without harming patient health or well-being, however, has proved a much more elu-

sive goal. There are, of course, oft-cited specific examples, such as robotic surgery tools or proton-

beam therapy for prostate cancer (Chandra and Skinner, 2012). But we know of few empirical studies

that have compellingly identified a specific and substantial source of waste.

      In this paper we provide a case study where, our evidence suggests, a substantial amount of

healthcare spending can be saved without harming patient outcomes. Our case study is of a specific
    1 For
      instance, McGinnis et al. (2013) was picked up by many major media outlets. See https://khn.org/morning-
breakout/iom-report/ for a summary.




                                                      1
healthcare institution: long-term care hospitals (LTCHs).2 LTCHs are one of several types of healthcare

institutions that provide post-acute care (PAC) – formal care provided to help patients recover from a

surgery or other acute care event.

    PAC is an under-studied sector, with large stakes for both federal spending and for patient health.

Federal spending on PAC through the Medicare program is substantial, about $59 billion in 2014. A

recent Institute of Medicine report found that, despite accounting for only 16% of Medicare spending,

PAC contributed to a striking 73% of the unexplained geographic variation in Medicare spending

(IOM, 2013), suggesting that there may be inefficiency in the sector.

    Traditionally, PAC was provided at skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) or at home by home health

agencies (HHAs). LTCHs were administratively created in the early 1980s to protect 40 chronic disease

hospitals from the new Prospective Payment System introduced for acute care hospitals. What began

as a regulatory carve-out for a few dozen specialty hospitals subsequently expanded into an industry

with over 400 LTCHs and $5.4 billion in annual Medicare spending in 2014 (MedPAC, 2016).

    The institutional history of LTCHs – which we discuss in detail below – suggests that they may

be primarily cost-increasing institutions. LTCHs are administrative – not medical – constructs. They

are unique to the U.S. health care system, and, to the best of our knowledge, do not exist in any

other country. LTCHs are reimbursed at substantially higher rates than other PAC facilities and are

run primarily by large for-profit chains. They have also been the subject of several decades worth of

a regulatory game of whack-a-mole; in a series of reforms, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services (CMS) has made multiple attempts to eliminate the loopholes that LTCHs offer for excess

reimbursement, and to limit the growth of the sector as a whole.

    We analyze the impact of a patient being discharged to an LTCH (hereafter, “LTCH discharge”)

on various outcomes. Our empirical strategy is to instrument for LTCH discharge with an event study

design based on the first entry of an LTCH into a local hospital market. We define hospitals markets

based on Hospital Service Areas (HSAs), of which there are about 3,400 in the U.S. We analyze 16 years

of data, from 1998-2014. During this period, 186 hospital markets experienced their first LTCH entry.

Another 152 markets already had an LTCH at the start of our sample period, and over 3,000 markets

still had no LTCH at the end of our sample period. Markets with LTCHs are disproportionately large,

accounting for 34% of the Medicare enrollees by the end of our sample period.

    We estimate that about four-fifths of discharges to LTCHs represent substitution from SNFs, while
   2 The acronym LTCH is typically pronounced“el-tack", presumably reflecting the fact that LTCHs are sometimes referred

to as long-term acute care hospitals (LTACs), which is phonetically pronounced in this manner.


                                                           2
the others substitute mostly from discharges home without home health care. SNFs are reimbursed by

Medicare at substantially lower rates than LTCHs; on a per day basis, LTCHs in 2014 were reimbursed

about $1,400, compared to about $450 for SNFs (authors’ calculation based on Medicare data described

below). We estimate that a discharge to an LTCH increases net Medicare spending by about $30,000.

Patients, however, do not benefit from this increased spending. Patients discharged to an LTCH owe

more money out of pocket, and we find no evidence that they spend less time in institutional care or

have better mortality outcomes as a result. Taken together, our findings indicate that Medicare could

save roughly $4.6 billion per year with no harm to patients by not allowing for discharge to LTCHs.

    Our strategy allows us to look not only at aggregate effects of LTCHs but also at whether there is

a subset of patients or LTCHs for whom the benefits of LTCH discharge are higher and/or the costs of

LTCH discharge are lower. We explore potential heterogeneity across a number of natural patient and

LTCH characteristics, and find little evidence of heterogeneous effects. Perhaps most interestingly, we

examine heterogeneity across LTCH patients affected by a recent policy change that occurred shortly

after the last year of our sample. To try to reduce expenditures and limit LTCH care to only the most

clinically complex patients, in 2016 CMS announced a “dual payment structure” under which LTCHs

are only reimbursed as LTCHs if the patients meet certain clinical criteria (MedPAC, 2017a). We find

no evidence of lower spending impacts or of mortality benefits for these more complex patients who

would continue to qualify for LTCH reimbursement under these new rules.

    In interpreting our results, it is important to note that despite high short-term mortality rates in

the affected population, the confidence intervals on our mortality results do not allow us to conclu-

sively reject economically meaningful improvements in health; this is a common feature of nearly all

research that considers mortality as an outcome. In addition, we are not able to measure non-mortality

dimensions of health (such as pain, functional limitations, and other quality-of-life metrics) or non-

health dimensions of utility (such as the quality of the room and board provided). Again, this is a

common feature of nearly all health economics research on patient outcomes. Our analysis makes

clear that any such unmeasured health or utility benefits would need to be valued at over $30,000 per

LTCH stay to cover the incremental Medicare spending associated with LTCH discharge. Moreover,

the institutional history of the LTCH sector as a regulatory carve-out – rather than an institution cre-

ated to serve a medical need – suggests that the “burden of proof” should be to show that LTCHs

provide medical or non-medical benefits that justify their costs. Consistent with CMS’ various at-

tempts to limit the growth of LTCHs, we cannot reject the null that the medical care LTCHs provide is


                                                   3
not better than the alternative.

      Our paper relates to several distinct literatures. Most narrowly, it complements recent work sug-

gesting that the PAC sector is a fruitful part of the healthcare system in which to look for inefficiencies

in Medicare spending (IOM, 2013; Doyle, Graves and Gruber, 2017); relatedly, Curto et al. (2019) note

that hospital patients enrolled in Medicare Advantage are much less likely to be discharged to PAC,

and particularly institutional PAC (LTCHs, SNFs, and IRFs). Our results are consistent with this exist-

ing impression and point to a particular PAC institution – the LTCH – whose elimination could save

money without any apparent harm to patients.

      Our paper also contributes to a small but growing literature on the impact of providers on the

healthcare sector. Much of this literature has focused on the effect of financial incentives on provider

behavior (e.g., Cutler, 1995; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Ho and Pakes, 2014; Eliason et al., 2018; Einav,

Finkelstein and Mahoney, 2018), or more broadly on the role of the physician in affecting healthcare

decisions (e.g., Barnett, Olenski and Jena, 2017; Molitor, 2018). Our study is unusual in that it studies

the impact of a specific institution (or organizational form) on the efficiency of the healthcare sector.

Most closely related to our analysis is Kahn et al. (2013) who look cross-sectionally at how outcomes

for chronically ill, acute care hospital patients differ in markets with differential LTCH penetration.

Like us, they conclude that increased probability of LTCH transfer is associated with lower use of

SNFs, higher overall Medicare payments, and no improvement in survival; our empirical analysis

below suggests, however, that there are likely confounds to such cross-sectional analysis.

      The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on Post-Acute Care

and LTCHs. Section 3 describes our data and presents summary statistics. Section 4 describes our

empirical strategy and Section 5 reports the results. Section 6 concludes.


2     Setting

2.1    Post-Acute Care

LTCHs are part of the post-acute care (PAC) sector, which provides patients with rehabilitation and

palliative services following an acute care hospital (hereafter, ACH or “hospital”) stay. PAC includes

both facility-based care – skilled nursing homes (SNF), inpatient rehabilitation facilities (IRFs), and

long-term care hospitals (LTCHs) – and home-based care, provided by home health agencies (HHAs).

About two-fifths of Medicare hospital patients are discharged to PAC, of which about 60% are sent

to PAC facilities (70% of PAC spending) and about 40% are sent to home health care (30% of PAC


                                                    4
spending) (MedPAC, 2015b). Because IRFs are institutionally similar to SNFs, but are much smaller in

number, we lump them together with SNFs in our discussion and empirical analysis that follow.3

     Spending on PAC is substantial. In 2014, Medicare spent $59 billion on PAC. This is approximately

16% of the $376 billion in total Traditional Medicare (hereafter, “Medicare”) spending and about 20%

more than the much-studied Medicare Part D program spending on Traditional Medicare beneficia-

ries.4 PAC patients are high-risk, with 15% of Medicare deaths involving a PAC stay in the prior 30

days (Einav, Finkelstein and Mahoney, 2018). Medicare spending on PAC is growing at two percent-

age points faster per year than overall Medicare spending, and more than doubled between 2001 and

2013 (Boards of Trustees for Medicare, 2002, 2014). This spending growth has not been associated with

any measurable improvements in patient health or quality of care (MedPAC, 2015a).

     Within the PAC landscape, LTCHs generally provide the most intensive care, SNFs and IRFs pro-

vide intermediate levels of care, and HHAs provide the least intensive care. Patient health follows a

similar ordering, with 90-day post-discharge mortality declining from 28% for patients discharged to

LTCHs to 13% for patients discharged to home health care in 2014.

     Medicare reimbursement differs greatly across PAC providers. Loosely speaking, LTCHs are paid

a fixed amount per admission, SNFs are reimbursed on a per diem basis, and HHAs are reimbursed

per 60-day episode of care. In 2014, the average LTCH stay was 26 days and cost Medicare $36,000; by

contrast, an average SNF stay was 25 days and cost $12,000. On a per day basis, therefore, LTCHs are

the most expensive form of PAC ($1,436 per day), followed by SNFs ($466 per day), and then HHAs

($73 per day). Patient cost sharing also differs across PAC providers. Cost sharing for LTCH stays

is tied to the beneficiary’s inpatient cost sharing; SNF stays are covered by a separate cost-sharing

schedule, with daily copays that kick in after 20 days; and cost sharing is generally not required for

HHA services.

     Despite these very different reimbursement regimes, physicians lack precise medical guidelines

or strict requirements from Medicare on which provider is most appropriate for a given patient, with

discharge decisions reflecting non-clinical factors, such as geographic availability, patient or physician

preferences, and familiarity between the PAC provider and the referring hospital (Buntin, 2007; Otten-

bacher and Graham, 2007). This results in substantial overlap in the types of cases treated by different
    3 In 2014, there were approximately 205,000 IRF stays ($3.3 billion in Medicare payments) and 2.5 million SNF stays ($32.4

billion in Medicare payments). These and subsequent numbers in this section without an explicit citation are based on the
Medicare data described in the next section.
    4 In particular, we estimate Part D spending for Traditional Medicare beneficiaries as the product of $78.1 billion in total

Part D spending (Boards of Trustees for Medicare, 2015) and the 62% of Part D beneficiaries enrolled in stand-alone PDP
plans (MedPAC, 2015b), which yields $48.4 billion in Part D spending.


                                                               5
PAC providers, and in significant variation in PAC utilization.

2.2    Whack-a-Mole: A Brief Regulatory History of LTCHs

Our analysis focuses on the impact of discharge to an LTCH. Unlike other medical facilities, LTCHs

are a purely regulatory phenomenon and are unique to the U.S. health care system. In order to be

classified as an LTCH, a hospital must have an average length of stay of 25 days or more. Because

there are no specific medical requirements, LTCHs provide a diverse range of services, including

those to address respiratory issues, septicemia, skin ulcers, and renal failure (MedPAC, 2018).

      LTCHs account for about 4% of discharges to facility-based PAC and about 12% of facility-based

PAC spending (MedPAC, 2015b). As we discuss in more detail below, LTCHs exist in some hospital

markets but not in others; in 2014, in markets where they exist, LTCHs accounted for 11% of discharges

to facility-based PAC and 31% of facility-based PAC spending. About half of LTCHs are known as

“hospitals within hospitals” meaning that they are physically located within the building or campus

of a (typically larger) acute care hospital (Office of Inspector General, 2013).

      The history of LTCHs reads like a whack-a-mole history of health care reform. In 1982, the Tax

Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) established a prospective payment system (PPS) for

acute care hospitals. Rather than being reimbursed on a fee-for-service (“cost-plus”) basis, hospitals

would be paid a predetermined, fixed amount that depended on the patient’s diagnosis related group

(DRG). At the time, there were about 40 hospitals – primarily former tuberculosis and chronic disease

facilities – that specialized in clinically complex patients who required long hospital stays; regulators

were concerned that the fixed payments under PPS would be insufficient to cover costs at these hos-

pitals. To keep these hospitals afloat, CMS excluded hospitals with average length of stay of at least

25 days from PPS and continued to pay them based on their average per-diem cost (Liu et al., 2001).

These 40 hospitals were the original LTCHs.

      Figure 1 plots the number of LTCHs over time. Since 1982, there has been a rapid growth in the

LTCH sector, with the number of facilities rising from 40 to over 400. Because new entrants did not

have prior cost data, payments for new entrants were determined by costs in their initial years of

operation. This encouraged new entrants to be inefficient when they first opened and to earn profits

by increasing their efficiency over time.5

      The majority (72% in 2014) of LTCHs are for-profit (21% are non-profit and 7% are government-
  5 Liu   et al. (2001) describes the early history and institutional features of LTCHs in greater detail.




                                                                 6
run).6 According to recent financial statements of the two largest LTCH operators, Kindred Health

Systems and Select Medical, LTCHs generate profits margins between 16% and 29%.7

     Since their creation in 1982, a series of policies have been enacted to try to curb rising LTCH

expenditures. The 1997 Balanced Budget Act (BBA) and 1999 Balanced Budget Refinement Act (BBRA)

established a prospective payment system for LTCHs. From 2002 to 2007, LTCHs were transitioned

to a payment system in which, like the PPS for acute care hospitals, they were paid a fixed amount

per patient-DRG. However, much like LTCHs were originally created as a necessary “carve out” to

PPS, the LTCH PPS in turn featured what was seen as a necessary carve out: in designing LTCH-PPS,

there was concern that LTCHs might discharge patients after a small number of days but still receive

the large, lump-sum payments that were intended for longer stays. To address this potential perverse

incentive to cycle patients briefly into an LTCH, stays in an LTCH below a certain number of days

(the “threshold day") were continued to be paid on the pre-PPS per-diem reimbursement schedule.

This created a substantial (approximately $13,000) jump in Medicare payments at the threshold day,

and LTCHs responded by discharging large numbers of patients right after reaching the threshold

(Kim et al., 2015; Weaver, Mathews and McGinty, 2015; MedPAC, 2016; Eliason et al., 2018; Einav,

Finkelstein and Mahoney, 2018). In Einav, Finkelstein and Mahoney (2018) we explored alternative

payment schedules that remove this jump in payments and generate significant savings for Medicare.

     In more recent years, CMS has taken at least four distinct measures to try to reduce LTCH spend-

ing. In 2007, and again in 2014, CMS established a 3-year moratorium on the certification of new

LTCHs or increases in LTCH beds (CMS, 2008, 2014). In 2005, CMS established a policy known as the

“25-percent rule” that penalizes LTCHs for admitting more than 25% of patients in an LTCH from a

single hospital, although Congress has delayed the full implementation of the law (42 CFR § 412.534,

2014). In 2011, in order to address incentives for hospitals-within-hospitals to “ping pong” patients

between the ACH and the LTCH, a regulation known as the “5 percent rule” went into effect, which

established that if more than 5% of patients discharged from an LTCH to a given hospital are later

re-admitted to the LTCH, the LTCH will be compensated as if the patient had a single LTCH stay (42

CFR § 412.532, 2011). In 2016, to reduce expenditures and incentivize LTCHs to better target the clini-
   6 Calculated
              from the American Hospital Association data described in the next section.
   7 Profits are defined as EBITA (earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization).
                                                                                Kindred’s profits have hovered between
22% and 29% of revenue based on 2009 to 2015 company reports. Prior to 2009, Kindred did not separate out their reporting
of LTCH profits from the much larger SNF category. Select’s profits have ranged between 16% to 22% of revenue based
on company reports from 2004 to 2015. Kindred’s annual reports are available at http://www.annualreports.com/
Company/kindred-healthcare-inc and Select’s are available at https://www.selectmedical.com/investor-
relations/for-investors/



                                                               7
cally complex patients they were initially designed to serve, CMS phased in a dual payment structure

for LTCHs. Under this new payment structure, LTCHs will be reimbursed under the LTCH PPS only

if the patient had an immediately preceding ACH stay with either (i) 3 or more days in an intensive

care unit (ICU) or coronary care unit (CCU), or (ii) mechanical ventilation for at least 96 hours at the

LTCH. All other LTCH cases are reimbursed at the lower of the inpatient PPS comparable per diem

rate and the total estimated cost incurred by the LTCH to treat the patient (MedPAC, 2017b). Irace (In

Progress) studies this reform. Most recently, beginning in 2018, a payment reform went into effect that

eliminated the jump in payments at the threshold (80 FR 37990 , 2017). While it is too soon to be sure,

if history is to guide us, the most recent round of reforms will generate new, unintended opportunities

for LTCHs to earn profits, and the game of whack-a-mole will continue.

      We have dwelled at some length on the institutional and regulatory history of LTCHs because, we

believe, it is important for setting our priors and the appropriate null hypothesis: namely, that LTCHs

are cost-increasing institutions with no clear benefits to patients. While suggestive, this qualitative

history is of course by no means definitive. As noted, existing empirical evidence is limited to cross-

sectional comparisons of patient outcomes in markets with differential LTCH penetration. We turn

now to our data and empirical strategy that will allow us to estimate the impact of LTCHs on average,

as well as on particular subsets of patients.


3     Data and Summary Statistics

3.1    Data, Sample, and Variable Definitions

Our primary data source is the 100% Medicare Provider and Analysis Review (MedPAR) data from

1998-2014. These data contain claim-level information on all Medicare patient stays at acute care

hospitals, LTCHs, SNFs and IRFs. For each stay, the data contain admission and discharge dates, and

information on procedures, diagnoses (DRGs), and Medicare payments.

      We merge the MedPAR data with three supplementary datasets. The Medicare Annual Beneficiary

Summary File provides us with basic patient demographic information, including age, sex, race, and

ZIP Code of residence, as well as date of death (if any) through 2014. The beneficiary summary file

also includes eligibility and enrollment information, which we use to determine whether a patient

is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or enrolled in Medicare Advantage. We exclude all

beneficiary-years that have at least one month of enrollment in Medicare Advantage. The Provider

of Service (POS) dataset contains annual characteristics for all Medicare-approved providers, which


                                                   8
allows us to identify each provider’s ZIP Code as early as 1984. Finally, we use the American Hospital

Association’s (AHA) annual survey from 1998-2014 to classify providers as for-profit, non-profit, or

government-run, and to obtain provider latitude and longitude, which allow us to calculate distances

between facilities.

    Our baseline analysis focuses on the entry of the first LTCH into a Hospital Service Area (HSA).

HSAs are a standard geographic measure of a health care market. HSAs were originally defined by

the National Center for Health Statistics as a collection of contiguous ZIP Codes with at least one

hospital where the majority of residents are hospitalized. Since the geographic unit’s creation in the

early 1990s, HSA boundaries have remained constant regardless of changes to the hospital systems in

those regions. There are 3,436 HSAs in the United States, which is similar to the number of counties

and roughly ten times the number of Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs), another common geographic

unit of analysis.8

    We use the claim-level MedPAR data to identify whether an LTCH is present in an HSA in each

quarter of each year. We define entry as the earliest quarter with a patient admission to an LTCH in

that HSA. Appendix A provides more detail on this measure of entry, showing that LTCHs quickly

reach steady-state volume after entry; it also shows that our claims-based definition of entry is highly

correlated with a measure of entry based on the year of an LTCH‘s first appearance in the POS file.

    In our baseline analysis, our unit of observation is a patient “spell” which we define (following

Einav, Finkelstein and Mahoney, 2018) as starting on the date of a patient’s admission to an acute care

hospital (ACH) and consisting of the set of almost-continuous days with a Medicare payment to an

acute care hospital, LTCH, SNF, or IRF . We start the spell with an ACH stay because the vast majority

(84%) of LTCH patients are admitted to an LTCH following their discharge from an ACH.9 We end the

spell if there are two consecutive days without any Medicare payments to any of these institutions.

Note that by this definition, a patient may be readmitted to an ACH following a stay at a different

facility without initiating a new spell. We show in Appendix C that our core results are robust to

defining the analysis window as a set amount of time following admission to the ACH.

    We analyze a variety of outcomes over the course of a spell. All monetary outcomes are converted

to 2014 dollars using the CPI-U. The first set of outcomes is the discharge destination from the ACH.

The (mutually exclusive and exhaustive) discharge destinations are to death, to another ACH, to an
  8 See      www.dartmouthatlas.org/downloads/geography/ziphsahrr98.xls                          and     http://www.
dartmouthatlas.org/downloads/methods/geogappdx.pdf for more details on defining HSAs and HRRs.
   9 Most others are admitted directly from the community via a physician referral, although a small number are admitted

from other facility-based PAC.


                                                           9
LTCH, to a SNF, or to home/other (where other includes home health care and hospice); Appendix A

provides more detail on how we code discharge destinations. We analyze total Medicare payments to

and days at various post-discharge facility destinations throughout the spell, as well as total Medicare

payments for the spell.10 We also analyze total out-of-pocket payments owed for the spell, using the

term out-of-pocket payments to refer to payments not covered by Medicare; these payments may be

covered by the patient’s supplemental insurance plan. Finally, we define indicators for whether the

patient has died in the 90-days since the initiating admission to the acute care hospital, and whether

the patient has ever been at home in the 90-days since the initiating admission to the acute care hos-

pital. Again, Appendix A provides details.

      A potential limitation of our analysis is that the MedPAR data do not include payments to home

health or hospice. We have separate data on such payments from 2002-2014. We show in Appendix C

that these destinations account for a relatively low share of spell spending (about 10% combined) and

incorporating them into the analysis does not meaningfully impact our findings.

3.2    LTCH Entry

Figure 2 shows the distribution of LTCHs across HSAs in the first year that data are available (1984),

the first year of our study period (1998), and the last year of our study period (2014). Prior to 1998,

152 HSAs had an LTCH. Over our study period, (1998-2014) an additional 186 HSAs experienced their

first entry. The figure also shows that LTCHs tend to be geographically concentrated.

      Figure 3 reports the timing of LTCH entry into new HSAs over our study period. First entries

occur fairly consistently over the first 12 years of our sample period but drop off in the last few years,

presumably due to the moratorium on new facilities.11

      Table 1 explores characteristics of the hospital markets with LTCHs, separately examining markets

that had an LTCH before 1998, experienced their first LTCH entry between 1998 and 2014, and never

had an entry. The final column shows the bivariate correlation between an indicator for whether the

HSA ever had an LTCH and these characteristics.

      Table 1 indicates that LTCHs are more likely to locate in urban and more populated markets, pre-

sumably because these markets have enough demand to recover fixed entry costs. In 2014, although

only about 10% of hospital markets had an LTCH, these markets covered 34% of Medicare beneficia-
  10 Our baseline measure includes all Medicare reimbursements except for outlier payments. In Appendix C, we show

that including outlier payments makes the point estimates stronger but, because outlier payments are noisy, reduces the
precision of our results.
  11 As Figure 3 illustrates, CMS made some exceptions; these are described in more detail in CMS (2008, 2014).




                                                          10
ries. LTCHs tend to be located in markets with a higher rate of ACH beds per capita, a larger share

of for-profit ACHs, and a higher rate of ACH patients discharged to SNF or any PAC (which includes

home health care). LTCHs are more likely to enter states that had one of the original LTCHs (de-

fined by presence of an LTCH in 1984) and less likely to enter states with Certificate of Need (CON)

laws, which regulate entry. The correlation between entry and these characteristics motivate our event

study research design as a complement to prior work that has examined the cross-sectional correlation

between outcomes and market-level LTCH penetration (Kahn et al., 2013).

3.3    Predicted Probability of LTCH Discharge

While the LTCH setting is high stakes both in terms of Medicare spending and patient health in a

given year, many patients are simply not “at risk” of an LTCH discharge and mainly add noise to

the estimates. For instance, in 2014, only about 1% of all hospital patients were discharged to an

LTCH. Even in HSAs with LTCHs, only about 2% of hospital patients were discharged to an LTCH. In

order to improve our statistical power, we generate a stay-level measure of the predicted probability

of LTCH discharge, and we allow our first stage estimate of the impact of LTCH market entry on

LTCH discharge to vary with this ex ante stay-level probability of LTCH discharge. Intuitively, the

heterogeneous first stage places more “weight” on patients with a higher ex ante probability of LTCH

discharge. We describe our IV approach in more detail in Section 4 below.

      Identifying a hospital stay’s probability of LTCH discharge (hereafter, p̂) from the high dimen-

sional set of covariates available in the claims data is a prediction problem well suited to machine-

learning methods. We use a regression tree as our prediction algorithm because its emphasis on in-

teractions closely parallels the clinical complexity of LTCH patients, who often have multiple chronic

illnesses or comorbidities (Liu et al., 2001; MedPAC, 2016).

      We include as predictors demographics and pre-determined health conditions that are plausibly

exogenous to the discharge decision. The demographics are the calendar year of the patient admission,

patient’s age, sex, race, and an indicator for dual enrollment in Medicaid. The health predictors are the

ICD-9 diagnoses from the patient’s initiating hospital admission. Specifically, we cluster the diagnoses

associated with the initiating stay (each stay can have up to 9 distinct diagnoses) into 285 mutually

exclusive Clinical Classification Software (CCS) codes (HCUP, 2017). CCS codes have been shown in

other settings to be good predictors of health status in Medicare data (Ash et al., 2003; Radley et al.,

2008).12
 12 We   exclude procedures in the initial hospital stay from our set of predictors as the propensity to perform certain pro-


                                                             11
    As our event study results will confirm, geographic proximity plays a central role in the prob-

ability of LTCH discharge. To determine the likelihood of LTCH discharge without geographic con-

straints, we predict probabilities conditional on having an LTCH in close proximity. To do so, we create

a training set consisting of all ACH stays within 5 kilometers of the nearest LTCH, with distance mea-

sured as spherical distance based on the provider’s latitude and longitude coordinates reported in the

AHA provider survey. We train the regression tree on a 10% sample of these stays using five-fold

cross-validation. We then use the estimated prediction model to generate p̂’s for all initiating hospital

stays (including those further than 5 kilometers away from an LTCH). Thus p̂ measures the predicted

probability of LTCH discharge if an LTCH were within 5 kilometers of the patient’s hospital.

    Appendix B provides more detail on both the construction of the prediction algorithm and its

output. Because the predictions are generated under the (counterfactual) assumption that all hospital

patients are within 5 kilometers of an LTCH, the mean probability of discharge to an LTCH is 2%,

rather than 1% as in the general population. The distribution of p̂ is highly right-skewed. This reflects

the fact that LTCHs are designed to serve a specific type of clinically complex patients; the vast ma-

jority of hospital patients have a very low probability of LTCH discharge, even conditional on having

an LTCH in the patient’s HSA.

    To reduce noise, we construct a “baseline” sample that focuses on all patients with a non-trivial

probability of LTCH discharge. Specifically, we drop the 73 million hospital stays (45%) with a p̂ ≤

0.004, which is the “leaf” with the lowest value in the regression tree. This restriction excludes only

8% of LTCH discharges. For some of our analyses, we also focus on a “high p̂” sample, where we

restrict to stays with p̂ > 0.15. This sample keeps 16% of LTCH discharges.

    Table 2 presents summary statistics for the full sample stays, the baseline sample, and the high

p̂ sub-sample of the baseline sample. Specifically, we report means of patient demographics and our

model’s “most important” selected health status features, where variable importance is measured by

ranking the variables by the additional R2 provided at each leaf of the tree. We find that patients with

a high probability of LTCH discharge are nearly 10 times as likely to have experienced some sort of

respiratory failure and over 10 times as likely to be diagnosed with septicemia (blood poisoning) than

the overall acute care population. This is consistent with previous work that finds a high prevalence of

patients with sepsis or respiratory failure in LTCHs (MedPAC, 2016; Chen, Vanness and Golestanian,

2011; Koenig et al., 2015). To further assess our model and square our predictions with the existing
cedures could be affected by the presence of an LTCH. And, indeed, we provide suggestive evidence of this in Appendix
B.


                                                         12
literature on LTCH patients, the bottom panel of Table 2 reports rates of ICU stays and mechanical

ventilation in the initial ACH stay, two common features of LTCH patients that have consistently been

reported in the literature (Kahn and Iwashyna, 2010; Koenig et al., 2015) but that we excluded from

our prediction algorithm due to concerns about potential endogeneity. Encouragingly, we find that

over 50% of high p̂ stays spent time in an ICU and over 45% were on a mechanical ventilator.

3.4    Summary Statistics

Table 3 presents means and standard deviations for our primary outcomes for our three event study

samples. Column 1 reports results for all acute care admissions. Column 2 shows the baseline sample,

which excludes all observations with a p̂ ≤ 0.004, and also restricts attention to the 186 first-entry

HSAs and drops quarters following subsequent LTCH entries or exits; this mimics the sample restric-

tions we use in the baseline event study analyses below. As a result, the event study samples are

roughly one seventh the size of the “baseline” sample sizes reported in Table 2, which included the

universe of hospitals stays with a p̂ ≤ 0.004. Finally, column 3 shows the high p̂ sub-sample of the

baseline sample.

      A comparison of outcomes in column 2 and column 3 provides a characterization of how patients

likely to be discharged from an LTCH differ from other patients. Patients in the high p̂ sample require

far more intensive, lengthy, and expensive care. High p̂ patients have a 13% probability of being

discharged to an LTCH (vs. 1.8% in the baseline sample), an average spell length of 36 days (compared

to 18 in the baseline sample), and average spell Medicare expenditure of over $42,000 (vs. roughly

$17,500 in the baseline sample).13 90-day mortality rates are high in the baseline sample (20%) and

even higher in the high p̂ sub-sample (over 40%).


4     Empirical Strategy
We estimate the effect of LTCH discharge on patient outcomes using variation in LTCH discharges

caused by the entry of the first LTCH into a hospital market. Our approach allows outcomes to differ

across markets (as suggested by Table 1) but assumes that, in the absence of entry, trends in outcomes

would be similar across markets. We examine this assumption by examining trends in outcomes prior

to entry.

      In our baseline specification, we focus on the entry of the first LTCH in an HSA because this is
   13 Because p̂ is the probability of LTCH discharge conditional on having one nearby, the true probability of LTCH discharge

is lower than the average p̂.



                                                             13
where we expect to see the sharpest effects. Specifically, we restrict our sample to the 186 HSAs with

a first entry during our 1998-2014 sample period. We exclude the 152 HSAs that, based on the POS

annual 1984-1998 files, had an LTCH prior to 1998, and we exclude the over 3,000 HSAs which had

no LTCH entry as of 2014. The markets we study are disproportionately large, accounting for 14% of

the Medicare patients and 24% of LTCH discharges at the end of our sample period. Within the 186

HSAs we study, we truncate the data just before the quarter of second LTCH entry or LTCH exit so

that the post-entry results are not contaminated by further shocks to LTCH discharges. Among our

186 HSAs, 24 experience a second entry and 23 an exit. Since the restricted sample is unbalanced, the

combination of heterogeneous treatment effects and changes in sample composition might generate

spurious time trends in our estimates. We conduct robustness analysis where we restrict the sample

to a balanced panel and show that these types of effects are not driving our results.

    In order to qualify as an LTCH, a facility must first document that it meets the minimum average

length of stay requirement of 25 days for a six-month period (42 CFR § 412.23, 2011).14 Most LTCHs

therefore begin as an ACH and are subsequently reclassified as an LTCH. These facilities are neither

an LTCH nor an ACH; they are operationally an LTCH but are not reimbursed as such. To address

this, we classify a facility that initially opens as an ACH for a brief period before being deemed an

LTCH as an “LTCH in training.” Appendix A describes in more detail how we identify them. Our

methodology is conservative; as we discuss below, there are likely some LTCHs-in-training that we

do not categorize as such.

    We define time relative to the quarter of LTCH entry as relative time (r). We consider three distinct

periods in relative time: a pre-period (r < −5), a post-period (r > 0), and a transition period (r ∈

[−5, 0]), in which an LTCH-in-training may have entered prior to the “true” LTCH entry at r = 0. We
draw these distinctions based on patterns in the raw data. In Appendix C, we show the results are

robust to alternative plausible time windows for this transition period. The patterns in the raw data

also motivate us to allow for separate trends in the outcomes pre and post entry, and to drop from our

event study estimates all observations that are associated with the transition period.

    Let i index spells, j index HSAs, and t index calendar time (in quarters). Our reduced form speci-
  14 In order to retain its LTCH reimbursement rate, a hospital must continue to report a 25-day average length of stay in

each cost reporting period.




                                                           14
fication for outcome yijt takes the form:


                  yijt = α · 1(r ∈ Ppost ) + 1(r ∈ Ppre ) f (r ) + 1(r ∈ Ppost ) g(r ) + γ j + τt + eijt                (1)


where γ j are HSA fixed effects, τj are calendar quarter fixed effects, and f (r ) and g(r ) are linear

functions in r, normalized such that f (0) = g(0) = 0.15 Our parameter of interest α captures the

average impact of LTCH entry on patient outcomes. We calculate heteroskedasticity-robust standard

errors clustered at the HSA level.

     Our identifying assumption is that in the absence of LTCH entry, any trends in the outcome across

markets would have been similar. While we cannot test this assumption directly, we present graphical

evidence of the time pattern of outcomes prior to LTCH entry that is consistent with the identifying

assumption

     The parameter α in equation (1) measures the impact of LTCH entry into the market on the out-

come. To study the impact of a patient’s discharge to an LTCH on outcomes, we estimate instrumental

variable (IV) specifications where we use LTCH entry as an instrument for LTCH discharge. Specifi-

cally, we estimate the equations


             LTCHijt = α · 1(r ∈ Ppost ) + 1(r ∈ Ppre ) f L (r ) + 1(r ∈ Ppost ) g L (r ) + γ jL + τtL + eijt
                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                        (2)
                                                                                                y     y     y
                       yijt = βy · LTCHijt + 1(r ∈ Ppre ) f y (r ) + 1(r ∈ Ppost ) gy (r ) + γ j + τt + eijt            (3)


where the first line shows the “first stage” equation that relates LTCH entry to LTCH discharge, and

the second line shows the “second stage” equation that relates LTCH discharge to patient outcome

yijt . Both equations include the same controls as the reduced form specification (equation 1), with

the parameters allowed to vary across equations. The parameter of interest βy can be interpreted as

the impact of being discharged to an LTCH on outcome yijt . We calculate heteroskedasticity-robust

standard errors clustered at the HSA level.

     In the LTCH setting, an additional challenge is that, as discussed in Section 3, the probability of

discharge to an LTCH is highly heterogeneous, and near zero for many patients (even if an LTCH
  15 Outside of the four-year window around entry, we model f (r ) and g (r ) as constant in relative time. Specifically, we

define
                                                                       
                                         a   if r < 16                       cr   if r ≤ 16
                              f (r ) =                  and g(r ) =                          .
                                         −br if r ≥ −16                      −d if r > 16

We define these functions in this way because it allows us to focus on LTCH entry inside a four-year window while still
preserving observations outside the window to pin down HSA and calendar-time fixed effects.


                                                            15
exists nearby). To improve statistical power, we therefore estimate specifications where we allow the

first stage coefficient (α) to vary with p̂, the predicted probability of LTCH discharge. Technically, p̂

can be interpreted as a compliance propensity score in the spirit of Follmann (2000), which we use to

determine heterogeneity in first stage effects.

      To allow for a heterogeneous first stage within our event study framework, we divide our baseline

sample into five groups indexed by k = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Groups 1 to 3 are quartiles 1 to 3 of the p̂

distribution, and groups 4 and 5 are based on splitting the top quartile into two groups ( p̂ < 0.15

and p̂ > 0.15). Appendix Table A1 summarizes these five p̂ groups. To account for heterogeneity, we

estimate a modified version of our IV specification


           LTCHijt = αk · 1(r ∈ Ppost ) + 1(r ∈ Ppre ) f kL (r ) + 1(r ∈ Ppost ) gkL (r ) + γkr
                                                                                             L
                                                                                                + τktL + eijkt
                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                 (4)
                                                             y                      y         y     y      y
                     yijt = βy · LTCHijt + 1(r ∈ Ppre ) f k (r ) + 1(r ∈ Ppost ) gk (r ) + γkj + τkt + eijkt     (5)


which is identical to equations (2) and (3), except that the first stage coefficient and all of the controls

are allowed to vary flexibly by k.

      We continue to assume that the coefficient of interest βy is homogenous across groups, and cal-

culate heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the HSA- p̂ group level. In the results

that follow, we show that, consistent with our homogeneity assumption, our point estimates are very

similar, but less precisely estimated, when we restrict the sample to patients with the highest ex ante

probability of LTCH discharge ( p̂ > 0.15). In Appendix C, we also show results separately for the other

p̂ groups, and find that the results are consistent with our homogeneity assumption. In Appendix C,

we also show that imposing a first stage specification with a homogenous first stage coefficient (α)

results, as expected, in substantially less precise IV estimates.


5     Results

5.1    Reduced Form Graphical Results for High p̂ Sample

Figures 4 to 8 present graphical evidence of the reduced form effects of LTCH entry into the market. In

each plot, the horizontal axis shows the relative event time r in quarters and the vertical axis shows the

outcome variable. The dots show quarterly averages of the outcome, net of HSA and calendar quarter

fixed effects from estimating equation (1). The solid lines show linear trends, f (r ) and g(r ), which, as

shown in equation (1), are separately estimated on the pre- and post-entry periods. For visual effect,


                                                           16
the dashed line extends the pre-period trend into the transition period. The reduced form effect of

LTCH entry on a given outcome, α, captures the gap between the linear trends at r = 0.

    We start by examining the effect of LTCH entry into a market on p̂, our predicted probably of

LTCH discharge. Recall that p̂ is constructed using demographics and pre-determined health condi-

tions of patients with ACH stays. If there was an effect of LTCH entry on p̂, it would indicate that

hospitals are responding endogenously to LTCH entry, for example by changing what patients they

admit, which would raise concerns for the interpretation of our empirical results. Reassuringly, Figure

4 shows no evidence of an effect of LTCH entry on p̂ in the baseline sample. The estimated reduced

form effect of LTCH entry on p̂ (α in equation 1) is 0.00050 (standard error = 0.00027), relative to a base

of 0.033 pre-entry.

    In Figures 5 to 8 we show the reduced form effects of LTCH entry into a market, limited to the

high p̂ sub-sample of our baseline sample. The first column of Table 4 summarizes the point estimate

(and standard error) of the impact of LTCH entry into a market on the outcome (α in equation 1).

Figure 5 shows the impact of LTCH entry into a market on the fraction of patients discharged to an

LTCH. This will be the first stage in our IV specification. The figure shows that LTCH entry has a

sharp impact, raising the probability of discharge to LTCH by 9.2 percentage points (standard error of

0.9), a tripling of the pre-entry probability. The figure also shows evidences of a slight linear trend in

LTCH discharges both pre- and post-LTCH entry, which is consistent with LTCHs choosing to enter

more rapidly growing markets.

    Figure 5 also provides support for our functional form assumptions. The sharp jump at r = 0

supports our decision to model LTCH entry with a discontinuous jump in the outcome rather than a

gradual increase over time. The linear trend fits the data extremely well in the pre-period (r < −5),

supporting our identifying assumption that, conditional on controls, the timing of entry is uncorre-

lated with deviations in the outcome from a linear trend. The linear trends fit well, but with somewhat

less precision, in the post period (r > 0), perhaps reflecting heterogeneous treatment responses. The

decline in discharges to LTCH during the transition period (r ∈ [−5, 0]) is consistent with the entry of

LTCHs-in-training, which admit patients that would otherwise have gone to an LTCH in the quarters

leading up to entry. We see this more directly in Figure 6 discussed below.

    Figure 6 shows the effect of LTCH entry into a market on discharges to a set of mutually exclu-

sive and exhaustive non-LTCH discharge destinations. Panel (A) indicates that LTCH entry causes a

substantial decline in the fraction of patients discharged to a SNF, suggesting that substitution away


                                                    17
from SNFs is the primary margin of adjustment. Panel (B) shows a smaller, but non-negligible, decline

in discharges to home/other, suggesting more modest substitution on this margin. Panel (C) shows

a sharp increase in discharges to LTCHs-in-training during the transition period only, which is what

we would expect given the institutional requirements to qualify as an LTCH. Panel (D) also shows

some evidence of an increase in discharges to ACHs during the transition period only, which may

reflect discharges to LTCHs-in-training that we did not classify using our algorithm. Panel (E) shows

no evidence of a change in the probability of discharge to death (i.e. in-hospital death) following the

entry of an LTCH.

      Figure 7 shows the effect of LTCH entry into a market on total spell days and total Medicare

spending during the spell. Recall that the main effect of LTCH entry was substitution from SNFs to

LTCHs. Panel (A) shows little effect on total spell days, suggesting that the marginal patients have

similar lengths of stay at SNFs and LTCHs. Panel (B), on the other hand, shows that LTCH entry into

a market leads to a fairly large increase in total Medicare spending, which is consistent with LTCHs

receiving larger daily reimbursements than SNFs.16

      Finally, Figure 8 shows the impact LTCH entry into a market on three measures of patient well

being: total out-of-pocket spell spending, the probability the patient is ever back home within 90 days

after the initial hospital admission, and 90-day mortality (also measured from the date of the initial

hospital admission). The graphical results suggest a clear increase in out-of-pocket spending. There is

some suggestive evidence of a slight decrease in the probability of being at home at any point within

90 days. Despite the high 90-day mortality rate (44% in the high p̂ sample), the 90-day mortality plot

shows no evidence of any obvious pattern, and is quite noisy.

5.2    IV Estimates

Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 show the IV estimates of the effect of discharge to an LTCH. Column 2

shows point estimates and standard errors in the high p̂ sample, and column 3 shows the average

impact of discharge to LTCH on patient outcomes for the whole baseline sample, allowing for a het-

erogeneous first stage to improve power. In the baseline sample, the share of patients discharged to

LTCH increases from 0.5% in r = −6 (just before the transition period) to 2.4% in r = 2 (just after

the transition period). This implies that our effects are identified off the 80% of patients in the base-

line sample who are marginal to LTCH entry, but are silent on the effects for the 20% of patients who
  16 Appendix  Figure A1 provides a more detailed perspective, showing the effect of LTCH entry on days and spending
separately by type of facility (LTCH, SNF, initiating ACH).



                                                        18
would have counterfactually been discharged to LTCHs in the absence of LTCH entry. Consistent with

our assumption that the impact of discharge to LTCH on patient outcomes is constant across patients

with different p̂’s, the IV estimates in the high p̂ sub-sample and the baseline sample are usually quan-

titatively very similar, and are never statistically distinguishable. We therefore focus our discussion

below on the IV results for the full baseline sample (column 3).17

     The top panel of Table 4 show IV estimates of the effect of LTCH discharge on non-LTCH dis-

charge locations. The results indicate that about four-fifths of patients discharged to an LTCH would

have otherwise been discharged to a SNF; the remaining one-fifth would have otherwise been dis-

charged to home without home care or other (which includes home with home health care, hospice,

and other facility care). More specifically, we estimate that each patient discharged to an LTCH re-

duced the probability of discharge to a SNF by 0.791 (standard error of 0.075) and to home/other by

0.236 (standard error of 0.073).

     A limitation to our baseline data is that we cannot see any finer granularity on the discharge desti-

nation of “home/other.” However, for a subset of our study period (2002-2014), additional data allow

us to further decompose this discharge destination; Appendix C shows the results. We find that about

half of the impact on the discharge destination “home/other’ reflects a decline in discharges home

without home health care, and the rest stems from a decline in discharges to a residual ”other” cate-

gory; there is no evidence of any decline in discharges to home with home health care or in discharges

to hospice.

     The next two panels of Table 4 show results for spell days and spell spending. Focusing again on

the IV estimates for the baseline sample in column 3, our results indicate that discharge to an LTCH

increases total spell days by a statistically insignificant 6.6 days (standard error of 5.1); days in both

SNF and the initiating ACH decrease, while days in LTCH increase. The 8.6 day average decline in

length of stay at the initiating ACH is consistent with the claim that LTCHs in some cases provide care

to patients that they could not receive at other forms of institutional PAC (NALTH, 2018); when the

patient is not discharged to an LTCH she spends, on average, considerably longer in the ACH. Given

that ACHs are paid a lump sum per patient that is (largely) independent of length of stay, the decline

in length of ACH stay associated with LTCH discharge suggests that not only LTCHs, but also ACHs,
  17 For completeness, Appendix Table A2 presents first stage and IV estimates for the five p̂ groups. Consistent with
the interpretation of p̂ as an estimated compliance propensity score, the first stage increases monotonically with p̂ group.
Although the results are, as expected, less precise in the lower p̂ bins, the broad similarity in estimates across groups is
consistent with our assumption that the impact of discharge to an LTCH on patient outcomes is the same across patients in
different groups.



                                                            19
may benefit financially from discharge to LTCH. We return to this point in the conclusion.

     Discharge to an LTCH increases total spell spending by $29,583 (standard error of $4,810). This

represents about 169% increase in total spell spending relative to the average spell spending of $17,519

(see Table 3). The increase in spending reflects a $34,569 increase in LTCH spending, that is only

slightly offset by a decline in SNF spending.         18


     The final panel of Table 4 shows results for three measures of patient welfare. There is no evidence

of discharge to LTCH improving patient welfare on any of these measures. Discharge to LTCH is

associated with increased amounts owed out of pocket of $2,420 (standard error $640).19 There is

no evidence that LTCHs increase the probability of being at home at any point in the 90 days post

admission to the initial acute hospital admission; indeed the point estimates suggests a statistically

insignificant decline (consistent with the statistically insignificant increase in institutional days and in

mortality). The final measure of patient welfare we look at is 90-day mortality; this is quite high in

our baseline sample (20%; see Table 3). However, we find no evidence that discharge to LTCH reduces

mortality. Indeed, the point estimate suggests that discharge to LTCH is associated with a statistically

insignificant increase in 90-day mortality of 10.1 percentage points; the 95% confidence interval allows

us to rule out mortality declines greater than 2.6 percentage points.

     Appendix Table A3 explores these mortality results in more detail, examining results over differ-

ent horizons from 30 days to a year; at all these horizons we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of

no impact of discharge to LTCH on mortality. We are unable to measure other potential non-mortality

health benefits or non-health utility benefits from an LTCH stay. Our estimates in Table 4, however,

indicate that any such unmeasured benefits would need to be valued at over $32,003 per LTCH stay

(increased Medicare spending of $29,583 plus increased out-of-pocket spending of $2,420 ) in order

to cover the incremental healthcare spending associated with LTCH discharge. With an increase in

length of stay of 28.9 days on average, this would require LTCHs to provide an incremental $1,107 in

daily value.
  18 We omit from the table two other possible sources of institutional days and spending: days and spending at an LTCH-

in-training and data at another ACH. The effects are substantively small and statistically insignificant: LTCH in training
utilization increases by 0.16 days (standard error of 0.09) and $113 in spending (standard error of 50), and ACH utilization
increases by 0.71 days (standard error of 1.29) and $629 (standard error of $1,930).
  19 LTCH stays are covered under inpatient cost-sharing. In practice, 95% of LTCH stays involve no deductible. However,

patients are exposed to per-day coinsurance that applies starting on day 61 of the benefit period. In 2014, LTCH stays
resulted in an average $2,250 in coinsurance owed out-of-pocket. By contrast, the first 20 days in a SNF have no patient
cost-sharing.




                                                            20
5.3    Heterogeneous impacts and robustness

We examine potential heterogeneity in the impact of LTCHs on a number of dimensions. Table 5

summarizes these results; Appendix Tables A4 and A5 provide additional details on the heterogeneity

results while Appendix Figures A2 and A3 show the first stage figures for the high p̂ samples for each

cut of the data.

      Panel A of Table 5 explores whether the impact of LTCHs differs for patients who – under the 2016

payment reform described in Section 2 – will still be reimbursed under LTCH reimbursement rules.

As discussed, this requires that the patient’s immediately preceding ACH stay have either 3 or more

days in an intensive care unit (ICU) or coronary care unit (CCU), as analyzed in Panel A, or mechani-

cal ventilation for at least 96 hours at the LTCH, as proxied in Panel B by an indicator for whether or

not the patient was ventilated at the initiating ACH. Consistent with the idea that these reforms were

designed to exclude patients for whom other forms of PAC are a reasonable substitute, patients whose

reimbursement at LTCH rates was subsequently excluded under the 2016 reform show more substitu-

tion away from SNF in response to LTCH discharge. However, there is no evidence that those patients

who would still qualify for LTCH reimbursement under the new policy experience lower spending

effects or greater patient welfare from LTCH discharge; indeed, if anything the point estimates are

suggestive of the opposite, although we are unable to reject the null hypothesis that effects are the

same across groups. Appendix Table A4 considers a more stringent regulation, originally proposed

by CMS but weakened when enacted into law by Congress: that patients must stay more than 8 days

(rather than 3) in an ICU or CCU in order to be reimbursed using the LTCH rates (MedPAC, 2014).

The results for this split of the data are again quite similar.

      Our analysis of LTCH entries does not capture the effects for infra-marginal patients who would

have traveled outside of their MSA to receive care in an LTCH if there had not be an LTCH entry in

their MSA. To shed some light on the effects for these type of patients, Panel C of Table 5 compares

impacts of LTCHs across markets that had a higher or lower pre-entry LTCH discharge share. Specifi-

cally, we compare results for those markets below and above the median share of patients discharged

to LTCHs in relative quarter r = −6; where the average share was 0.27% and 0.89% respectively.

The results seem mostly similar between the two groups, with some evidence that LTCHs that enter

higher pre-entry LTCH discharge markets may have worse impacts on patients (who are less likely to

go home and more likely to die within 90 days). In Panel D, we also compared results across for-profit

and non-profit LTCHs but see no evidence of differential impacts.

                                                     21
      We also explore the robustness of our findings to a number of alternative specifications. Appendix

C presents the results, which are reassuring. Our baseline analysis allowed for a transition period

from relative year -5 to 0, in which an LTCH-in-training may have entered prior to the “true” LTCH

entry at r = 0. We explore alternative transition periods, both shorter (-2 to 0) and longer (-5 to 5). Our

baseline analysis is limited to the 186 markets where LTCHs entered for the first time during our study

period (1998 to 2014). We show the results are robust to including the 152 markets with pre-existing

LTCHs as controls. We also show that our results are robust to alternative geographic definitions of

healthcare markets (specifically, ZIP Code or county rather than HSA), and to including entries of

additional LTCHs after the first in the market. We also show the results are robust to a balanced panel,

to excluding Medicaid dual eligibles from the analysis, to defining a spell as one-year post admission

to the ACH, and to including additional data on home health and hospice payments.

5.4    Implications

We briefly explored the implications of our estimates for aggregate Medicare spending and for the

much-studied geographic variation in Medicare spending. In 2014, Medicare spending on LTCHs

was $5.4 billion (MedPAC, 2016). Our estimates in Table 4 indicate that about 85% of LTCH spending

(i.e. $29,583/$34,569) represents incremental spending. This suggests that the elimination of LTCHs

would reduce Medicare spending by about $4.6 billion per year, with no measurable adverse impact

on patient welfare.

      Relatedly, we can use our estimates to ask what share of the large, and much-discussed, geo-

graphic variation in Medicare spending would be eliminated if Medicare patients were no longer

sent to LTCHs. The finding of substantial differences across areas in Medicare spending per enrollee

– without correspondingly better health outcomes – has been widely-touted as suggestive of waste

and inefficiency in the U.S. healthcare system (e.g., CBO, 2008; Gawande, 2009; Skinner, 2011). As

noted earlier, an influential report by the Institute of Medicine estimated that almost three-quarters

of the unexplained geographic variation in Medicare spending could be explained by spending on

PAC (IOM, 2013). This analysis, however, assumed that there would be no behavioral response to the

removal of PAC. We can use our estimates of the behavioral response to LTCHs – i.e., how much of

LTCH spending is incremental as opposed to substitution from SNFs – to ask how much geographic

variation in spending would be reduced if LTCHs were removed. We closely replicate the IOM (2013)

finding – specifically we find that eliminating PAC would reduce residual variance by 69% (compared



                                                    22
to their 73% reported estimate). We find that eliminating LTCHs – which are only 1% of Medicare

spending – would remove 13% of the residual variance, in the absence of a behavioral response, and

about 10% given the substitution to SNFs. Consistent with the Dartmouth Atlas interpretation of the

geographic variation as evidence of waste and inefficiency, our estimates suggest that this reduction

in geographic variation would come without any adverse effects on patient well-being.


6   Conclusion
LTCHs were originally intended as a small administrative carve-out to the new inpatient prospec-

tive payment system designed in 1982. Inadvertently, however, their designation created a regulatory

loophole for post-acute care facilities to receive substantially higher reimbursements. Over the ensu-

ing decades, CMS has endeavored, through a series of legislative and regulatory reforms, to try to

close this loophole. Its continued attempts suggest that is has not yet been successful, and raise real

questions about whether incremental reforms will ever achieve their goals.

    Our empirical estimates suggest that by simply eliminating the administratively-created concept

of LTCHs as an institution with its own reimbursement schedule – and reimbursing them instead like

SNFs – Medicare could save $4.6 billion per year with no harm to patients. Moreover, despite account-

ing for only about 1% of Medicare spending, we estimate that eliminating LTCHs would reduce 10%

of the unexplained geographic variation in Medicare spending. As is the case with any counterfactual,

one must always be careful to not go too far out of sample. From this perspective, a strength of our

analysis is that it provides the rare opportunity to study a non-marginal change: the entry of a new

healthcare institution into a healthcare market.

    Nonetheless, there are (at least) two potential caveats to keep in mind in generalizing from our

estimates to the impact of changing LTCH reimbursement to that of SNFs. First, we study the impact

of LTCHs at the time of their creation. It is of course possible that the longer-run impacts of LTCHs

on either spending or patient well-being are different (with unknown sign) from what we estimate

here, although the graphical analysis we present in Figures 5 through 8 do not suggest any obvious

differences in the first four years of the LTCH’s existence.

    Second, our estimates of the impact of LTCHs are not based on all LTCH patients. Our baseline

sample excludes the approximately 15% of LTCH patients who are not admitted from an ACH and

the approximately 8% of LTCH admissions from an ACH that involve patients whose ex-ante proba-

bility of discharge to an LTCH is less than 0.4%. Our estimates also do not speak to the effects for the


                                                   23
20% of patients who would have counterfactually been discharged to LTCHs in the absence of LTCH

entry into their HSA. In this respect, we find it reassuring that we were unable to detect any evidence

of heterogeneous impacts of LTCHs across patients, markets or outcomes; in particular, we find no

evidence of differential effects across markets with different shares of patients who would have coun-

terfactually been discharged to LTCHs in the absence of LTCH entry into their HSA, for-profit and

non-profit LTCHs, and patients whose LTCH stays are or are not eligible for LTCH reimbursement

rates under the 2016 dual payment reform (MedPAC, 2017b).

    More broadly, our paper suggests that successfully reducing waste in the healthcare sector may

involve more forensic investigation than health economists and health policy experts typically engage

in. Our reading of past efforts at “reducing waste” in U.S. healthcare is that they have emphasized

broad-based reforms to delivery models, often motivated by economic theory – price regulation and

certificate of need laws in the 1970s (Joskow, 1981), Prospective Payment and managed care systems

in the 1980s and 1990s (Newhouse, 1996), and most recently, the move to Alternative Payment Models

such as Accountable Care Organizations and bundled payments (Berwick, 2011). These efforts have

consistently failed to fulfill the high expectations set for them, and have often produced unintended,

negative consequences. By contrast, our analysis of a specific institution that appears to be wasteful is

closer to the approach Duflo (2017) advocates: “the economist as plumber . . . she installs the machine

in the real world, carefully watches what happens, and then tinkers as needed.” Our analysis of the

case of LTCHs provides an illustration of how the health economist might fruitfully transform into the

health plumber.

    We finish with a note of caution: while changing the reimbursement of LTCHs might be viewed

as tinkering relative to the broad-based reform discussed above, there is no reason to expect that such

tinkering will be politically easy. The $4.6 billion of incremental spending generated by LTCHs every

year may look like “waste” to the health economist, but to the (largely for-profit) LTCH industry it

might more accurately be referred to as “rents.” Acute Care Hospitals (ACHs) likely also benefit from

the presence of LTCHs since, we found, discharges to LTCHs reduce length of stay at the initiating

ACH, who bear the incremental costs of additional days. This suggests a large financial incentive on

the part of LTCHs as well as ACHs to preclude major regulatory changes, and may help explain their

continued survival.




                                                   24
References
42 CFR § 412.23. 2011. “Excluded hospitals: Classifications.” Code of Federal Regulations.

42 CFR § 412.532. 2011. “Special payment provisions for patients who are transferred to onsite
  providers and readmitted to a long-term care hospital.” Code of Federal Regulations.

42 CFR § 412.534. 2014. “Special payment provisions for long-term care hospitals-within-hospitals and
  satellites of long-term care hospitals, effective for discharges occurring in cost reporting periods
  beginning on or before September 30, 2016.” Code of Federal Regulations.

80 FR 37990 . 2017. “A Rule by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.” Federal Regester.

AHPA. 2003-2011. “National Directory of Health Planning, Policy and Regulatory Agencies.” Ameri-
 can Health Planning Association.

Anderson, Gerard F, Peter S Hussey, Bianca K Frogner, and Hugh R Waters. 2005. “Health spending
 in the United States and the rest of the industrialized world.” Health Affairs, 24(4): 903–914.

Ash, Arlene S, Michael A Posner, Jeanne Speckman, Shakira Franco, Andrew C Yacht, and Lindsey
 Bramwell. 2003. “Using claims data to examine mortality trends following hospitalization for heart
 attack in Medicare.” Health Services Research, 38(5): 1253–1262.

Barnett, Michael L, Andrew R Olenski, and Anupam B Jena. 2017. “Opioid-prescribing patterns of
  emergency physicians and risk of long-term use.” New England Journal of Medicine, 376(7): 663–673.

BEA. 2016. “Download NIPA Tables: Government Current Receipts and Expenditures (Section 3).”

Berwick, Donald M. 2011. “Launching accountable care organizations—the proposed rule for the
  Medicare Shared Savings Program.” New England Journal of Medicine, 364(16): e32.

Boards of Trustees for Medicare. 2002. “The 2002 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the
  Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
  Fund.”

Boards of Trustees for Medicare. 2014. “The 2014 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the
  Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
  Fund.”

Boards of Trustees for Medicare. 2015. “The 2015 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the
  Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
  Fund.”

Buntin, Melinda Beeuwkes. 2007. “Access to postacute rehabilitation.” Archives of physical medicine
  and rehabilitation, 88(11): 1488–1493.

CBO. 2008. “Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending.” Congressional Budget Office.

CBO. 2016. “Updated Budget Projections: 2016 to 2026.” Congressional Budget Office.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan Skinner. 2012. “Technology growth and expenditure growth in
 health care.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3): 645–80.

Chen, Han-Yang, David J Vanness, and Ellie Golestanian. 2011. “A simplified score for transfer of
 patients requiring mechanical ventilation to a long-term care hospital.” American Journal of Critical
 Care, 20(6): e122–e130.


                                                 25
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D Gottlieb. 2014. “Do physicians’ financial incentives affect medical
  treatment and patient health?” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1320–49.

CMS. 2008. “Moratorium on Classification of Long-Term Care Hospitals (LTCH) or Satellites/Increase
 in Certified LTCH Beds.” Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

CMS. 2014. “Long-term Care Hospital (LTCH) Moratorium – Preliminary Instructions.” Centers for
 Medicare & Medicaid Services.

Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan D Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2019. “Health-
 care spending and utilization in public and private Medicare.” American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 11(2): 302–32.

Cutler, David. 2010. “How Health Care Reform Must Bend The Cost Curve.” Health Affairs,
 29(6): 1131–1135.

Cutler, David M. 1995. “The Incidence of Adverse Medical Outcomes Under Prospective Payment.”
 Econometrica, 63(1): 29–50.

Doyle, Joseph J, John A Graves, and Jonathan Gruber. 2017. “Uncovering waste in US healthcare:
 Evidence from ambulance referral patterns.” Journal of health economics, 54: 25–39.

Doyle, Joseph, John Graves, and Jonathan Gruber. 2015. “In hospital care saves money – and lives.”
 Boston Globe.

Duflo, Esther. 2017. “Richard T. Ely Lecture: The Economist as Plumber.” American Economic Review,
 107(5): 1–26.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney. 2018. “Provider incentives and healthcare costs:
  Evidence from long-term care hospitals.” Econometrica, 86(6): 2161–2219.

Eliason, Paul J, Paul LE Grieco, Ryan C McDevitt, and James W Roberts. 2018. “Strategic Patient
  Discharge: The Case of Long-Term Care Hospitals.” American Economic Review, 108(11): 3232–65.

Follmann, Dean A. 2000. “On the effect of treatment among would-be treatment compliers: An
  analysis of the multiple risk factor intervention trial.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  95(452): 1101–1109.

Gawande, Atul. 2009. “The Cost Conundrum: What a Texas Town Can Teach Us about Health Care.”
 New Yorker.

HCUP. 2017. “Clinical Classifications Software (CCS) for ICD-9-CM.” Healthcare Cost and Utilization
 Project.

Ho, Kate, and Ariel Pakes. 2014. “Hospital choices, hospital prices, and financial incentives to physi-
 cians.” American Economic Review, 104(12): 3841–84.

IOM. 2013. Variation in health care spending: target decision making, not geography. National Academies
  Press.

Irace, Mariano. In Progress. “The Impact of Payment Reform on the Behavior of Long-Term Care
  Hospitals.”

Joskow, Paul L. 1981. Controlling hospital costs: The role of government regulation.




                                                     26
Kahn, Jeremy M, and Theodore J Iwashyna. 2010. “Accuracy of the discharge destination field in
 administrative data for identifying transfer to a long-term acute care hospital.” BMC research notes,
 3(1): 205.

Kahn, Jeremy M, Rachel M Werner, Guy David, Thomas R Ten Have, Nicole M Benson, and
 David A Asch. 2013. “Effectiveness of long-term acute care hospitalization in elderly patients with
 chronic critical illness.” Medical care, 51(1): 4.

Kim, Yan S, Eric C Kleerup, Patricia A Ganz, Ninez A Ponce, Karl A Lorenz, and Jack Needleman.
  2015. “Medicare payment policy creates incentives for long-term care hospitals to time discharges
  for maximum reimbursement.” Health Affairs, 34(6): 907–915.

Koenig, Lane, Berna Demiralp, Josh Saavoss, and Qian Zhang. 2015. “The Role of Long-term Acute
 Care Hospitals in Treating the Critically Ill and Medically Complex: An Analysis of Nonventilator
 Patients.” Medical care, 53(7): 582.

Liu, Korbin, Cristina Baseggio, Douglas Wissoker, Stephanie Maxwell, Jennifer Haley, and Sharon
  Long. 2001. “Long-term care hospitals under Medicare: facility-level characteristics.” Health care
  financing review, 23(2): 1.

McGinnis, J Michael, Leigh Stuckhardt, Robert Saunders, Mark Smith, et al. 2013. Best care at lower
 cost: the path to continuously learning health care in America. National Academies Press.

MedPAC. 2014. “Chapter 11: Long-term Care Hospital Services.” Medicare Payment Advisory Com-
 mission.

MedPAC. 2015a. “A Data Book: Health Care Spending and the Medicare Program.” Medicare Pay-
 ment Advisory Commission.

MedPAC. 2015b. “Report to the Congress.” Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

MedPAC. 2016. “Chapter 10: Long-term Care Hospital Services.” Medicare Payment Advisory Com-
 mission.

MedPAC. 2017a. “Long-Term Care Hospitals Payment System.” Medicare Payment Advisory Com-
 mission.

MedPAC. 2017b. “Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 11: Long-term care
 hospital services.” Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

MedPAC. 2018. “Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 11: Long-term care hos-
 pital services.” Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

Molitor, David. 2018. “The evolution of physician practice styles: evidence from cardiologist migra-
 tion.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1): 326–56.

NALTH. 2018. “A Response to the National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper, “Long-
 Term Care Hospitals: A Case Study in Waste” A Response to National Bureau of Economics Re-
 search Working Paper, “Long-Term Care Hospitals: A Case Study in Waste”.” National Association
 of Long Term Hospitals.

Newhouse, Joseph P. 1996. “Reimbursing health plans and health providers: efficiency in production
 versus selection.” Journal of economic literature, 34(3): 1236–1263.

OECD. 2017. “Health at a Glance 2017: OECD Indicators.” OECD.


                                                 27
Office of Inspector General. 2013. “Early Alert Memorandum Report: Co-Located Long-Term Care
 Hospitals Remain Unidentified, Resulting in Potential Overpayments.” Department of Health and
 Human Services.

Orszag, Peter R. 2009. “Heath Costs are the Real Deficit Threat.” The Wall Street Journal.

Ottenbacher, Kenneth J, and James E Graham. 2007. “The state-of-the-science: access to postacute
 care rehabilitation services. A review.” Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 88(11): 1513–
 1521.

Papanicolas, Irene, Liana R Woskie, and Ashish K Jha. 2018. “Health care spending in the United
  States and other high-income countries.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 319(10): 1024–
  1039.

Radley, David C, Daniel J Gottlieb, Elliot S Fisher, and Anna NA Tosteson. 2008. “Comorbidity
  risk-adjustment strategies are comparable among persons with hip fracture.” Journal of clinical epi-
  demiology, 61(6): 580–587.

Skinner, Jonathan. 2011. “Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care.” In Handbook
  of health economics. Vol. 2, 45–93. Elsevier.

Weaver, Christopher, AW Mathews, and Tom McGinty. 2015. “Hospital discharges rise at lucrative
 times.” Wall Street Journal.




                                                   28
                                                Figure 1: LTCH Facilities over Time



                                   500




                                   400




                                   300
                 Number of LTCHs




                                   200



                                                                         Observation period (1998-2014)
                                   100




                                    0
                                         1984   1989     1994     1999         2004            2009       2014
                                                                  Year




Note: Data from the Provider of Service (POS) File from 1984-1998 and the MedPAR data from 1998-2014. Figure only
includes LTCHs that appear in the MedPAR data.




                                                                29
                              Figure 2: LTCH Concentration over Time

                                                    (A) 1984




                                                    (B) 1998




                                                    (C) 2014




Note: Maps illustrate the number of LTCHs present in each HSA in 1984, 1998, and 2014, according to the 1984-2016
POS File and the 1998-2014 MedPAR data. White space indicates HSAs with no LTCHs.




                                                       30
                                                                Figure 3: LTCH Entry Quarters
                                            12

                                                                                                   Additional entry (not first) into HSA
                                                                                                   First entry into HSA


                                            9
           Number of new LTCHs in quarter




                                            6




                                            3




                                            0
                                            1998Q1   2000Q1   2002Q1   2004Q1    2006Q1       2008Q1    2010Q1      2012Q1       2014Q1
                                                                                Quarter of entry

Note: Histogram of LTCH entry to an HSA. First entries are defined as the first entry observed in our data (1998-2014),
and thus excludes HSAs that had an LTCH at the start of our data period.




                                                                                   31
                                   Figure 4: Predicted Probability of LTCH Discharge




                    .034
                    .033
             Average P-hat
                   .032
                    .031
                    .03




                             -16              -8              0                       8                    16
                                                   Quarters Relative to Entry

Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the baseline event study sample. The figure displays our
estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values of p̂. Quarters −6 < r < 1
are greyed out because we drop all observations in these quarters. The y-axis reports the average p̂ and is scaled so that
the mean at r = −1 is equal to the mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                            32
                                                 Figure 5: Discharge to LTCH




                           .2        .15
               Frac Discharged to LTCH
             .05          .1
                           0




                                           -16   -8              0                    8                    16
                                                      Quarters Relative to Entry

Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values of
the discharged to LTCH indicator. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in these quarters.
The y-axis reports the share discharged to LTCH and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal to the mean at r = −1
among HSAs.




                                                              33
                                                            Figure 6: Alternative Discharge Destinations

                                                      (A) SNF                                                                                                                 (B) Home/Other
                     .32




                                                                                                                                              .34
                     .3




                                                                                                                               Frac Discharged to Home/Other
    Frac Discharged to SNF




                                                                                                                                                    .32
           .26      .28




                                                                                                                                     .3
  .24                .22




                                                                                                                                              .28
                                        -16   -8              0                                         8           16                                         -16       -8               0                 8   16
                                                   Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                                  Quarters Relative to Entry



                                              (C) LTCH-in-Training                                                                                                               (D) ACH
                     .04




                                                                                                                                              .09
  Frac Discharged to LTCH-in-Training




                                                                                                                                                     .08
                                                                                                                               Frac Discharged to ACH
                          .02




                                                                                                                                   .06      .07
            0




                                                                                                                                              .05
                     -.02




                                                                                                                                              .04




                                        -16   -8              0                                         8           16                                         -16       -8               0                 8   16
                                                   Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                                  Quarters Relative to Entry



                                                                                                                   (E) Death
                                                                                 .29        .28
                                                                   Frac Discharged to Death
                                                                 .25       .26   .24.27




                                                                                                  -16       -8              0                                        8            16
                                                                                                                 Quarters Relative to Entry



Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values
of each of the discharge destination indicators. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations
in these quarters. The y-axis reports the share discharged to the location indicated and is scaled so that the mean at
r = −1 is equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                                                         34
                                                                         Figure 7: Total Spell Utilization

                                             (A) Total Spell Days                                                                             (B) Total Spell Spending




                                                                                                                    46000
                    38




                                                                                                Total Spell Dollars (Incl. Init. ACH)
  Total Spell Days (Incl. Init. ACH)




                                                                                                                              44000
                            37




                                                                                                              42000
          36




                                                                                                 40000
                    35




                                                                                                                    38000
                                       -16   -8              0                 8      16                                                -16    -8              0                 8   16
                                                  Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                        Quarters Relative to Entry



Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values
of spell days and spell spending. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in these
quarters. The y-axis reports the utilization measure indicated and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal to the
outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                           35
                                                                             Figure 8: Patient Welfare Outcomes

                               (A) Total Spell Out of Pocket Spending                                                                      (B) Home in 90 Days




                                                                                                                    .42
            3600




                                                                                                                    .41
                  3400




                                                                                                          Frac Home in 90 Days
  Total OOP Spending




                                                                                                                        .4
         3200




                                                                                                               .39
            3000




                                                                                                                    .38
            2800




                                                                                                                    .37
                         -16           -8              0                           8           16                                -16       -8              0                 8   16
                                            Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                          Quarters Relative to Entry



                                                                                       (C) 90-Day Mortality
                                                                  .49
                                                                  .48
                                                          90 Day Mortality
                                                           .46     .47
                                                                  .45
                                                                  .44




                                                                             -16       -8              0                               8           16
                                                                                            Quarters Relative to Entry



Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values
of each of the patient welfare outcomes. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in
these quarters. The y-axis reports the utilization measure indicated and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal
to the outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                                    36
                                      Table 1: Correlates of LTCH Location

                                                       HSAs w/ pre-1998     HSAs w/ 1998-     HSAs w/ no LTCH
                                                                                                                       Correlationa
                                                             LTCH             2014 entry          by 2014
                                                               (1)                (2)                (3)                    (4)

Number of HSAs                                                152                186                 3,098
HSA demographics:
    Population (000s)                                        540.7              233.5               59.1                   0.47
    % Urban                                                  0.84               0.76                0.50                   0.28
    % Black                                                  0.16               0.15                0.07                   0.18
    Median age                                               39.6               40.9                43.2                   -0.16
    Median income (US$) (000s)                               56.0               49.9                49.9                   0.05
    % <FPL                                                   0.16               0.17                0.16                   0.02
    % Uninsured                                              0.14               0.15                0.14                   0.03
    % Dual                                                   0.20               0.19                0.18                   0.04
HSA hospital system:
    ACH beds per 1,000 people                                 4.2                4.5                3.6                    0.05
    % For profit                                             0.25                0.25               0.13                   0.11
    % SNF discharges                                         0.20                0.19               0.12                   0.21
    % PAC discharges                                         0.41                0.39               0.21                   0.27
    Medicare spend per beneficiary ($US) (000s)              10.17               9.92               9.59                   0.09
HSA region:
    % HSAs with LTCH in census divisionb                      0.12               0.13               0.10                   0.13
    % HSAs with LTCH in state in 1984c                        0.50               0.34               0.39                   0.02
    % in states with CON lawd                                 0.40               0.41               0.49                   -0.05

Note: “Pre-1998 Entry” is the set of HSAs that ever had an LTCH from 1984-1997. “1998-2014 Entry” refers to HSAs where
a first LTCH entered from 1998 to 2014. “Never Enter” is the set of HSAs that never had any LTCHs from 1984-2014.
Population, share urban, and share black are determined from the 2010 census. Median age, income, the share below the
poverty line, and the share uninsured are from the 2010-2014 ACS. ACH beds per capita, share for-profit, share discharged
to SNF/IRF, share discharged to any PAC (including LTCH, SNF, IRF, HHA or hospice), and Medicare spending were
calculated for 2014, the final year of observation in our event study.
a The bivariate correlation column lists the bivariate correlation between the outcome variable and an indicator for whether
an HSA ever had an LTCH from 1984-2014 (i.e. the union of the HSAs in column 1 and column 2).
b Census Division’s share of HSAs with an LTCH calculates the share of HSAs in the same Census division as that reference
HSA that have an LTCH in 2014 (leaving out the reference HSA).
c Share with an LTCH in state in 1984 calculate the share of HSAs in each group (pre-1998 entry, 1998-2014 entry, and never
entry) that had an LTCH in the state in 1984.
d Share in a state that ever had a Certificate of Need (CON) law: This is the share of HSAs in each group that is in a state that
had a CON law at any point from 2002-2010. State CON laws for 2002-2010 are reported in AHPA (2003-2011).




                                                               37
                         Table 2: Summary Statistics: Predictors of LTCH Discharge

                                                                All ACH admissions        Baseline sample        High p-hat sample
                                                                        (1)                      (2)                     (3)

P-hat                                                                0.020                   0.033                    0.189
Number of obs. (000s)                                               163,649                  90,384                   2,338
Demographics
  Age                                                                 73.9                     75.6                    71.1
  Female                                                              0.57                     0.57                    0.49
  White                                                               0.83                     0.83                    0.77
  Black                                                               0.12                     0.12                    0.17
  Hispanic                                                            0.02                     0.02                    0.02
  Asian                                                               0.01                     0.01                    0.01
  Dual-Eligible for Medicaid                                          0.26                     0.28                    0.34
Selected Features
    Respiratory failure; insufficiency; arrest                        0.07                     0.14                    0.71
    Septicemia                                                        0.06                     0.11                    0.59
    Chronic skin ulcer                                                0.04                     0.08                    0.31
    Nutritional deficiencies                                          0.05                     0.09                    0.44
    Infective arthritis and osteomyelitis                             0.01                     0.02                    0.15
    Complications of surgical procedures or medical care              0.06                     0.10                    0.27
    Shock                                                             0.01                     0.02                    0.17
    Pneumonia                                                         0.11                     0.20                    0.44
    Acute cerebrovascular disease                                     0.03                     0.06                    0.10
    Aspiration pneumonitis; food/vomitus                              0.02                     0.04                    0.15
    Other aftercare                                                   0.06                     0.05                    0.01
    Skin and subcutaneous tissue infections                           0.04                     0.07                    0.09
    Bacterial Infection                                               0.05                     0.10                    0.08
    Intracranial injury                                               0.01                     0.01                    0.02
    Gangrene                                                          0.01                     0.02                    0.05
    Paralysis                                                         0.02                     0.03                    0.07
    Pleurisy; pneumothorax; pulmonary collapse                        0.05                     0.06                    0.18
Excluded Features
   ICU                                                                0.14                     0.17                    0.53
   Ventilation                                                        0.04                     0.08                    0.45
   Over 3 days in ICU/CCU                                             0.20                     0.26                    0.64
   Over 8 days in ICU/CCU                                             0.10                     0.14                    0.45


Note: Each observation is a unique ACH stay. The baseline sample excludes all observations with p̂ ≤ 0.004. High p̂ stays
refer to ACH stays with a predicted probability of LTCH discharge ( p̂) greater than 0.15. The CCS (Clinical Classification
Software) health predictors are those that are among the 18 most important selected features used as predictors in the LTCH
discharge model, where variable importance is measured by ranking the additional R2 each of the variables adds, summed
across all the leaves of the tree. Note that 17 CCS categories are chosen; the 20th important variable is age. ICU is determined
using the MedPAR ICU indicator code, and mechanical ventilation is defined using the CCS procedure code for respiratory
intubation and mechanical ventilation. Age is enters the regression tree continuously. Race categories not listed include
“other,” “unknown,” and “Native American.”




                                                              38
                                   Table 3: Summary Statistics: Outcomes

                                              All ACH admissions            Baseline sample            High p-hat sample
                                                      (1)                          (2)                         (3)

  Discharge destination
     LTCH                                      0.010        (0.101)        0.018        (0.133)        0.126         (0.332)
     SNF                                       0.166        (0.372)        0.220        (0.414)        0.252         (0.434)
     Home/Other                                0.736        (0.441)        0.646        (0.478)        0.334         (0.472)
     LTCH-in-training                          0.000        (0.011)        0.000        (0.014)        0.001         (0.036)
     (other) ACH                               0.052        (0.221)        0.056        (0.230)        0.063         (0.243)
     Death                                     0.036        (0.186)        0.059        (0.236)        0.224         (0.417)
  Spell days
     LTCH                                       0.4          (4.0)          0.7          (5.1)          4.3          (13.1)
     SNF                                        7.0         (19.1)          9.0         (21.5)          12.4         (25.9)
     Initiating ACH                             5.4          (5.6)          6.9          (6.7)          16.2         (14.0)
     Total                                      14.1        (23.3)          18.0        (26.5)          35.8         (38.3)
  Spell spending ($)
     LTCH                                      530          (5,254)        843          (6,657)       5,869        (18,115)
     SNF                                      2,692         (7,222)       3,404         (8,078)       4,782        (10,189)
     Initiating ACH                           10,079       (10,466)       11,201       (12,342)       27,583       (30,116)
     Total                                    14,992       (17,665)       17,519       (20,713)       42,202       (44,769)
  Patient outcomes
     Out-of-pocket spending ($)                1,507        (2,602)        1,716        (3,111)        3,334         (6,431)
     Home within 90 days                       0.82          (0.39)        0.73          (0.44)        0.42           (0.49)
     Died within 90 days                       0.14          (0.34)        0.20          (0.40)        0.44           (0.50)
  Mean p-hat                                   0.020    (0.032)            0.034    (0.039)            0.189         (0.034)
  Number of Obs. (000s)                            24,251                      13,093                          373

Note: Each observation is a unique ACH stay. All ACH admissions (Column 1) includes all HSAs that experience a first
entry from 1998-2014, dropping observations at and after the quarter of subsequent entry or LTCH exit. Baseline sample
(column 2) further excludes all observations with p̂ ≤ 0.004. High p̂ sample (Column 3) refers to ACH stays in the baseline
sample with p̂ > 0.15.




                                                            39
                                         Table 4: Event Study Estimates

                                          High p-hat sample               High p-hat sample               Baseline sample
                                            Reduced form                         I.V.                           I.V.
                                                  (1)                             (2)                            (3)

Discharge destination
   LTCH                                  0.092          (0.009)
   SNF                                   -0.062         (0.010)         -0.674          (0.103)         -0.791            (0.075)
   Home/Other                            -0.022         (0.010)         -0.244          (0.105)         -0.236            (0.073)
   LTCH-in-training                      0.001          (0.001)         0.007           (0.006)         0.007             (0.003)
   (other) ACH                           -0.003         (0.006)         -0.035          (0.064)         0.044             (0.040)
   Death                                 -0.005         (0.009)         -0.054          (0.101)         -0.024            (0.051)
Spell days
   LTCH                                   2.8            (0.4)           30.0            (1.9)           28.9              (1.0)
   SNF                                    -1.5           (0.5)           -16.2           (6.3)           -14.3             (3.9)
   Initiating ACH                         -1.4           (0.4)           -15.5           (4.8)            -8.6             (2.1)
   Total                                  0.1            (0.9)            1.5            (9.4)            6.6              (5.1)
Spell spending ($)
   LTCH                                  3,138           (592)          34,210           (4,079)       34,569             (1,708)
   SNF                                    -513           (246)           -5,593          (2,714)       -3,024             (1,572)
   Initiating ACH                        -1,124          (844)          -12,256          (9,340)       -2,016             (3,800)
   Total                                 1,894          (1,088)         20,649          (11,065)       29,583             (4,810)
Patient outcomes
   Out-of-pocket spending ($)             360            (133)          3,928           (1,381)         2,420              (640)
   Home within 90 days                   -0.004         (0.010)         -0.039          (0.110)         -0.172            (0.088)
   Died within 90 days                   0.014          (0.010)         0.150           (0.109)         0.101             (0.065)
Number of Obs. (000s)                             343                             343                            11,824

Note: Column 1 reports estimates and standard errors of α in equation (1) and column 2 reports the IV estimate and standard
errors of βy from equations (2) and (3), both estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample. Column
3 reports IV estimates and standard errors of βy from equations (4) and (5), estimated on the baseline event study sample.
Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level (186 clusters) for the high p̂ sample (columns 1 and 2), and at the HSA-bin
level (930 clusters) for the baseline specification (column 3).




                                                              40
                                    Table 5: Event Study Estimates: Heterogeneity
                                          High p-hat sample                                 Baseline sample
                                              First stage                                          I.V.
                                          Discharge to LTCH          Discharge to SNF    Total spell spending ($)   Died within 90 days
                                                  (1)                       (2)                     (3)                     (4)

Panel A: Days in ICU / CCU
   Over 3 days                           0.105        (0.011)    -0.689        (0.069)    31,935        (6,472)     0.176       (0.070)
   Under 3 days                          0.067        (0.008)    -1.015        (0.137)    25,818        (5,345)     -0.015      (0.120)
Panel B: Mechanical ventilator
   On a ventilator                       0.094        (0.012)    -0.673        (0.074)    40,788        (2,593)     0.221       (0.097)
   Not on a ventilator                   0.091        (0.009)    -0.851        (0.098)    31,624        (1,531)     -0.003      (0.077)
Panel C: Pre-entry LTCH discharge rate
   Above median                          0.072        (0.015)    -0.765        (0.121)    30,983        (3,167)     0.276       (0.111)
   Below median                          0.113        (0.011)    -0.713        (0.085)    36,363        (1,582)     0.014       (0.077)
Panel D: For-profit status
   For-profit LTCH                       0.091        (0.011)    -0.745        (0.101)    34,447        (2,118)     0.192       (0.080)
   Not-for-profit LTCH                   0.095        (0.015)    -0.824        (0.113)    35,546        (3,383)     -0.062      (0.109)


Note: Column 1 reports first stage estimates and standard errors of α in equation (1) in the high p̂ sample. Columns 2-4
reports the IV estimate and standard errors of βy from equations (4) and (5), estimated on the baseline event study sample.
Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level (186 clusters) for the high p̂ sample (columns 1), and at the HSA-bin level
(930 clusters) for the baseline specification (column 3). In Panel C, the pre-entry discharge rate is based on the rate in period
r = −6. For this panel, we exclude 30 of the 186 MSAs where we do not observe outcomes in period r = −6.




                                                                41
           Long-Term Care Hospitals: A Case Study in Waste
                                       Online Appendix

                        Liran Einav     Amy Finkelstein       Neale Mahoney


A      Data Appendix
A.1     Defining LTCH Entry
We define LTCH entry using both the Medicare claims in the MedPAR dataset and the Provider of
Service (POS) File. We determine the precise timing of entry with the MedPAR data, defining the
quarter of entry as the first quarter in which we observe a stay at a given LTCH facility. Appendix
Figure A4 confirms that the first stay is a good indicator of facility entrance. There is a large jump in
admissions to the entering LTCH in the week of the first stay as the LTCH fills its beds, followed by a
more gradual scale up from three to four admissions per week over the course of the LTCH’s first six
months.
      The Medicare claims data do not include facility geography. We rely on the annual Provider of
Service (POS) File, which records characteristics of Medicare-approved facilities, to match each LTCH
to a given geography (an HSA in our baseline specification). Because we are using two different data
sources, Appendix Figure A5 cross-validates the timing of LTCH entry between our two sources. In
both data sets, we define entry as the first time the facility “appears” in the data (the first stay in
the MedPAR data and the first entry in the POS file). The size of the dots in Appendix Figure A5
correspond to the number of LTCHs that are defined as entering in a given (year MedPAR , year POS ) pair.
The majority of entrances lie on the 45-degree line, indicating that our two data sets generally agree.
Nearly all entries that do not align have a lagged date of entry in the POS file, potentially indicating
some administrative lag between when an LTCH is established and when it makes its way into the
POS File. In these cases, we backfill the geography of the facility from the first instance it appears in
the POS data to the quarter we identify the first stay associated with a given LTCH facility.

A.2     Variable Definitions
Discharge Destinations We define a patient as being discharged to a given facility if they are admit-
ted to that facility within one day of discharge from the initiating ACH stay. Although each stay-level
record in the MedPAR data contains an indicator for the discharge destination of each patient (e.g.,
ACH, SNF, home, death), we construct our own definition of discharge destination within a healthcare
spell. We do so primarily because the “discharge to LTCH” code was first introduced in 2002; prior to
2002, discharges to LTCHs were grouped into an “other” category. In addition, the destination codes
are often unreliable; in many instances following ACH discharge, a patient is immediately admitted
at a facility type inconsistent with the recorded discharge destination (Kahn and Iwashyna, 2010). We
code the discharge destination for a patient that died at the ACH as “discharged to death.” We code
the discharge destination for a patient that is still alive following ACH discharge but not making any
Medicare payments to an ACH, LTCH, SNF, or IRF as discharged to home without care or to some
other care, such as a hospice or home health care.

                                                     42
Spell Definition, Days, and Spending As in Einav, Finkelstein and Mahoney (2018), we define
spells as the set of almost-continuous days with a Medicare payment to an acute care hospital, LTCH,
SNF, or IRF following an acute care hospital stay. The spell starts on the first day of the ACH stay and
ends if there are two consecutive days without any Medicare payments to any of these institutions.
Spell days count the number of days in each facility over the course of the spell, including the ini-
tiating acute care stay. Spell spending sums Medicare reimbursements, excluding outlier payments,
at each facility over the spell, including the initiating acute care stay. Out-of-pocket spending sums
the beneficiary coinsurance, inpatient deductible, and blood deductible at each facility over the spell,
including the initiating ACH stay.

Patient Outcomes We have three main patient outcome measures. The first is whether the patient is
home within 90 days of admission to the initiating acute care hospital stay. If the discharge destination
code in the final facility within a spell of continuous days is to home (with either self-care or in the
care of a home health association) within 90 days of the date of admission at the initiating acute care
stay, the patient is coded as going home within 90 days. The second is an indicator for whether the
beneficiary dies within 90 days of the date of admission of the index ACH stay. The third is the
amount of out-of-pocket spending owed for the spell – i.e., payments not covered by Medicare; these
payments may be covered by the patient’s supplemental insurance plan.

LTCHs-in-Training Before a facility can be classified as an LTCH, it must demonstrate a 25-day av-
erage length of stay for six months (42 CFR § 412.23, 2011). Because of this regulatory requirement, an
LTCH must begin its life as another facility (which we call an “LTCH-in-training"), most commonly
acute care hospitals. When an LTCH-in-training is reclassified as an LTCH, it remains the same facility
in all operational senses (the same building, the same services, etc.), but its reimbursement schedule
changes. As we will show, the vast majority of LTCHs-in-training exist for only the six months re-
quired to fulfill the regulatory requirement. Because these facilities are neither true ACHs (since they
are operationally an LTCH) nor true LTCHs (since they are not reimbursed as such), we classify them
as a separate entity.
    The facility’s provider identification number changes upon reclassification, leaving no clear link
between an LTCH and its associated LTCH-in-training in the data. To address this challenge, we
rely on addresses and facility names in the POS data. The quality of the POS addresses is variable;
addresses and facility names will often change slightly year over year. Moreover, it is common for
multiple facilities to be located at the same address; about half of LTCHs are co-located with an ACH
in “Hospitals within Hospitals,” rendering a simple match on addresses insufficient. To address these
data challenges, we searched for LTCHs-in-training by hand using addresses and facility names in the
POS data.
    We first analyze the address and facility name data by hand, defining a potential LTCH-in-training
as any facility that meets the following two criteria: (1) exists at the same address as an entering LTCH
in the year of entry or prior to entry, and (2) vanishes from the data in the year following entry. Using
this method, we were able to identify 192 total potential LTCHs-in-training. Encouragingly, these 192
potential LTCHs-in-training have an average length of stay of just over 25 days in the six months prior


                                                   43
to entry, as required by CMS regulation. Among the potential LTCHs-in-training we identified by
hand, we found that the 158 (82%) are ACHs (the remainder are IRFs). For simplicity, we only consider
ACHs that precede LTCHs as LTCHs-in-training. Of these 158 LTCHs-in-training, all facilities had at
least one quarter with an average length of stay longer than 20 days, and 90% had at least one quarter
with an average length of stay longer than 25 days. We are able to identify the LTCHs-in-training
associated with 112 of the 186 first entries we study in our main specification. Appendix Figure A6
presents a histogram of the number of quarters a facility exists for the 158 LTCHs-in-training we were
able to identify. Over 90% of the LTCHs-in-training we identified exist for one year or less, implying
that the vast majority of LTCHs-in-training are simply a regulatory object that allow a true LTCH to
enter a market. Some LTCHs-in-training have longer facility lives, which indicates that a few facilities
may have reclassified as LTCHs as their average length of stay increased organically over time.
    Our method of identifying LTCHs-in-training is imperfect; we fail to identify the LTCH-in-training
associated with 74 of the LTCH entries we study in our baseline analysis. Because the majority of
LTCHs-in-training existed as ACHs, this means that there may be up to 74 facilities in our data that we
are mischaracterizing as ACHs, when they would be more accurately described as LTCHs-in-training.
In our event study analysis, Figure 6 Panel (D) shows some evidence of an increase in discharges
to ACHs during the transition period; this may reflect discharges to LTCHs-in-training that we did
not classify using our algorithm. To assess this, Appendix Figure A7 presents discharges to ACH
restricted to the 112 HSAs in which we were able to identify a credible LTCH-in-training associated
with the entering LTCH. This restriction eliminates the increase in discharges to an ACH during the
transition period, indicating that the slight increase in Figure 6 Panel (D) may be due to unclassified
LTCHs-in-training.

Patient Classifications In Appendix Table 5 we analyze the impact of LTCHs across patients based
on the number of days they spent in an ICU or CCU during the initial ACH stay, and whether or
not they were ventilated during the initial ACH stay. We identify ventilator use in the MedPAR data
using the ICD-9 codes associated with the initial ACH stays. A patient is coded as “ventilated” if the
stay has an ICD-9 code included in the “Respiratory intubation and mechanical ventilation” category
of the Clinical Classification Software (CCS) procedure codes. Note that there is no way in the data
to tell how long a patient was on a mechanical ventilator, so the “ventilated” classification is a rough
approximation of the category that will be included in LTCH reimbursement under the new rules
(ventilated for over 96 hours), and will include many patients who in fact do not qualify for the LTCH
rate.
    The number of days in an ICU (intensive care unit) and CCU (coronary care unit) for each stay
are reported in the MedPAR data. A spell is included in the “Over 3 (8) days in an ICU/CCU” if the
patient spent over 3 (8) days in an ICU or over 3 (8) days in a CCU during the initial ACH stay.

B       Constructing LTCH Discharge Probabilities ( p̂s)
We use a regression tree to generate predicted probabilities of LTCH discharge ( p̂) conditional on
having an LTCH nearby. Each observation in the training and prediction data is an ACH stay from
1998-2014 with an indicator for whether a patient was discharged to an LTCH as the dependent vari-


                                                  44
able. We include as predictors the calendar year of the patient’s admission, the patient’s age, sex, race,
and an indicator for dual enrollment in Medicaid. We also use the ICD-9 diagnoses from the patient’s
initiating hospital admission as health status indicators. Each ACH stay can have up to 9 distinct
diagnoses, and we cluster each diagnosis into 285 mutually exclusive Clinical Classification Software
(CCS) codes (HCUP, 2017).
    We construct a training set consisting of ACH stays that are “close” to an LTCH. We define close as
all ACHs with an LTCH less than five kilometers away, where distance is measured using the latitude-
longitude coordinates for each facility reported in the AHA Annual Survey. From 1998-2014, there
were 32,724,774 “close” ACH stays. Our final training set for the model uses a 10% random sample of
these close stays, resulting in a training set of 3,272,477 ACH stays. We use 5-fold cross validation to
choose a complexity parameter to maximize out of sample R2 . The complexity parameter determines
how much to “prune” the regression tree; specifically, the complexity parameter is the minimum R2
each additional leaf of the tree must add to be included in the decision tree. Appendix Figure A8
plots the cross-validated (out of sample) R2 for different values of the complexity parameter. As the
magnitude of the complexity parameters decreases, the size of the tree increases (as more new leaves
cross the minimum R2 threshold). Appendix Figure A8 shows a maximum R2 is achieved at 3 × 10−5 .
We build the optimally pruned tree (complexity parameter = 3 × 10−5 ). As anticipated with a small
complexity parameter, this creates a very large tree. For ease of visualization, we present a list of
selected features in Appendix Table A6 instead of the very complex decision tree.
    Appendix Table A7 presents the distribution of p̂ (predicted from our optimally pruned tree)
among all ACH stays and among ACH stays with a high p̂ ( p̂ > 0.15), and among all “close” ACH
stays, the set of ACH stays with an LTCH within five kilometers. Note that the mean p̂ among all
stays is higher than the share discharged to LTCHs. This is because p̂ is the probability of LTCH
discharge conditional on having an LTCH nearby; among all close ACH stays, the mean p̂ and the
share discharged to an LTCH are equivalent.
    As discussed in the main text, we carefully chose predictors that are plausibly exogenous to the
LTCH discharge decision. We excluded any procedures from the set of predictors because certain
procedures may become more or less common when there is an LTCH available in the HSA. Panels
A and B of Appendix Figure A9 present the probability of receiving a tracheostomy (a procedure to
insert a breathing tube into a windpipe for a patient on a mechanical ventilator) and the probability
of being on a mechanical ventilator upon LTCH entry estimated among all high p̂ stays. Neither
tracheostomy nor mechanical ventilation appear to increase upon LTCH entry, but we cannot rule out
non-negligible effects.

C    Additional Results and Robustness
Alternative transition periods: Our baseline specification drops the r ∈ [−5, 0] transition period.
Appendix Figure A10 shows first stage plots of the effect of LTCH entry on LTCH stays for alternative
transition periods. Specifically, we show results for a narrow transition period which drops quarters
r ∈ [−2, 0] and a wide transition period which drops quarters r = [−5, 5]. Appendix Table A8 reports
our baseline IV estimates for these narrow and wide periods. Both the plots and tables confirm that
our results are robust to alternative transition periods.


                                                    45
Alternative specifications: In Appendix Figure A11 and Appendix Table A9, we show first stage
plots and IV estimates that probe the sensitivity of our results to a number of different alternative
specifications. Panel A and column 1 show our baseline specification for reference. In Panel B and
column 2, we show our results are robust to including all HSAs that already had at least one LTCH
as of 1998 as controls. In Panel C and column 3, we restrict the sample to a balanced panel of HSAs
where we can observe outcomes +/- 3 years around entry. Restricting to a balanced panel allows
us to assess whether changes in sample composition (in combination with heterogeneous treatment
effects) generate time-trends in our results. A comparison of the balanced panel plot with the baseline
specification plot indicates little reason to be concerned about this issue.
    In Panel D and column 4, we show our results are robust to including subsequent entries, rather
than just the first entry into an HSA, in our event study sample. We construct the data so that HSAs
with two entries “appear" twice, with the event-time variable r defined in relation to the entry of
interest. We additionally control for the non-focal entry in this specification. In Panel E and column
5, we show that our results are robust to dropping individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid.
Since dual eligibles have their out-of-pocket costs covered by Medicaid, it is interesting that there is a
similar increase in the out of pocket costs when these patients are excluded.
    The remaining panels and columns show that our results are robust to defining health care mar-
kets at alternative geographic levels. In Panel F and column 5, we show results where we redefine our
event study to analyze the first entry of an LTCH into a ZIP code, and replace the HSA fixed effects
with fixed effects at the ZIP code level. There are 230 first entries at the ZIP code level in comparison
to 196 first entries in our baseline HSA level analysis. In Panel G and column 6, we show analogous
results where were redefine our event study to analyze the first entry at the county level. There are
148 first LTCH entries at the county level in our data.

Heterogeneous first stage and homogenous second stage: Our baseline specification allowed the
first stage of LTCH entry on LTCH discharge to be heterogeneous based on the five p̂ groups, but
imposed a homogeneous second stage of LTCH discharge on outcomes. Appendix Table A2 shows
IV estimates separately for each of the five p̂ groups. The IV estimates are similar across the p̂ groups,
consistent with our homogeneity assumption. Appendix Table A10 shows IV estimates where we im-
pose a homogenous first stage (and maintain the homogenous second stage from our baseline spec-
ification). As expected, imposing a homogeneous first stage results in substantially less precise IV
estimates.

Alternative spell definitions: In our baseline sample, we defined as spell as starting on the first day
of the ACH stay and ending if there are two consecutive days without Medicare payments to any
institution. As a robustness check, we explore an alternative spell definition, where we define a spell
as the 365 days post admission to the ACH stay. Appendix Table A11 shows summary statistics with
our baseline and this alternative spell definition. With the 365-day spell definition, average LTCH
and SNF days and spending are roughly twice as large as under our baseline definition. Appendix
Table A12 shows IV estimates on spell days and spending in both samples. The estimates with the
365-day spell sample are twice as large as those in the baseline sample, which is consistent with the


                                                    46
twice-as-large averages for this sample.

Decomposing discharges to “home/other": A limitation to our baseline data is that we cannot see
any finer granularity on the discharge destination of “home/other.” However, for a subset of our
study period (2002-2014), we have separate data on claims for home health and hospice. Using these
data, we define two new destinations within the discharge to “home/other" category based upon our
methodology defined in Appendix A: a patient is defined as discharged to home health or hospice
if the patient has a claim for home health or hospice beginning within one day of discharge from
the initiating ACH stay. To further decompose the remaining unclassified patients, we also use the
discharge destination codes on each ACH claim to categorize patients as discharged "home with no
care." All remaining unclassified patients are categorized as discharged to "other." Column 3 of Ap-
pendix Table A12 shows the results. When restricting to stays from 2002-2014, each LTCH discharge
reduces discharges to home/other by 32.7 percentage points. We can decompose this into a decrease
in discharges home with no care (which decreases by 11.4 percentage points), home with home health
care (which increases by 1.5 percentage points), hospice (decreases by 7.0 percentage points) and other
(which decreases by 15.8 percentage points).

Including payments to home health and hospice: A potential limitation of our baseline analysis is
that the MedPAR data do not include payments to home health or hospice. We have separate data on
such payments from 2002-2014. Appendix Table A11 shows these destinations account for a relatively
low share of spell spending (about 10% combined). Column 3 of Appendix Table A12 shows that
incorporating home health spending into the analysis does not meaningfully impact our findings.

Including outlier payments: As discussed in Appendix Section A, our baseline measure of Medicare
spending does not include outlier payments. In Appendix Table A13 and Appendix Figure A12 we
show, in addition to the baseline effects for reference, effects on outlier payments and combined base-
line and outlier payments. The point estimates indicate that including outlier payments strengthen
our finding that LTCHs leads to excess spending. However, because the effects on outlier spending are
very noisy (outlier payments are naturally rare) including them substantially decreases the precision
of our results.




                                                  47
                                                          Figure A1: Spell Utilization by Destination

                                               (A) LTCH Spell Days                                                                      (B) LTCH Spell Spending




                                                                                                                8000
                        6           5




                                                                                                                          6000
                                                                                                Rest of Spell Dollars at LTCH
         Rest of Spell Days in LTCH
                           4




                                                                                                            4000
                 3




                                                                                                2000
                        2
                        1




                                                                                                                0
                                        -16     -8              0                 8   16                                         -16       -8              0                 8   16
                                                     Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                 Quarters Relative to Entry



                                                (C) SNF Spell Days                                                                       (D) SNF Spell Spending
                        13




                                                                                                                4800     4600
                                                                                                Rest of Spell Dollars at SNF
         Rest of Spell Days in SNF
                             12




                                                                                                 4200        4400
           11




                                                                                                                4000
                        10




                                        -16     -8              0                 8   16                                         -16       -8              0                 8   16
                                                     Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                 Quarters Relative to Entry



                                              (E) Initiating ACH Days                                                                  (F) Initiating ACH Spending
                        19.5




                                                                                                                30000
                              19




                                                                                                                    29500
                                                                                                  Originating ACH Payment
          Originating ACH LOS
                    18.5




                                                                                                28500      29000
         18




                                                                                                                28000
                        17.5




                                        -16     -8              0                 8   16                                         -16       -8              0                 8   16
                                                     Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                 Quarters Relative to Entry




Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values
of the spell utilization by destination. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in these
quarters. The y-axis reports the spell utilization indicated and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal to the
outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                           48
      Figure A2: First Stage: Heterogeneity by ICU /CCU and Mechanical Ventilator

                                               (A) 3 or More Days in ICU/CCU                                                              (B) Under 3 Days in ICU/CCU




                              .25




                                                                                                                     .15
                                       .2
                Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                        Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                            .1
                            .15




                                                                                                           .05
                 .1           .05




                                                                                                                     0
                                              -16       -8              0                 8   16                                    -16          -8              0                 8   16
                                                             Quarters Relative to Entry                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry




                                               (C) 8 or More Days in ICU/CCU                                                          (D) Under 8 Days in ICU/CCU




                                                                                                                     .25
                              .2        .15




                                                                                                                               .2
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                         Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                    .15
                .05          .1




                                                                                                        .1           .05
                              0




                                              -16       -8              0                 8   16                                    -16          -8              0                 8   16
                                                             Quarters Relative to Entry                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry




                                                    (E) Patient on Ventilator                                                              (F) Patient not on Ventilator
                              .25




                                                                                                                     .15
                                       .2
                Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                        Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                         .1
                            .15




                                                                                                         .05
                 .1           .05




                                                                                                                     0




                                              -16       -8              0                 8   16                                    -16          -8              0                 8   16
                                                             Quarters Relative to Entry                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry




Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of various robustness event study
samples. Figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized
values of the discharge to LTCH indicator. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in
these quarters. Panels A and B show plots separately by whether the patient spent 3 or more days in an intensive care
unit (ICU) or coronary care unit (CCU) prior to LTCH discharge. Panels C and D show plots separately by whether the
patient spent 8 or more days in a ICU / CCU. Panels E and F split the analysis by whether was placed on a mechanical
ventilator at the initiating ACH. The y-axis reports the share discharged to LTCH and is scaled so that the mean at
r = −1 is equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among the geographies in the sample.




                                                                                                   49
   Figure A3: First Stage: Heterogeneity by Pre-Entry Discharge and For-Profit Status

              (A) Below Median Pre-Entry Discharge Rate (B) Above Median Pre-Entry Discharge Rate




                              .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                                        .15
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                      Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                         .15
                             .1




                                                                                                         .1
                .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                              0




                                              -16   -8                0                 8   16                                      -16   -8              0                 8   16
                                                           Quarters Relative to Entry                                                          Quarters Relative to Entry




              (C) Bottom Quartile Pre-Entry Discharge
              Rate                                    (D) Top Quartile Pre-Entry Discharge Rate




                                                                                                                    .25
                              .2      .15
                Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                      Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                          .2
                            .1




                                                                                                           .15
                .05




                                                                                                                    .1
                              0




                                              -16   -8                0                 8   16                                      -16   -8              0                 8   16
                                                           Quarters Relative to Entry                                                          Quarters Relative to Entry




                                                         (E) For Profit                                                                   (F) Not For Profit
                              .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                                        .15




                                                                                                                              .15
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                        Frac Discharged to LTCH
                             .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                .05




                                                                                                      .05
                              0




                                                                                                                    0




                                              -16   -8                0                 8   16                                      -16   -8              0                 8   16
                                                           Quarters Relative to Entry                                                          Quarters Relative to Entry




Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of various robustness event study
samples. Figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized
values of the discharge to LTCH indicator. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in
these quarters. Panels A and B split the sample by whether the MSA had below or above the median LTCH discharge
share. Panels C and D show results for the bottom and top quartiles of LTCH discharge share. Panels E and F split
the analysis by whether the LTCH is a for-profit or non-for-profit organization. In Panels A-D, the pre-entry discharge
rate is based on the rate in period r = −6. For these panels, we exclude 30 of the 186 MSAs where we do not observe
outcomes in period r = −6. The y-axis reports the share discharged to LTCH and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1
is equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among the geographies in the sample.




                                                                                                 50
                 Figure A4: Average Weekly Admissions Following LTCH Entry




                                       8
                          Avg Number of Admissions
                              4        2     6




                                                      0     5          10           15       20   25
                                                                       Weeks post entry


Note: Figure shows the average number of LTCH admissions per week relative to LTCH entry for all LTCH entries from
1998-2014. Admission frequencies were calculated by taking the average number of admissions across all active LTCHs
for a given week relative to LTCH entry.




         Figure A5: Dates of LTCH Entry Into HSA, As Coded in Different Data Sets
                                       2015
                                       2010
                          POS data
                            2005       2000
                                       1995




                                                     1995       2000       2005           2010    2015
                                                                        MedPAR data


Note: Figure plots entry years using the Provider of Service (POS) file against entry years using MedPAR data from 1998-
2014. The size of each point on the scatter plot is determined by the number of observations for each unique (MedPAR
data entry year, POS data entry year) point in order to view the density of matched observations. A 45 degree line is
included for reference.




                                                                          51
                                                       Figure A6: LTCHs-in-Training: Facility Life




                                        .8
                                        .6
                          Fraction
                            .4          .2
                                        0




                                                       0       8        16          24             32       40   48
                                                                          Quarters of Facility Life


Note: Figure plots a histogram of the number of quarters the LTCHs-in-Training admit patients. Quarters of Facility Life
denotes the number of quarters from the first observed admission date to the last observed admission date.




                                                             Figure A7: Discharged to ACH
                                        .1       .09
                          Frac Discharged to ACH
                                .07      .08
                                        .06
                                        .05




                                                       -16         -8              0                    8        16
                                                                        Quarters Relative to Entry


Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample
restricted to the 112 HSAs where we believe we were able to identify an associated LTCH-in-training. Figure displays
our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values of Discharge to ACH
. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in these quarters. The y-axis reports the share
discharged to an ACH and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal to the mean at r = −1 among the 112 HSAs.




                                                                                 52
                                                                            Figure A8: Complexity Parameter vs. R-squared


                                                                            0.055
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●
                                                                                      ●●

                                                                            0.050

                                                                                           ●


                                                                                               ●
                                              Rsquared (Cross−Validation)

                                                                            0.045
                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                       ●

                                                                                                           ●●


                                                                            0.040                               ●
                                                                                                                    ●●


                                                                                      ●



                                                                            0.035


                                                                                                                            ●                                             ●



                                                                            0.030




                                                                            0.025                                                                                                 ●              ●




                                                                                    0.000                       0.001     0.002                                          0.003   0.004         0.005

                                                                                                                         Complexity Parameter


Note: This figure shows a plot of the variation explained (R2 ) versus the complexity parameter.




                                           Figure A9: Responsiveness of Procedures to LTCH Entry

                                           (A) Tracheostomy                                                                                                                      (B) Mechanical Ventilation
                 .15




                                                                                                                                                      .48
                          .14




                                                                                                                                                                   .47
                                                                                                                                      Frac with Mechanical Ventilator
   Frac with Tracheostomy
                  .13




                                                                                                                                                        .46
        .12




                                                                                                                                               .45
                 .11




                                                                                                                                     .44              .43
                 .1




                                -16   -8                0                                                   8              16                                             -16         -8              0                 8   16
                                             Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Entry



 Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
 Figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values of
 tracheostomy, and mechanical ventilation. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in
 these quarters. The y-axis reports the frequency of the procedure indicated and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is
 equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                                                                53
                                               Figure A10: Alternative Transition Periods: First Stage

                                      (A) Narrow Transition Period                                                            (B) Wide Transition Period
                .2




                                                                                                        .2
                          .15




                                                                                                                  .15
    Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                            Frac Discharged to LTCH
               .1




                                                                                                       .1
  .05




                                                                                          .05
                0




                                                                                                        0
                                -16       -8              0                 8   16                                      -16     -8              0                 8   16
                                               Quarters Relative to Entry                                                            Quarters Relative to Entry



Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
Figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values of the
discharge to LTCH indicator. The greyed out quarters are the alternative dropped transition periods, with the narrow
transition period defined as r ∈ [−2, 0] and the wide transition period defined as r = [−5, 5]. The y-axis reports the
share discharged to LTCH and is scaled so that the mean at r = −1 is equal to the mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                     54
                                                                      Figure A11: First Stage: Robustness

                                                              (A) Baseline                                                                                   (B) Include HSAs with Prior LTCHs




                              .2




                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                        .15




                                                                                                                                                            .15
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                                                      Frac Discharged to LTCH
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                 .1
                .05




                                                                                                                                    .05
                              0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                              -16        -8               0                                  8          16                                        -16       -8               0                 8   16
                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                         Quarters Relative to Entry




                                                    (C) 3 Year Balanced Panel                                                                                       (D) Include Subsequent Entries
                              .2




                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                        .15
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                                                    Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                                                       .15
                             .1




                                                                                                                                       .1
                .05




                                                                                                                                                  .05
                              0




                                              -16        -8               0                                  8          16                                        -16       -8               0                 8   16
                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                         Quarters Relative to Entry




                                                    (E) Exclude Dual Eligibles                                                                                                   (F) Zip code
                                                                                                                                                  .25
                              .2        .15




                                                                                                                                                           .2
                  Frac Discharged to LTCH




                                                                                                                                     Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                                                                                               .15
                .05          .1




                                                                                                                                    .1            .05
                              0




                                              -16        -8               0                                  8          16                                        -16       -8               0                 8   16
                                                               Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                         Quarters Relative to Entry




                                                                                                                      (G) County
                                                                                         .15
                                                                             Frac Discharged to LTCH
                                                                               .05       0     .1




                                                                                                       -16       -8              0                                      8           16
                                                                                                                      Quarters Relative to Entry




Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of various robustness event study
samples. Figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized
values of the discharge to LTCH indicator. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in
these quarters. In panel (A) we present the result from our baseline event study sample. In panel (B) we include all
HSAs that already had at least one LTCH as of 1998 as controls. In panel (C) we restrict to all observations with a
balanced 3-year panel around entry (i.e. first entries that occurred between 2001 and 2011 and was not followed by an
entry or exit within three years). In panel (D) we do not drop subsequent entries or exits, and in panel (E) we restrict
to all beneficiary-years in which beneficiaries are not dually eligible for Medicaid. In panels (F) and (G) we use zip
code and county as the geographic units. The y-axis reports  55 the share discharged to LTCH and is scaled so that the
mean at r = −1 is equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among the geographies in each robustness sample.
                                                                                                                  Figure A12: Outlier Payments

                                                       (A) Baseline Spending                                                                                                                     (B) Outlier Spending

                             46000




                                                                                                                                                                    12000      11000
         Total Spell Dollars (Incl. Init. ACH)
                                       44000




                                                                                                                                                     Total spell outlier spending
                                                                                                                                                                     10000
                       42000




                                                                                                                                                          9000
          40000




                                                                                                                                                 8000
                             38000




                                                                                                                                                                    7000
                                                 -16    -8              0                                                8            16                                               -16        -8              0                 8   16
                                                             Quarters Relative to Entry                                                                                                                Quarters Relative to Entry



                                                                                                                        (C) Baseline + Outlier Spending
                                                                                              56000
                                                                           Total spell spending (incl. outlier)
                                                                             50000        52000
                                                                                              48000    54000




                                                                                                                  -16         -8              0                                              8            16
                                                                                                                                   Quarters Relative to Entry




Note: Figure reports estimates of equation (1), estimated on the high p̂ sub-sample of the baseline event study sample.
The figure displays our estimated function of relative quarter, r, and a scatter plot of the average residualized values
of the spell utilization by destination. Quarters −6 < r < 1 are greyed out because we drop all observations in these
quarters. Panel (A) shows effects on the baseline spending measures, which is the sum of Medicare reimbursements
excluding outlier payments, panel (B) shows effects on outlier payments, and panel (C) shows effects on combined
baseline and outlier payments. The y-axis reports the spell utilization indicated and is scaled so that the mean at
r = −1 is equal to the outcome mean at r = −1 among HSAs.




                                                                                                                                           56
                                        Table A1: Summary Statistics by p̂ Bin

                                         Bin 1                    Bin 2                     Bin 3                     Bin 4                     Bin 5
                                          (1)                      (2)                       (3)                       (4)                       (5)

Discharge destination
   LTCH                         0.003         (0.056)     0.006           (0.080)   0.013           (0.115)   0.044           (0.205)   0.126           (0.332)
   SNF                          0.163         (0.370)     0.242           (0.428)   0.234           (0.424)   0.257           (0.437)   0.252           (0.434)
   Home/Other                   0.771         (0.420)     0.656           (0.475)   0.631           (0.483)   0.513           (0.500)   0.334           (0.472)
   LTCH-in-training             0.000         (0.006)     0.000           (0.009)   0.000           (0.013)   0.001           (0.022)   0.001           (0.036)
   (other) ACH                  0.042         (0.201)     0.069           (0.254)   0.063           (0.242)   0.053           (0.223)   0.063           (0.243)
   Death                        0.021         (0.142)     0.027           (0.162)   0.059           (0.235)   0.134           (0.340)   0.224           (0.417)
Spell days
   LTCH                          0.2              (2.5)    0.3             (3.2)     0.5             (4.3)     1.5             (7.6)     4.3            (13.1)
   SNF                           6.4             (18.0)    9.8            (22.1)     9.6            (22.5)     10.4           (23.3)     12.4           (25.9)
   Initiating ACH                5.0              (4.1)    5.9             (4.7)     6.5             (5.6)     9.8             (8.9)     16.2           (14.0)
   Total                         12.6            (21.0)    17.6           (25.2)     18.3           (26.8)     23.7           (30.3)     35.8           (38.3)
Spell spending ($)
   LTCH                          217          (3,160)      342         (3,922)       619         (5,425)      1,932       (10,104)      5,869       (18,115)
   SNF                          2,388         (6,579)     3,852        (8,476)      3,669        (8,504)      3,853        (8,568)      4,782       (10,189)
   Initiating ACH               8,770         (8,613)     10,221       (8,645)      10,027       (9,503)      15,113      (16,273)      27,583      (30,116)
   Total                        12,809       (14,272)     16,435      (16,107)      16,541      (18,109)      23,514      (26,609)      42,202      (44,769)
Patient outcomes
   Out-of-pocket spending ($)   1,338         (2,210)     1,691           (2,627)   1,730           (2,974)   2,059           (3,988)   3,334           (6,431)
   Home within 90 days          0.83           (0.38)     0.79             (0.41)   0.71             (0.45)   0.59             (0.49)   0.42             (0.49)
   Died within 90 days          0.14           (0.34)     0.13             (0.33)   0.22             (0.41)   0.32             (0.47)   0.44             (0.50)
Mean p-hat                      0.009         (0.000)     0.016        (0.003)      0.028        (0.004)      0.077     (0.026)         0.189        (0.034)
Number of Obs. (000s)                    3,841                    3,078                     3,236                  2,565                         373
Number of LTCH Discharges                12,204                   19,574                    43,186                113,211                       47,020


Note: Table shows summary statistics by p̂ bin. Each observation is a unique ACH stay. Bins are divided among the
baseline event study sample, which drops all observations with p̂ ≤ 0.004, restricts to all HSAs that experience a first entry
from 1998-2014, and drops observations at and after the quarter of subsequent entry or LTCH exit. Bins 1 to 3 are quartiles
of the p̂ distribution, and groups 4 and 5 are based on splitting the top quartile into two groups ( p̂ < 0.15 and p̂ > 0.15).




                                                                     57
                                         Table A2: First Stage and IV by p̂ Bin

                                         Bin 1                      Bin 2                      Bin 3                      Bin 4                      Bin 5
                                          (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)                        (5)

Discharge destination
   LTCH                          0.005           (0.001)    0.009           (0.001)    0.017           (0.002)    0.044           (0.004)    0.092           (0.009)
   SNF                          -1.343           (0.613)   -1.677           (0.499)   -0.997           (0.244)   -0.748           (0.108)   -0.674           (0.103)
   Home/Other                    0.262           (0.689)    0.432           (0.475)   -0.204           (0.259)   -0.288           (0.103)   -0.244           (0.105)
   LTCH-in-training              0.008           (0.005)    0.001           (0.003)    0.003           (0.002)    0.008           (0.004)    0.007           (0.006)
   (other) ACH                   0.217           (0.355)    0.456           (0.314)    0.180           (0.130)    0.030           (0.053)   -0.035           (0.064)
   Death                        -0.144           (0.171)   -0.211           (0.119)    0.018           (0.104)   -0.002           (0.072)   -0.054           (0.101)
Spell days
   LTCH                          28.4             (3.1)     25.0             (2.1)     28.1             (1.6)     28.7             (1.4)      30.0            (1.9)
   SNF                          -23.9            (27.6)     -3.7            (21.1)    -19.9            (11.6)    -12.6             (5.5)     -16.2            (6.3)
   Initiating ACH                -5.8             (7.7)     -7.7             (4.8)     -4.8             (4.0)     -5.7             (2.6)     -15.5            (4.8)
   Total                         -5.7            (34.6)     17.3            (24.0)      4.0            (13.9)      9.6             (7.0)      1.5             (9.4)
Spell spending ($)
   LTCH                         34,141        (4,160)      28,373        (2,592)      33,445           (2,164)   35,367           (2,170)    34,210       (4,079)
   SNF                           2,855       (11,166)       9,179        (9,640)      -2,374           (4,368)   -2,621           (2,230)    -5,593       (2,714)
   Initiating ACH               -8,730       (19,212)      -6,010       (12,670)      -6,139           (5,476)    4,738           (4,504)   -12,256       (9,340)
   Total                        25,426       (24,402)      35,264       (16,728)      26,120           (8,062)   34,874           (6,147)    20,649      (11,065)
Patient outcomes
   Out-of-pocket spending ($)    499             (3,221)   1,786            (2,229)    576             (1,321)   2,071            (828)     3,928            (1,381)
   Home within 90 days           0.19             (0.65)    0.24             (0.52)   -0.21             (0.29)   -0.27            (0.13)    -0.04             (0.11)
   Died within 90 days          -0.62             (0.45)   -0.33             (0.30)    0.02             (0.17)    0.13            (0.10)     0.15             (0.11)
Number of Obs. (000s)                   3,449                      2,765                      2,931                      2,336                        343


Note: Table displays first stage (top row) and IV estimates (all other rows) for each p̂ bin. Standard errors are clustered at
the HSA level (186 clusters). Bins 1 to 3 are quartiles of the p̂ distribution, and bins 4 and 5 are based on splitting the top
quartile into two groups ( p̂ < 0.15 and p̂ > 0.15).




                                                                        58
                               Table A3: Mortality Horizons

                                                            Baseline Sample
                                                                                        Proportional
                                      Estimate            S.E.             Mean            Change

   Died within
      30 days                           0.056           (0.058)            0.12              0.47
      60 days                           0.065           (0.065)            0.17              0.39
      90 days                           0.101           (0.065)            0.20              0.51
      180 days                          0.091           (0.067)            0.26              0.35
      365 days                          0.003           (0.072)            0.35              0.01
   Number of Obs. (000s)                                          11,824

Note: Table displays IV estimates from equations 4 and 5, estimated on the baseline sample, along with
the mean and the implied proportional change in the mortality rate. Mortality is measured from the day
of admission to the initiating ACH. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA-bin level.




                                                 59
                                        Table A4: Heterogeneity by ICU/CCU and Mechanical Ventilator

                                          3 or More Days in       Fewer Than 3 Days in     8 or More Days in       Fewer than 8 Days in                              Patient Not on
                                                                                                                                          Patient on Ventilator
                                               ICU/CCU                 ICU/CCU                  ICU/CCU                 ICU/CCU                                        Ventilator
                                                  (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)                    (6)

      Discharge destination
         SNF                             -0.689       (0.069)     -1.015       (0.137)     -0.700      (0.069)     -0.901      (0.115)     -0.673         (0.074)   -0.851    (0.098)
         Home/Other                      -0.302       (0.067)     -0.134       (0.141)     -0.218      (0.066)     -0.257      (0.113)     -0.314         (0.082)   -0.162    (0.094)
         LTCH-in-training                 0.006       (0.004)      0.008       (0.002)      0.006      (0.004)      0.008      (0.002)      0.007         (0.004)    0.007    (0.003)
         (other) ACH                     -0.009       (0.043)      0.155       (0.064)     -0.030      (0.043)      0.132      (0.057)     -0.080         (0.049)    0.097    (0.048)
         Death                           -0.007       (0.060)     -0.015       (0.079)     -0.059      (0.057)      0.018      (0.072)      0.060         (0.094)   -0.092    (0.054)
      Spell days
         LTCH                              28.6           (1.1)     28.8           (1.3)    30.0           (1.2)     27.2         (1.1)     31.5           (1.5)     27.5         (1.0)
         SNF                              -12.8           (3.5)    -19.2           (7.2)   -15.8           (3.8)    -14.5         (5.9)    -19.4           (4.4)    -11.1         (4.9)
         Initiating ACH                    -8.0           (2.4)     -4.8           (2.7)    -8.8           (2.6)     -3.9         (2.2)     -9.9           (2.8)     -7.7         (2.2)
         Total                              9.1           (4.9)      4.0           (8.8)     6.4           (5.2)      8.8         (7.4)      3.0           (6.9)      9.4         (6.1)
      Spell spending ($)
         LTCH                            34,798       (1,955)     32,886       (1,754)     36,450      (2,155)     31,674      (1,593)    40,788          (2,593)   31,624    (1,531)
         SNF                             -4,090       (1,470)     -2,019       (2,718)     -5,285      (1,507)     -1,419      (2,338)    -6,820          (1,763)    -988     (1,914)
         Initiating ACH                   -235        (5,580)     -2,745       (2,923)      -570       (6,255)      229        (2,664)    -4,563          (7,131)    -556     (3,560)
60




         Total                           31,935       (6,472)     25,818       (5,345)     31,108      (7,189)     29,780      (4,572)    29,033          (8,852)   30,695    (5,047)
      Patient outcomes
         Out-of-pocket spending ($)       3,166        (706)       639          (960)       3,361       (795)       1,151       (802)       3,172          (977)     2,124     (738)
         Home within 90 days             -0.157       (0.074)     -0.176       (0.157)     -0.108      (0.075)     -0.218      (0.131)     -0.125         (0.095)   -0.159    (0.106)
         Died within 90 days              0.176       (0.070)     -0.015       (0.120)      0.165      (0.070)      0.041      (0.101)      0.221         (0.097)   -0.003    (0.077)
      Number of Obs. (000s)                       3,297                    8,527                   1,825                 10,000                     924                  10,900


     Note: Table displays IV estimates for different splits of the data. Columns 1 and 2 show plots separately by whether the patient spent 3 or more days in an
     intensive care unit (ICU) or coronary care unit (CCU) prior to LTCH discharge. Columns 3 and 4 show plots separately by whether the patient spent 8 or more
     days in a ICU / CCU. Columns 5 and 6 split the analysis by whether was placed on a mechanical ventilator at the initiating ACH. Standard errors are clustered
     at the HSA-bin level.
                                      Table A5: Heterogeneity by Pre-Entry Discharge and For-Profit Status

                                           Below Median              Above Median            Bottom Quartile            Top Quartile                For Profit             Not for Profit

                                                   (1)                      (2)                      (3)                       (4)                       (5)                      (6)

      Discharge destination
         SNF                             -0.713          (0.085)   -0.765         (0.121)   -0.655         (0.084)   -1.391          (0.209)    -0.745         (0.101)   -0.824         (0.113)
         Home/Other                      -0.272          (0.088)   -0.292         (0.115)   -0.333         (0.099)   -0.063          (0.189)    -0.409         (0.100)    0.040         (0.107)
         LTCH-in-training                 0.003          (0.003)    0.014         (0.006)    0.007         (0.003)    0.012          (0.007)     0.004         (0.003)    0.010         (0.005)
         (other) ACH                      0.048          (0.041)   -0.036         (0.070)    0.066         (0.049)    0.280          (0.125)     0.105         (0.054)   -0.097         (0.059)
         Death                           -0.067          (0.061)    0.080         (0.080)   -0.085         (0.069)    0.161          (0.104)     0.045         (0.067)   -0.129         (0.074)
      Spell days
         LTCH                              29.9           (0.9)     27.4           (1.8)     27.8           (1.0)      30.2            (3.7)     29.1           (1.3)     28.5           (1.6)
         SNF                              -16.7           (5.1)     -9.7           (5.6)    -14.3           (4.6)     -32.1            (9.4)    -10.4           (5.0)    -19.8           (6.4)
         Initiating ACH                   -11.4           (2.5)     -4.6           (3.1)    -11.8           (2.8)      6.2             (5.3)    -10.2           (2.9)     -7.2           (2.6)
         Total                             2.3            (6.7)     11.6           (7.1)     2.0            (6.1)      4.4            (10.3)     11.6           (6.6)     -3.1           (7.8)
      Spell spending ($)
         LTCH                            36,363          (1,582)   30,983         (3,167)   34,026         (1,795)    34,547          (5,763)   34,447         (2,118)   35,546         (3,383)
         SNF                             -3,007          (1,716)   -2,846         (2,917)   -1,965         (1,797)   -13,917          (4,897)     60           (2,063)   -6,841         (2,651)
         Initiating ACH                  -1,925          (4,806)   -1,053         (5,553)    -715          (4,229)    6,172           (8,093)   -6,250         (5,134)    6,501         (5,989)
61




         Total                           31,769          (5,791)   24,867         (7,797)   31,074         (5,744)    22,687         (11,466)   33,970         (6,287)   25,185         (7,997)
      Patient outcomes
         Out-of-pocket spending ($)       2,347           (824)     2,260          (977)    1,478           (815)      135           (1,371)     3,459          (796)     400           (1,161)
         Home within 90 days              0.103          (0.090)   -0.563         (0.164)   0.029          (0.107)   -0.777          (0.317)    -0.223         (0.111)   -0.060         (0.148)
         Died within 90 days              0.014          (0.077)    0.276         (0.111)   0.012          (0.079)    0.226          (0.168)     0.192         (0.080)   -0.062         (0.109)
      Number of Obs. (000s)                       5,551                    4,590                    2,637                     1,528                     7,599                    4,225


     Note: Table displays IV estimates for different splits of the data. Columns 1 and 2 split the sample by whether the MSA had below or above the median LTCH
     discharge share. Columns 3 and 4 show results for the bottom and top quartiles of LTCH discharge share. Columns 5 and 6 split the analysis by whether the
     LTCH is a for-profit or non-for-profit organization. In columns 1-4, the pre-entry discharge rate is based on the rate in period r = −6. For these columns, we
     exclude 30 of the 186 MSAs where we do not observe outcomes in period r = −6. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA-bin level level.
                                                    Table A6: Selected Features

                                                                CCS Categories                                                              Other

               Respiratory failure; insufficiency; arrest                                                  Mycoses                          Age
                               Septicemia                                                  Intestinal obstruction without hernia
                            Other aftercare                                               Complication of device; implant or graft
                       Nutritional deficiencies                                                   Upper respiratory disease
         Complications of surgical procedures of medical care                                Acute and unspecified renal failure
            Pleurisy; pneumothroax; pulmonary collapse                                                 Other fractures
                       Secondary malignancies                                                      Urinary tract infections
                    Acute cerebrovascular disease                                                  Essential hypertension
                              Pneumonia                                                  Congestive heart failure; nonhypertensive
                          Intracranial injury                                                  Disorders of lipid metabolism
                         Chronic ulcer of skin                                                       Bacterial infection
               Aspiration pneumonitis; food/vomitus                                   Peri; endo-; and myocarditis; cardiomyopathy
                 Infective arthritis and osteomyelitis                                    Skin and subcutaneous tissue infections
                                Paralysis                                                                 Gangrene
                      Neck of femur (hip) fracture                                            Peritonitis and intestinal abscess
                           Spinal cord injury                                    Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchiectasis


Note: Table lists potential predictors for the LTCH discharge regression tree model which were actually selected.




                                                                       62
                                          Table A7: Distribution of p̂

                                    All ACH admissions           High p-hat sample           All close ACH admissions
                                            (1)                         (2)                              (3)

Mean                                       0.020                       0.189                           0.022
S.D.                                       0.031                       0.034                           0.035
Median                                     0.009                       0.179                           0.009
Percentile
   10th                                    0.004                       0.159                           0.004
   25th                                    0.004                       0.164                           0.004
   75th                                    0.024                       0.206                           0.025
   90th                                    0.053                       0.218                           0.062
   95th                                    0.085                       0.272                           0.092
   99th                                    0.173                       0.291                           0.181
Discharged to LTCH                         0.009                       0.110                           0.022
Number of Obs. (000s)                    163,649                       2,338                          32,708


Note: Table presents the distribution of p̂ for all ACH admissions, ACH admissions with a high predicted probability of
LTCH discharge ( p̂>0.15), and all ACH admissions with an LTCH within 5 kilometers.




                                                          63
                                  Table A8: Alternative Transition Periods

                                                  Baseline             Narrow transition period       Wide transition period
                                                     (1)                          (2)                           (3)

Discharge destination
   SNF                                   -0.791         (0.075)         -0.676        (0.049)         -0.716         (0.070)
   Home/Other                            -0.236         (0.073)         -0.245        (0.052)         -0.318         (0.073)
   LTCH-in-training                       0.007         (0.003)         -0.006        (0.003)          0.001         (0.002)
   (other) ACH                            0.044         (0.040)         -0.016        (0.027)          0.067         (0.038)
   Death                                 -0.024         (0.051)         -0.057        (0.034)         -0.034         (0.053)
Spell days
   LTCH                                    28.9            (1.0)         29.2             (0.8)         29.0            (1.1)
   SNF                                    -14.3            (3.9)        -10.5             (2.4)        -13.2            (3.6)
   Initiating ACH                          -8.6            (2.1)         -7.7             (1.4)         -9.2            (2.2)
   Total                                    6.6            (5.1)         10.2             (3.3)          7.2            (4.9)
Spell spending ($)
   LTCH                                  34,569         (1,708)        35,585         (1,307)         35,100         (1,691)
   SNF                                   -3,024         (1,572)        -2,709         (1,121)         -2,852         (1,578)
   Initiating ACH                        -2,016         (3,800)         -914          (2,319)         -2,653         (3,928)
   Total                                 29,583         (4,810)        31,295         (3,240)         29,880         (4,657)
Patient outcomes
   Out-of-pocket spending ($)            2,420          (640)           3,074          (469)           2,486         (677)
   Home within 90 days                   -0.17          (0.09)          -0.08          (0.06)          -0.05         (0.09)
   Died within 90 days                    0.10          (0.07)           0.02          (0.04)           0.08         (0.07)
Number of Obs. (000s)                             11,824                         12,438                        10,737


Note: Table displays IV estimates from equations 4 and 5, estimated for the baseline sample, dropping alternative transition
period observations. The narrow transition period is defined as r ∈ [−2, 0] and the wide transition period is defined as
r = −5, 5]. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA-bin level (930 clusters).




                                                              64
                                                                                    Table A9: Robustness

                                                              Include HSAs with                               Include subsequent
                                         Baseline                                   3 year balanced panel                           Exclude dual eligibles         Zip code                  County
                                                                 prior LTCHs                                        entries
                                              (1)                    (2)                      (3)                      (4)                     (5)                      (6)                      (7)

     Discharge destination
        SNF                          -0.791         (0.075)   -0.795    (0.075)      -0.765         (0.081)   -0.760     (0.074)     -0.837          (0.082)   -0.725         (0.086)   -0.770         (0.090)
        Home/Other                   -0.236         (0.073)   -0.225    (0.073)      -0.182         (0.079)   -0.225     (0.075)     -0.201          (0.086)   -0.364         (0.080)   -0.170         (0.085)
        LTCH-in-training              0.007         (0.003)    0.008    (0.003)       0.006         (0.002)   -0.009     (0.008)      0.007          (0.003)    0.002         (0.003)    0.007         (0.003)
        (other) ACH                   0.044         (0.040)    0.054    (0.041)      -0.011         (0.041)    0.002     (0.034)      0.062          (0.052)    0.051         (0.042)   -0.020         (0.042)
        Death                        -0.024         (0.051)   -0.042    (0.052)      -0.048         (0.052)   -0.009     (0.048)     -0.031          (0.061)    0.037         (0.054)   -0.047         (0.058)
     Spell days
        LTCH                          28.9           (1.0)     28.2         (1.1)     27.9           (1.0)      28.3        (1.0)      28.6           (1.1)     24.7           (1.2)     26.6           (1.2)
        SNF                          -14.3           (3.9)    -14.3         (3.9)    -10.0           (4.1)     -14.0        (3.6)     -16.0           (4.2)    -15.6           (3.8)    -12.6           (4.4)
        Initiating ACH                -8.6           (2.1)     -8.7         (2.1)     -7.2           (2.0)      -8.0        (1.8)     -10.1           (2.3)     -2.9           (2.1)    -13.1           (2.5)
        Total                          6.6           (5.1)      5.6         (5.1)     10.9           (5.3)       5.6        (4.9)      4.0            (5.7)      7.9           (5.1)     2.2            (5.7)
     Spell spending ($)
        LTCH                         34,569         (1,708)   33,645    (1,903)      34,646         (1,866)   33,903     (1,892)     33,440          (1,811)   27,319         (1,913)   34,420         (1,828)
        SNF                          -3,024         (1,572)   -3,391    (1,610)      -2,201         (1,423)   -2,965     (1,432)     -2,760          (1,710)   -6,188         (1,705)   -1,182         (1,762)
        Initiating ACH               -2,016         (3,800)   -1,806    (3,783)       1,829         (3,699)   -4,343     (3,331)     -2,355          (4,530)    2,260         (3,307)   -7,557         (4,308)
        Total                        29,583         (4,810)   28,740    (5,001)      34,143         (4,973)   24,960     (4,582)     29,606          (5,925)   23,853         (5,253)   26,656         (5,493)
     Patient outcomes
65




        Out-of-pocket spending ($)    2,420          (640)     2,245     (656)       2,559           (647)     2,008      (610)       2,167           (718)     1,514          (731)    2,122           (749)
        Home within 90 days          -0.172         (0.088)   -0.169    (0.091)      0.014          (0.080)   -0.217     (0.084)     -0.058          (0.100)   -0.299         (0.085)   0.089          (0.090)
        Died within 90 days           0.101         (0.065)    0.084    (0.065)      0.032          (0.065)    0.128     (0.063)      0.118          (0.076)    0.124         (0.066)   0.042          (0.076)
     Number of Obs. (000s)                11,824                   38,027                    7,993                 15,346                     8,719                    7,919                 12,307


        Note: Table displays IV estimates from equations 4 and 5, estimated on the baseline sample. Standard errors are clustered at the geography-bin level. Column 1
        presents our baseline results. In column 2 we include all HSAs that already had at least one LTCH as of 1998 as controls. In column 3 we restrict to all observations
        with a balanced 3-year panel around entry (restricting to entries that occurred between 2001 and 2011). In column 4 we do not drop subsequent entries, and in
        column 5 we restrict to non-dually eligible beneficiary years. In columns 6 and 7 we use Zip code and county as the geographic units; 230 Zip codes and 148
        counties experienced a first LTCH entry.
                             Table A10: Pooled versus Interacted First Stage

                                                             Baseline                     Non-interacted first stage
                                                                (1)                                 (2)

    Discharge destination
       SNF                                          -0.791              (0.075)            -0.926             (0.165)
       Home/Other                                   -0.236              (0.073)            -0.209             (0.170)
       LTCH-in-training                             0.007               (0.003)            0.006              (0.003)
       (other) ACH                                  0.044               (0.040)            0.130              (0.095)
       Death                                        -0.024              (0.051)            -0.001             (0.061)
    Spell days
       LTCH                                          28.9                (1.0)              28.1               (1.2)
       SNF                                           -14.3               (3.9)              -13.5              (7.3)
       Initiating ACH                                 -8.6               (2.1)               -4.5              (2.9)
       Total                                          6.6                (5.1)              10.5               (9.1)
    Spell spending ($)
       LTCH                                        34,569               (1,708)            33,607             (1,966)
       SNF                                         -3,024               (1,572)             -603              (3,462)
       Initiating ACH                              -2,016               (3,800)            1,196              (5,674)
       Total                                       29,583               (4,810)            34,356             (7,821)
    Patient outcomes
       Out-of-pocket spending ($)                   2,420                (640)             1,981                (925)
       Home within 90 days                          -0.17               (0.09)             -0.21               (0.21)
       Died within 90 days                          0.10                (0.07)             0.04                (0.10)
    Number of Obs. (000s)                                     11,824                                11,824

Note: Table displays IV estimates from 4 and 5 (interacted first stage) and equations 2 and 3 (non-interacted first stage)
estimated on the baseline sample. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level for the non-interacted specification (186
clusters) and at the HSA-bin level for the interacted first stage specification (930 clusters).




                                                             66
                      Table A11: Summary Statistics: Alternative Spell Definition

                                                                       1998-2014                                2002-2014
                                                        Continuous spells        365-day spells                365-day spells
                                                               (1)                    (2)                           (3)

Spell days
   LTCH                                                 0.7           (5.1)        1.2          (7.2)         1.4             (7.8)
   SNF                                                  9.0          (21.5)        14.5        (29.2)         15.3           (30.2)
   Initiating ACH                                       6.9           (6.7)        6.9          (6.7)         6.7             (6.4)
   Total                                                18.0         (26.5)        32.2        (39.1)         33.0           (40.3)
    Home health care                                                                                          41.5           (79.9)
    Hospice                                                                                                   7.1            (34.1)
    Total (incl. home health and hospice)                                                                     81.6           (99.9)
Spell spending
   LTCH                                                 843          (6,657)      1,500        (9,161)      1,821        (10,078)
   SNF                                                 3,404         (8,078)      5,404       (10,813)      5,805        (11,337)
   Initiating ACH                                      11,201       (12,342)      11,201      (12,342)      11,382       (12,397)
   Total                                               17,519       (20,713)      32,448      (33,488)      33,955       (35,026)
    Home health care                                                                                        2,698         (5,058)
    Hospice                                                                                                 1,303         (5,676)
    Total (incl. home health and hospice)                                                                   37,956       (36,627)
Number of Obs. (000s)                                          13,093                     12,700                     9,557

Note: Each observation is a unique ACH stay. Includes all HSAs that experience a first entry from 1998-2014, dropping
observations at and after the quarter of subsequent entry or LTCH exit and excluding all observations with the minimum p̂
value (the Baseline Sample). Column 1 summarizes outcomes using the continuous spell definitions for utilization used in
our baseline utilization analysis; column 1 is the same as the baseline column in Table 3 of the main exhibits. All subsequent
columns represent a single deviation from the baseline, as indicated. Column 2 summarizes utilization using a 365-days
post admission spell, summing all days and spending at an ACH, LTCHs, SNFs, IRFs, or LTCHs-in-Training with admission
dates within 365 days of the admission date at the index acute care stay. Column 3 restricts to 2002-2014 (the years when we
have hospice and home health claims data). For these years, we incorporate utilization at home health and hospice into the
365-day post admission spell definition.




                                                               67
                    Table A12: Event Study Estimates: Alternative Spell Definition

                                                                    1998-2014                              2002-2014
                                                     Continuous spells        365-day spells              365-day spells
                                                            (1)                    (2)                         (3)

Discharged to Home/Other                                                                                -0.327       (0.100)
   Home health care                                                                                      0.015       (0.063)
   Hospice                                                                                              -0.070       (0.039)
   Home (no care)                                                                                       -0.114       (0.071)
   Other                                                                                                -0.158       (0.059)
Spell days
   LTCH                                               28.9         (1.0)        47.7         (1.2)        49.5           (1.6)
   SNF                                               -14.3         (3.9)       -26.8         (4.9)       -21.7           (6.0)
   Initiating ACH                                     -8.6         (2.1)        -8.6         (2.1)        -5.8           (2.6)
   Total                                               6.6         (5.1)         2.7         (6.6)         7.8           (7.9)
    Home health care                                                                                     19.6            (18.0)
    Hospice                                                                                              -1.2             (5.5)
    Total (incl. home health and hospice)                                                                26.2            (21.2)
Spell spending
   LTCH                                             34,569        (1,708)     56,499      (1,868)       60,876       (2,106)
   SNF                                              -3,024        (1,572)     -7,128      (2,102)       -8,085       (2,310)
   Initiating ACH                                   -2,016        (3,800)     -2,016      (3,800)        9,841       (4,470)
   Total                                            29,583        (4,810)     40,507      (7,022)       55,873       (8,065)
    Home health care                                                                                     916         (1,191)
    Hospice                                                                                              -313         (917)
    Total (incl.home health and hospice)                                                                56,477       (8,305)
Number of Obs. (000s)                                     11,824                    11,431                       5,997


Note: Table displays IV estimates from equations 4 and 5, estimated on the baseline sample. Standard errors are clustered
at the HSA-bin level.




                                                             68
                        Table A13: Event Study Estimates: Outlier Payments

                                    Baseline                           Outlier                  Baseline + Outlier
                                       (1)                               (2)                           (3)

Spell spending ($)
   LTCH                    34,569          (1,708)            5,155          (791)          39,724          (1,922)
   SNF                     -3,024          (1,572)             178            (57)          -2,846          (1,575)
   Initiating ACH          -2,016          (3,800)            4,429         (8,184)          2,413          (9,836)
   Total                   29,583          (4,810)            10,884        (8,489)         40,466         (10,245)


Note: Table displays IV estimates from equations 4 and 5, estimated on the baseline sample. Column 1 shows effects on
the baseline spending measures, which is the sum of Medicare reimbursements excluding outlier payments. Column 2
shows effects on outlier payments. Column 3 shows effects on combined baseline and outlier payments. Standard errors
are clustered at the HSA-bin level.




                                                         69
