NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKE TWO! SAT RETAKING AND COLLEGE ENROLLMENT GAPS
Joshua Goodman
Oded Gurantz
Jonathan Smith
Working Paper 24945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24945

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018, Revised April 2019

These views do not reflect those of the College Board or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We are grateful for helpful feedback from John Friedman and three anonymous
referees, as well as seminar participants at Brandeis, Columbia, Duke, the Federal Reserve,
Harvard, Montana State University, Purdue, University of Connecticut, University of Maryland,
University of Memphis, and West Point. We also thank the College Board for sharing data and
Melanie Rucinski for providing excellent research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Joshua Goodman, Oded Gurantz, and Jonathan Smith. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Take Two! SAT Retaking and College Enrollment Gaps
Joshua Goodman, Oded Gurantz, and Jonathan Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 24945
August 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. I2,I20,I23,I24,J24
ABSTRACT
Only half of SAT-takers retake the exam, with even lower retake rates among low income and
underrepresented minority (URM) students. We exploit discontinuous jumps in retake
probabilities at multiples of 100, driven by left-digit bias, to estimate retaking’s causal effects.
Retaking substantially improves SAT scores and increases four-year college enrollment rates,
particularly for low income and URM students. Eliminating disparities in retake rates could close
up to 10 percent of the income-based gap and up to seven percent of the race-based gap in fouryear college enrollment rates of high school graduates.
Joshua Goodman
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joshua_goodman@hks.harvard.edu
Oded Gurantz
Truman School of Public Affairs
University of Missouri
216A Middlebush Hall
Columbia, MO 65203
gurantzo@missouri.edu

Jonathan Smith
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
jsmith500@gsu.edu

U.S. college enrollment varies substantially by income and race. In 2016, 83 percent of students
from high-income families enrolled in college immediately after graduating from high school,
while only 67 percent of students from low-income families did so (McFarland and Hussar, 2018).
Over 70 percent of White high school graduates immediately enroll in college, compared to 56
percent of Black high school graduates. When low income and underrepresented minority (URM)
students enroll in college, they are disproportionately likely to do so at colleges with relatively low
graduation rates and low expected earnings, such as two-year community colleges.1 One partial
explanation of such disparities comes from informational and procedural complexities in the transition to college, which disproportionately impact students who lack the resources or guidance to
navigate college processes as effectively as their more advantaged peers (Page and Scott-Clayton,
2016).
College entrance exams such as the SAT and ACT are one source of complexity. Although
much has been written about the decision to take a college entrance exam for the first time (the
extensive margin), we know very little about students’ decisions to retake such exams (the intensive margin). Only 54 percent of SAT-takers retake the SAT at least once, implying that nearly half
of students never retake.2 Those who do not retake appear at a competitive disadvantage, given
that retaking is strongly incentivized by current admissions practices of U.S. colleges. Nearly 75
percent of four-year colleges that use SAT scores in the admissions process publicly claim to consider only a student’s maximum score.3 Over 80 percent of those define that maximum as the
superscore, the combination of the highest scores a student receives on each section of the exam,
even if those scores occurred at different takes. For three-fourths of colleges, retaking can only
improve students’ chances of being admitted by making their applications more competitive.
In this paper, we assess the consequences of SAT retaking for student achievement, with a
1

For purposes of this paper, underrepresented minority (URM) students refers to those who identify as Black, Hispanic, or Native American.
2
Retake rates are even lower for the ACT, the other major American college entrance exam. Only 41 percent of
2009 ACT-takers retook the exam, a proportion that rose to 45 percent by 2015. Many of the associations we document
between SAT-retaking, demographics and test scores also appear in the ACT. See the ACT’s 2016 Technical Brief entitled
“Multiple Testers: What Do We Know About Them?”, by Matt Harmston and Jill Crouse.
3
The remaining 26 percent of colleges that use all SAT scores in the admissions process tend to be more selective
than those using maximum scores. See the College Board’s 2015 publication “SAT Score-Use Practices by Participating
Institution”, in which the College Board surveyed all SAT-using colleges about their admissions practices. The cited
percentages are conditional on being in the 87 percent of colleges with a valid response.

1

focus on the differential effects of retaking across demographic groups. Our analysis has three
parts. First, we analyze which students take up the opportunity to retake the SAT. We show that
retake rates increase with initial SAT scores across most of the distribution, falling only above the
95th percentile. Retake rates increase with income but are also higher for low income students who
use waivers that render retakes free, suggesting that financial costs may deter some students from
retaking.4 Female students are three percentage points more likely to retake than male students
and Asian-American students are 12 percentage points more likely to retake than White students,
differences robust to conditioning on a rich set of covariates. URM students are nine percentage
points less likely to retake than White students, a gap only partly explained by income differences
between those two groups. Students who take their first exam at an earlier date are more likely to
retake, in part because they have more opportunities to do so.
Second, we estimate the causal impact of retaking on both test scores and college enrollment.
Relative to those who do not retake, retakers may believe their first take is not as reflective of their
true abilities, may be generally more motivated, or may be better informed about the benefits of
retaking, all of which would confound attempts at causal inference. To eliminate endogenous
retaking, we borrow from behavioral economics and psychology literature that observes people
focusing disproportionately on the leftmost digits of numbers when making decisions. Pope and
Simonsohn (2011) first observed such behavior in the test-taking context, using lumpiness in the
distribution of maximum scores to infer that students scoring just below multiples of 100 must
retake the SAT at higher rates than those scoring at or above such round number thresholds.5
We confirm this finding directly: students with first SAT scores just below a multiple of 100
are, on average, one percentage point more likely to retake the SAT than students with scores just
at or above that number. Discontinuities in retaking rates appear at almost all multiples of 100,
ranging in magnitude from 0.5 percentage points at lower thresholds to 12 percentage points for
the highest threshold. These thresholds serve as exogenous sources of variation in retake rates,
4

Students are eligible for such fee waivers if they receive or are eligible for federally subsidized school lunch, receive
public assistance, live in federally subsidized public housing, or are homeless. To get the waiver, a student must contact
a school counselor or authorized community-based organization that confirms the student’s eligibility.
5
Their data, a 25 percent sample of SAT scores from 1996-2001, lacked explicit measures of retaking and college
enrollment outcomes.

2

motivating a fuzzy regression discontinuity design to estimate the impact of retaking on SAT
scores and college enrollment, with retaking instrumented by an indicator for scoring just below
a multiple of 100.
The impact of threshold-induced retaking on SAT scores is substantial. On average, retake
scores are 0.15 standard deviations higher than first take scores (46 points on a 2400 point scale).
Retaking once improves students’ admissions-relevant superscores by nearly 0.3 standard deviations (90 points). For students who initially score in the lower half of the SAT distribution, retaking
once boosts superscores by nearly 0.4 standard deviations (120 points). Higher-scoring students
see meaningful but smaller test score gains, in part because of ceiling effects. Retaking increases
the SAT scores of low income and URM students by more than it does for their high income and
non-URM counterparts.
The score increases resulting from retaking are large enough to drive substantial improvements
in college enrollment outcomes, particularly for low income and URM students. On average, retaking increases the probability of enrolling in a four-year college by 13 percentage points, driven
in large part by substitution away from two-year colleges. Retaking also improves the quality
of colleges students attend. These effects are even larger for low income and URM students and
substantially smaller for high income and non-URM students.
Retaking also improves college quality, inducing students to attend colleges with historical
B.A. completion rates six percentage points higher than they would otherwise. It does so by
shifting enrollment from non-selective, low completion rate (often two-year) colleges to somewhat
more selective, higher completion rate four-year colleges. Enrollment in the most selective, highest
graduation rate colleges does not change. Because it does not alter application patterns to the
colleges where enrollment shifts are observed, retaking most likely changes college choices by
increasing the odds of admission through increased SAT scores.
The college enrollment effects of threshold-induced retaking are large. This may be partly
explained by the fact that taking the SAT itself indicates interest in four-year colleges, so that
SAT-takers may generally be less constrained financially or otherwise than non-takers. SAT-takers
induced to retake by missing a round number score may also be unusual. We show that compliers

3

do not differ much by income or race from the average retaker but acknowledge that students with
target scores may differ along unobservable dimensions. If compliers are particularly motivated
to attend four-year colleges, our estimates may provide upper bounds for the enrollment effect of
increasing retaking among wider populations.
In the third part of our analysis, we combine calculations from the first two parts to show that
retaking behavior can explain a substantial fraction of college enrollment gaps. Among the SATtaking population, low income students are 21 percentage points less likely to retake, yet doing
so increases enrollment at four-year college enrollment by 30 percentage points. This implied six
percentage point effect (0.21 * 0.30) represents 25 percent of the four-year college enrollment gap
between low and high income SAT-takers. A similar calculation shows that retaking explains 14
percent of the four-year college enrollment gap between URM and non-URM SAT-takers. Because
roughly half of high school graduates do not take college entrance exams, the proportion of college enrollment gaps among all high school graduates explained by retaking is roughly half the
proportion within the SAT-taking population. Our calculations suggest that disparities in retake
rates explain up to 10 percent of the income-based gap and up to seven percent of the race-based
gap in four-year college enrollment rates of high school graduates. These calculations ignore any
potential general equilibrium effects, driven by actions of colleges or other students, that might
result from substantial increases in retake rates of low income and URM students.
Our results suggest that individual students, particularly low-scoring, low income, or URM
students, should likely retake college entrance exams more than they currently do. Though our
data is too recent to measure retakers’ completion rates with precision, evidence from other contexts suggests the shift from two-year to four-year colleges and the general improvement in quality
of college chosen will lead to higher degree completion rates (Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith, 2017;
Cohodes and Goodman, 2014) and higher labor market earnings (Zimmerman, 2014; Canaan and
Mouganie, 2018).
Our paper contributes to the literature in two ways. First, we highlight one part of the college
enrollment process that contributes to socioeconomic gaps in educational attaintment but has received relatively little attention. Most recent research has focused on students’ decisions about

4

whether to take college entrance exams. For example, states mandating the SAT or ACT as part
of accountability systems increased exam-taking rates and meaningfully improved four-year college enrollment rates and the selectivity of colleges chosen, particularly for URM students (Klasik,
2013; Hurwitz et al., 2015; Goodman, 2016; Hyman, 2017). Opening exam testing centers near students’ homes also increases test-taking and college enrollment rates (Bulman, 2015). This body of
research on first-time exam taking suggests both that some students underestimate their college
readiness and that relatively small costs can dissuade such students from taking college entrance
exams.
Retaking has received much less attention. Vigdor and Clotfelter (2003) use data on applicants
to three selective U.S. colleges to study the predictors of retaking, arguing that retake-induced
score increases are too large to be explained by selection and must represent increased familiarity
with the test or actual learning. Frisancho et al. (2016) use data from the Turkish college entrance
exam to similarly argue that retaking generates familiarity- or learning-based gains that are larger
for less advantaged students, thus potentially narrowing socioeconomic gaps. We build on this
small literature by using data on the universe of over 10 million SAT takers from the high school
classes of 2006-2014 both to document predictors of retaking and, more importantly, to provide
the first causal estimates of the impact of retaking on college enrollment.
Our second contribution is to the behavioral economics literature. We add to the research on
“left-digit bias”, which has been shown to operate in car and housing sales (Busse et al., 2013;
Lacetera, Pope and Sydnor, 2012) and athletic performance (Allen et al., 2017; Foellmi, Legge
and Schmid, 2016). The example of college entrance exam retaking is particularly striking as
it demonstrates large real-life consequences of left-digit bias. This work also adds to a broader
literature on behaviorally-based public policy interventions. Our results suggest that students
underestimate or undervalue the expected benefits of retaking compared to its small apparent
costs. Such costs include a few hours of test-taking time, study effort, and a fee that ranges from
$0 for low income students, who qualify for a fee waiver that renders the first two takes free,
to about $50-$60 for higher income students. The retaking of college entrance exams may be a
margin ripe for the type of behavioral intervention that has generated interest in public policy

5

generally (Chetty, 2015) and in education policy specifically (Lavecchia et al., 2016; Levitt et al.,
2016). We discuss a variety of potential interventions in the conclusion but note that encouraging
or requiring students to take their first exam earlier might be particularly effective, given that
many low income and URM students do so in 12th grade when few retaking opportunities remain.

1

Data and Descriptive Analysis

For descriptive purposes, we begin with student-level data from the College Board on the universe
of nearly 14 million students from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid scores on all
three sections of the SAT: math, critical reading, and writing. For purposes of causal inference,
we include in our regression discontinuity sample the 12 million of those students who first took
the SAT by November of senior year and thus had at least one opportunity to retake prior to
graduating high school.6
For each student, we observe SAT math, reading and writing scores from all takes, as well as
the timing of those takes. This allows us to construct first total SAT scores across all three sections,
as well as the superscores most commonly used by college admissions offices. Each SAT section
is scored on a scale of 200 to 800 in multiples of 10, so that total SAT scores can range from 600
to 2400.7 For these cohorts, the SAT was offered seven times a year and students could retake the
SAT as many times as their college application timeline allowed. Each SAT take during this time
cost roughly $40-$60, with low income students who applied for and received fee waivers eligible
to take the exam twice at no cost. We observe whether each student used such a fee waiver, as well
as self-reported demographic information on gender, race, parental education and family income.
Our main outcome of interest is college enrollment, which we observe via a merge between
the College Board data and the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which tracks enrollment
choices of 94 percent of U.S. college students. We assign students to the first college they enroll
in within 180 days of high school graduation and characterize colleges both by sector (four-year
vs. two-year) and by expected graduation rate and later income. We use the NSC data to compute
6

Students who first took the SAT later than that have extremely low retake rates.
Our data cover a roughly ten-year period during which the SAT comprised three sections scored on a 2400 point
scale. Beginning in 2016, the SAT has two sections and a 1600 point scale.
7

6

each college’s expected graduation rate as the fraction of students in our data who initially enroll
in a given institution and who earn a B.A. anywhere within six years. Relative to graduation
rates available through the Department of Education’s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System, this measure has the advantage of existing for all colleges and being comparable across
the two- and four-year sectors.8 We use data from from Chetty et al. (2017) to characterize the
expected income of each college’s initial enrollees at ages 32-34.9 We also observe all colleges to
which a student ultimately sends SAT scores, a decent proxy for college application behavior given
that many colleges require standardized test scores as part of their admissions process (Pallais,
2015; Bond et al., 2018; Smith, 2018).
Table 1 shows mean characteristics of the full sample, the subset who first took the SAT by
November of senior year and thus comprise our regression discontinuity sample, and three subsamples of interest: lower scoring students, defined as those whose first SAT score is closest to
or below the median threshold of 1500; low income students, defined as those with self-reported
family income below $50,000; and underrepresented minority (URM) students, defined as those
who report their race/ethnicity as Black, Hispanic or Native American. Among the full sample,
27 percent are URMs and 21 percent are low income. Twenty percent of students used a fee waiver
on their first SAT take, making the exam free.
First SAT scores average 1475 with maximum SAT scores over 50 points higher. Fifty-four
percent of students retake the SAT at least once, and some more than once, so that the mean
number of takes is over 1.7. On average, students first take the SAT about 12 months before high
school graduation, in May or June of junior year. Though not shown in the table, 69 percent of
students give themselves substantial time to retake by first taking the SAT in 11th grade, while
29 percent first take it in 12th grade.10 Fifty-seven percent of SAT-takers first enroll in a four-year
college within 180 days of high school graduation and another 18 percent enroll in a two-year
college. The regression discontinuity sample looks fairly similar to the full sample, though with a
8

To deal with selection into college, students who do not immediately enroll in any college are assigned the mean
six-year B.A. completion rate of all students who do not enroll immediately after high school graduation. For more
detailed discussion of these measures, see Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith (2017).
9
We use the baseline income measure favored by Chetty et al. (2017), which measures the 2014 income of each
college’s initial enrollees from the birth cohorts of 1980-82.
10
Two percent first take the SAT in 9th or 10th grade.

7

higher retake rate (61 percent compared to 54 percent) and a higher four-year college enrollment
rate (61 percent compared to 57 percent). The three subsamples come from lower income families,
have lower SAT scores, retake less often and are less likely to enroll in four-year colleges.
Table 2 shows predictors of retaking from a linear probability model that regresses a retaking
indicator on various covariates. A few clear patterns emerge in the top three panels. Low income
students are 21 percentage points less likely to retake than high income students. This could be
driven by differential ability to afford the costs of retaking or by differential college preferences or
perception of the benefits of retaking. URM students are 9 percentage points less likely to retake
than White students, a gap partly but not solely explained by income differences across these
groups. Asian students are 12 percentage points more likely to retake than White students and
female students are three percentage points more likely to retake than male students, differences
robust to inclusion of further controls.
The bottom panel shows that those with higher first SAT scores are actually more likely to
retake the SAT, a pattern we explore in more detail in the next section.11 Though initially higher
scoring students may have less need to improve their scores, such students tend to be more advantaged along a number of dimensions that predict higher retake rates. Students who use fee
waivers are more likely to retake, suggesting testing fees may affect low income students’ propensity to retake. High retake rates among fee waiver users might also be driven by positive selection
as the most informed and motivated low income students seek such waivers.
Each month earlier that a student first takes the SAT is associated with a more than four percentage point increase in retaking probability, even controlling for all the aforementioned factors.
Early takers are more likely to retake in part because they have more opportunities to do so. The
timing of a student’s first take is also the single most powerful predictor of the probability of retaking. Controlling for such timing quadruples the predictive power of this regression model,
raising its R-squared from five to 20 percent. Though not shown in the table, over 40 percent of
URM students first take the SAT in 12th grade, compared to just over 20 percent of white and
11
The relationship between first SAT score and retaking is fairly linear across all but the very top of the score distribution, so that our descriptive conclusions are substantively unchanged when controlling for higher order terms in
first SAT scores.

8

Asian students, explaining some of the difference in retake rates by race. All of this suggests that
encouraging students to take their first test at an earlier date may be a channel through which to
increase retake rates.

2

Methodology

The propensity to retake the SAT is strongly correlated with observed student characteristics but
is also likely correlated with unobserved characteristics such as true ability, motivation or information about the college admissions process. As such, even conditional on variables observed
in our data, the relationship between retaking and college outcomes is probably biased upwards
by the fact that highly motivated or well-informed students are both more likely to retake and
more likely to enroll in college. Estimating the causal impact of retaking requires an exogenous
source of variation that affects retaking but is not related to students’ underlying characteristics.
We exploit the fact that the distance of a students’ first SAT score from the nearest multiple of 100
provides such a source of variation.

2.1

Regression Discontinuity Specification

We estimate the impact of round-number thresholds on retaking with a regression discontinuity
design that fits linear specifications around each such threshold, similar to a linear spline specification but with additional flexibility built into the model. To do so, we generate two identical
observations per student containing demographic information, SAT scores from each take, retaking measures, and college enrollment outcomes. The existence of multiple thresholds means that
each student’s total SAT score from the first take falls in between two multiples of 100 (or on one
such multiple). For one of the student’s two observations we generate regression discontinuity
variables defined relative to the threshold to the left and for the other observation by the threshold to the right.12
We generate three such variables. The first, R, is defined in one observation as the nearest
12

All students appear twice in the data except for a small number who appear once because of first SAT scores below
the lowest threshold (700) or at or above the highest threshold (2300).

9

round-number threshold at or below a student’s first SAT score and in the other observation as
the nearest threshold above that score. The second, the running variable D, is defined as the
distance between a student’s first SAT score and R, which can take on values between -100 and
90. The third, Below, indicates whether a student’s first SAT score falls below R or, equivalently,
whether for that observation D is negative. For example, a student whose first SAT score is 1270
would appear in one observation with R = 1200, Below = 0 and D = 70 and in the other with R =
1300, Below = 1 and D equal to -30.13
Our first stage regression takes the form:

Retookir = βF S Belowir +

23
X

[Rn00 ∗ (αn00 + γn00 Dir + δn00 Belowir ∗ Dir )] + µcd + ir

(1)

n=7

The outcome Retook indicates that student i near round-number threshold r retook the SAT at least
once. The variable Rn00 indicates an observation being defined relative to threshold 100*n, so that
the summed terms in brackets represent 17 local linear regression discontinuity specifications, one
at each threshold from 700 to 2300. The three terms within brackets flexibly allow each threshold
to have its own intercept, slope below the threshold, and slope above the threshold. This resembles a linear spline specification that would use one observation per student but, unlike that
specification, does not impose the restriction of a single slope between each threshold. Instead,
each student is allowed to contribute to the estimation of one slope for the threshold below and
one slope for the threshold above her first score. Relative to a linear spline, this specification imposes fewer functional form assumptions but has lower precision because nearly twice as many
coefficients are being estimated.
The first stage coefficient of interest, βF S , averages across all 17 thresholds the predicted differences in retake rates between those scoring just below and just above a threshold. Because
students just on either side of the threshold are nearly identical in terms of academic skill and
other characteristics, we interpret this coefficient as the causal impact on retaking of just missing a
round number score. High school class by first SAT date fixed effects µcd control flexibly for class
13
As an example of a student whose first score is a multiple of 100, consider one who initially scored 1200. That
student would appear in one observation with R = 1200, Below = 0 and D = 0 and in the other with R = 1300, Below = 1
and D equal to -100.

10

and test date-specific factors such as time trends in retaking behavior, selection into first test dates
by different types of students, and varying exam difficulty over time.
Our ultimate goal is to estimate the impact of retaking on these SAT and college outcomes. To
do so, we generate instrumental variable estimates of the form:

Yir = βIV Retookir +

23
X

[Rn00 ∗ (ζn00 + ηn00 Dir + θn00 Belowir ∗ Dir )] + νcd + ξir

(2)

n=7

where Retook is instrumented by the indicator Below, as in equation 1.14 We focus primarily on
two sets of outcomes Y , measures of subsequent SAT performance and measures of college enrollment, including the sector and completion rate of college chosen. The coefficient of interest, βIV ,
thus estimates the impact on SAT scores and college outcomes of the retaking driven by students’
reactions to round-number thresholds.
This flexible local linear specification allows us to use bandwidths ranging from 20 (below
which we have only a single point with which to estimate a line) to 100 (above which our data
cross additional thresholds that may affect estimation). We split the difference between these
two extremes and choose 60 as our default bandwidth, but show in extensive robustness checks
that the linearity of the data means our results are not sensitive to this choice.15 Because our
running variable is discrete, we cluster standard errors in all of these regressions by first SAT
score as suggested by Lee and Card (2008). Clustering by first SAT score also accounts for the fact
that some students have two observations in the stacked version of the data. We show later that
our results remain statistically significant without clustering and remain robust to bandwidths of
50 and below, where each student is observed only once. Consistent with the earlier observed
smoothness of covariates, we show that our results are robust to controlling for students’ income,
race, gender and parental education. Our specification also yields estimates extremely similar to
those from a traditional linear spline specification.
14

We implement this using two-stage least squares but find that, because our instruments are quite strong, limited
information maximum likelihood estimation yields indistinguishable results.
15
The regression specifications above also allow us to choose different bandwidths at different thresholds. The linearity of the data again mean such choices make little difference to our estimates.

11

2.2

First Stage

Figure 1 plots the fraction of students retaking the SAT as a function of first SAT scores. Retake
rates rise with first SAT scores across most of the distribution, peaking above 65 percent for those
with scores in the 1800-2000 range and then dropping for first scores above 2000, the 95th percentile of the distribution. Students whose first SAT score falls just below a multiple of 100 are
more likely to retake the SAT than those whose score is that multiple of 100. These difference in
retake rates are largest and visually clearest for the higher thresholds but also appear at many of
the middle and lower thresholds in denser parts of the distribution.
Figure 2 makes this visually clearer with the stacked version of the data, where the running
variable is the distance of each student’s first SAT score from the nearest multiple of 100. Averaged across all the thresholds, students just below a round-number threshold appear about one
percentage point more likely to retake the SAT than those just above that threshold. The first row
of Table 3 provides the first stage estimate of that discontinuity from equation 1, suggesting that
students first scoring just below a round-number threshold are 0.9 percentage points more likely
to retake the SAT than those just above that threshold.
Figure 3 shows the point estimates and standard errors from running this first stage model at
each individual threshold, rather than averaging them into a single estimate. Sixteen of the 17 individual thresholds generate statistically significant variation in retake rates. Consistent with the
raw retaking data, we see large retaking impacts of falling below higher thresholds and smaller
impacts of falling below lower thresholds. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 average these effects across
the two halves of the initial score distribution, showing that retake rates increase by 0.6 percentage points for lower scoring students and 1.4 percentage points for higher scoring students. The
impacts of missing thresholds on retake rates varies less by income and race.
Missing round-number thresholds induces more than one retake attempt on average for compliers, perhaps because they have target scores that a second take fails to achieve or because they
learn that retaking is less costly than they had previously believed. The second row of Table 3
runs a version of the first stage regression where the outcome is the total number of takes rather
than an indicator for retaking. Such coefficients always exceed their counterparts in the first row.
12

The third row provides instrumental variables estimates the impact of threshold-induced retaking
on the total number of takes, the ratio of the first and second row coefficients. Compliers retake
the SAT about 1.3 times on average, with lower scoring compliers retaking upwards of 1.4 times.
The remainder of this paper uses as a treatment variable the indicator for retaking the SAT at least
once because we lack independent variation in whether a student retakes once or more than once.
Nonetheless, if we assume treatment effects are linearly increasing in the number of takes, subsequent estimates can simply be divided by 1.3 (or the relevant subsample coefficient) to generate a
“per-retake” treatment effect.
These thresholds provide extremely strong variation in retake rates. The first stage F-statistic
exceeds 180 for the entire sample and exceeds 70 in all of the subsamples we study, far above traditional thresholds for potentially weak instruments (Staiger and Stock, 1997). Though the instrument is strong, the first stage is small in magnitude, raising potential concerns that compliers may
be an unusual subset of the population. The bottom panels of Table 3 compute the mean characteristics of compliers, as suggested by Abadie, Angrist and Imbens (2002) and Abadie (2003), and
of the whole sample for comparison. Relative to the population of SAT-takers, compliers have
higher first SAT scores, look indistinguishable in terms of income, and are somewhat less likely
to be URM students. Across the subgroups, compliers generally have higher first SAT scores than
the mean student, are equally or more likely to be low income, and appear similar in terms of
racial composition. Though this does not exclude the possibility that compliers are unusual with
respect to unobservable characteristics such as motivation, these results suggest compliers do not
appear to be outliers along observable dimensions.
That students appear to have round number target scores is not surprising. The top two results
from a Google search for “Should I retake the SAT?” lead to web pages that advise “you should
have an exact target score in mind” and “having a concrete score in mind can be a powerful motivator.”16 Students’ focus on round number thresholds may arise from irrational left-digit bias.
It could also be a rational response to the perceived left-digit bias of admissions or financial aid
16
These quotes come from Prep Scholar’s December 13, 2014 blog post by Allen Cheng entitled “Should You Retake
the SAT or ACT? 3-Step Process” and U.S. News & World Report’s March 21, 2016 blog post by Brian Witte entitled
“When Retaking the SAT Makes Sense”, both of which were accessed on August 15, 2017.

13

processes, which may explicitly use round number thresholds to determine eligibility or implicitly overweight scores’ first digits due to the mental processes of admissions officers with heavy
workloads (Bowman and Bastedo, 2017).

2.3

Validity Checks

For the regression discontinuity approach to yield valid treatment effect estimates, students must
not be able to precisely control the relationship between their first SAT score and round-number
thresholds. Details of the test itself suggest no scope for such potential manipulation. The SAT is
scored centrally and the scale translating raw scores into scaled scores is unknown to test-takers.
Two pieces of empirical evidence are consistent with this. First, we see no heaping at values
just above or below round-number thresholds, suggesting no systematic imbalance in the number
of students to the left and right of each threshold.17 Second, students just above and below the
thresholds appear quite similar in terms of the demographic characteristics we observe.18 All
available evidence suggests that students just above and below the thresholds are identical except
for their retaking rates.
We provide two further pieces of evidence that students care specifically about their total SAT
scores with respect to retake decisions. First, retaking rates were discontinuous at round-number
thresholds on the 1600 point math and reading scale that existed prior to the introduction of the
third section on writing. When that third section was introduced, retaking discontinuities as measured on the 1600 point scale largely vanished.19 Retake rates also show no discontinuities at
round-number thresholds from scores on individual sections of the SAT.20 All of this is consistent
with students primarily reacting to their total SAT scores, the measure most frequently highlighted
by college admissions offices.
Whether round-number thresholds provide a valid instrument for SAT retaking depends also
17

See Figure A.1, which plots the density of observations and appears smooth at all thresholds.
Table A.1 shows instrumental variable estimate from equation 2, using demographic characteristics as outcomes.
Across a variety of bandwidths, we see no statistically significant relationship between threshold-driven retaking and
income, race, parental education, or gender. Figure A.2 shows estimated instrumental variable coefficients at individual thresholds. Differences in such characteristics are very close to zero and statistically insignificant at nearly all
thresholds.
19
See Figure A.3.
20
See Figure A.4.
18

14

on whether they satisfy the exclusion restriction, affecting outcomes only through retaking and
not through other channels. For outcomes such as maximum SAT scores, the exclusion restriction
is clearly satisfied because retaking is the only channel through which such scores can change. For
college enrollment outcomes, we note potential channels other than retaking through which such
thresholds might have an effect.
College admissions and financial aid processes may exhibit left-digit bias because of explicit
rules or implicit biases of application readers. If so, scoring just below a threshold will disadvantage students by reducing their chance of admission or financial aid. Left-digit bias from individual colleges is unlikely to be empirically important because of the national scope of our sample
and our use of so many different thresholds. We also later rule out the possibility that individual states’ public postsecondary systems’ admissions or financial aid rules might be driving our
results. This channel suggests that missing a threshold could harm a student’s college outcomes
for reasons other than retaking, making our instrumental variable estimates of retaking impacts
downward-biased and thus lower bounds on true effects.
Regardless of whether colleges actually exhibit left-digit bias, students may believe they do. If
so, missing a threshold could discourage students from applying for admission or financial aid or,
conversely, could encourage them to work harder on admission and aid applications on margins
other than their SAT score. These reactions have opposing effects on college outcomes, making it
ambiguous as to the sign of the bias for instrumental variable estimates of retaking impacts.

3

Results

3.1

Admissions Relevant SAT Scores

Retaking induced by round-number thresholds substantially increases students’ SAT scores. Table
4 shows the impact of retaking on four outcomes: most recent total score after two potential takes;
superscore after two potential takes; superscore after all takes; and the probability that a student’s
final superscore exceeds her first superscore by at least 150 points (0.5 standard deviations).21
21

Table A.2 shows the reduced form impact of missing a round number threshold on SAT scores.

15

Column 1 shows that, on average, retakers’ total scores are 46 points higher on their second take
than on their first take, suggesting real gains either through learning or increased familiarity with
the test. The magnitude of this round number threshold-induced gain is remarkably similar to the
44 point gain the average retaker achieves between the 1st and 2nd tests. This provides another
indication that the compliers driving our estimates are not unusual relative to the average retaker.
Superscoring makes retaking even more effective, with retakers’ superscores increasing by
88 points, nearly twice as much as their total scores rise. With additional retakes, superscores
ultimately rise by 102 points, with 24 percent of retakers seeing superscore gains of at least 150
points. This superscore increase among compliers is again remarkably similar to the 100 point
increase in superscores that the average retaker achieves after completing all takes. Comparing
columns 2 and 3, the ratio of superscore gains between the final and second takes is less than the
1.3 retakes induced among compliers. This suggests diminishing marginal benefits of retaking,
with the magnitude of this implying that the first retake increases superscores by about twice as
much as subsequent retakes. Improvements in SAT scores come from all three sections of the
test, with about 50-60 percent of retakers raising their scores on any given section and 20 percent
raising their score on all three sections.22
On average, retaking improves scores for all students but particularly for those with lower
initial scores. Figure 4 shows by individual threshold the estimated impact of retaking on ultimate
superscores.23 We see statistically significant superscore gains from retaking at each threshold,
with higher gains for initially lower scoring students. Panel B of Table 4 confirms this pattern. Low
scoring students’ second take total scores are 91 points higher than their first, relative to an only
22 point gain for higher scoring students. On average, retaking ultimately increases low scoring
students’ superscores by 136 points, relative to 84 points for higher scoring students. The scores
of low income and URM students tend to increase more from retaking than the scores of their
high income and non-URM counterparts, though this heterogeneity is lower than that by initial
SAT score.24 For all subsamples, the magnitude and statistical significance of retaking’s impact on
22

See Table A.3.
We exclude the lowest three thresholds (700-900) because the small number of students near these thresholds lead
to noisier treatment effects that distort the scaling of the graph.
24
Retaking does not appear to have heterogeneous impacts by gender on SAT scores or subsequent outcomes, so we
23

16

ultimate superscores is remarkably robust to choices of bandwidth, inclusion of covariates, and
decision to cluster standard errors by initial SAT score.25

3.2

College Enrollment

Retaking meaningfully improves college enrollment outcomes, including four-year college enrollment rates. As shown in Table 5, retaking the SAT increases the probability that a student will
enroll in a four-year college by a statistically significant 13 percentage points.26 This represents a
nearly 20 percent increase over the 67 percent enrollment rate among control compliers. Roughly
half of that increase is due to a shift away from two-year colleges, while the other half comes
from students who would not otherwise have enrolled in college. This magnitude seems large
but aligns quite closely with another recent study of the impact of Boston’s charter schools on
SAT scores and college enrollment. Angrist et al. (2016) estimate that attending a charter school
in Boston increased students’ SAT scores by about 100 points and immediate four-year college
enrollment by 13 percentage points, much of which represented substitution away from two-year
colleges. Our estimated impacts of retaking on both SAT scores and college enrollment are nearly
identical to these magnitudes, suggesting the enrollment increase we observe is reasonable given
the SAT increase we observe.
Retaking causes students to enroll in colleges with completion rates six percentage points
higher than they would have otherwise, in part because four-year colleges have higher completion rates than two-year colleges. This improvement in college quality, as measured by graduation
rates, comes from a nine percentage point increase in the probability of attending colleges with
graduation rates of at least 50 percent, the roughly median graduation rate of colleges attended by
SAT takers. We see no change in enrollment at colleges with graduation rates of at least 80 percent,
the roughly 80th percentile of the college quality distribution. Characterizing college quality by
expected income yields qualitatively similar, though noisier, results. Retaking increases expected
income by a statistically insignificant $700 and the probability of attending a college with roughly
do not report these results.
25
See Table A.4.
26
Table A.5 shows the reduced form impact of missing a round number threshold on college enrollment.

17

median expected income ($50,000) by a marginally significant eight percentage points, but has no
clear impact on the attending colleges above the 80th percentile of the expected income distribution ($65,000).
Retaking’s positive impact on college enrollment outcomes is driven almost entirely by lower
scoring students. Figure 5 shows threshold-specific estimates of the impact of retaking on enrollment in four-year colleges. Near the higher thresholds, retaking has little impact on four-year
college enrollment. Near the lower thresholds, point estimates are large, positive and sometimes
statistically significant. Panel B of Table 5 shows the pooled versions of these estimates. Retaking
increases the probability that lower scoring students attend a four-year college by 33 percentage
points, a near doubling from a baseline 39 percent attendance rate among compliers. Two-thirds
of this increase comes from students who would otherwise have attended two-year colleges. For
lower scoring students, retaking increases the graduation rate of their chosen college by 14 percentage points, driven entirely by movement from below to above median quality colleges. Retaking increases lower scoring students’ expected income at ages 32-34 by a statistically significant
$6,900, a nearly 20 percent increase relative to control compliers.
Conversely, we see little impact of retaking on higher scoring students’ college outcomes. For
such students, the estimated impacts of retaking on college enrollment and quality are generally
close to zero in magnitude and never statistically significant. One possible explanation is that,
based on their control complier mean outcomes, higher scoring students have less room for improvement of college outcomes. Over 80 percent of such students enroll in four-year colleges,
with at least 40 percent enrolling in colleges at or above the 80th percentile of graduation rate and
expected income.

3.3

Heterogeneity by Income and Race

Retaking improves college outcomes for low income and URM students much more than it does
for high income and non-URM students. For low income students, retaking increases four-year
college enrollment by 30 percentage points, nearly all of which substitutes for two-year college
enrollment. Low income students who retake attend colleges with 16 percentage points higher

18

graduation rates. They are roughly 30 percentage points more likely to attend colleges of above
median quality, as measured both by graduation rates and by expected income. We see little
evidence of improvement in college outcomes for high income students. Retaking has roughly
double the impact on the four-year college enrollment rates of URM students than of non-URM
students, raising the former by 20 percentage points and the latter by eight percentage points.
Heterogeneity in the impact of retaking on college by race is less clear than by income or initial
score.
The heterogeneous impacts of retaking by income are not simply explained by the fact that
low income students have lower initial scores on the SAT than do high income students. To show
this, Table 6 explores heterogeneity by income and race among only lower scoring students. Panel
A suggests that, even among only those with initially lower scores, retaking improves college
enrollment and quality much more for low income students than for high income students. Conversely, panel B suggests that heterogeneity in retaking’s impacts by race are largely explained by
racial differences in initial SAT scores. Among lower scoring students, retaking improves the fouryear college enrollment rates of both URM and non-URM students by about 30 percentage points.
Point estimates on college quality measures suggest, if anything, greater benefits of retaking for
non-URM students in this lower scoring sample.27

3.4

Robustness Checks and Degree Completion

The estimated impacts of retaking on college enrollment and quality are robust to changing the
empirical choices made in our baseline specification. Figures A.5 and A.6 show the sensitivity
to bandwidth choice of the estimated impacts for the entire sample and the three subsamples of
most interest. The magnitude and statistical significance of retaking’s impact on four-year college
enrollment and chosen college’s graduation rate are stable across bandwidths ranging from 30 to
100 SAT points, the maximum bandwidth usable between thresholds. Tables A.7 and A.8 show
that, across the whole sample and all subsamples, estimated impacts of retaking are robust to:
27

Table A.6 explores heterogeneity by income and race among only higher scoring students. Point estimates are
larger for low income students than high income students among higher scorers but the standard errors are too large
to infer much with respect to heterogeneity.

19

choice of bandwidth; flexibly controlling for gender, race, family income and parental education
through fully-interacted fixed effects; and choice to cluster standard errors by first SAT score or
not.
These enrollment impacts are likely not confounded by the use of round-number thresholds in
state public colleges’ admissions or financial aid processes. In theory, publicly known admissions
thresholds could confound our estimates given that Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith (2017) show,
in the context of Georgia’s public four-year colleges, that some students retake specifically to gain
admission to a particular college or sector. Though some states use SAT score thresholds to partly
determine admissions or merit aid eligibility, few of these states use round-number thresholds.
Furthermore, all such eligibility criteria that we could identify, including Georgia, are based on
scores from just the math and reading sections of the SAT, not the three section total score studied
here. In case we have overlooked an empirically important state program that might violate our
exclusion restriction, we generate estimated impacts excluding each of the 10 largest states in our
data one at a time. Table A.9 shows that no single state is responsible for our primary results, making it unlikely that state-specific policies are confounding our estimates of the impact of retaking
on college enrollment.
We cannot infer much about degree completion, as seen in Table A.10. We can observe six-year
completion rates for only the first three cohorts in the sample, which weakens our instruments for
the subgroups whose enrollment rates are positively affected. Though estimated impacts on degree completion are noisy, they are generally quite similar in magnitude to the estimated impacts
on expected completion based on college-level graduation rates, particularly for lower scoring
and low income students.

3.5

College Application Behavior

Retaking the SAT boosts four-year college enrollment rates, in large part by shifting enrollment
from two-year to four-year institutions. There are two primary explanations for why this might
occur. First, by increasing admissions-relevant SAT scores, retaking may strengthen students’
college applications and thus increase their chances of admission at four-year institutions that are

20

at least somewhat selective. Second, retaking may change the set of colleges to which students
apply. This might occur either because each retake allows students to send their SAT scores to up
to four colleges for free or because students’ higher scores change their expectations about where
they might be admissible.
Though we can not observe admissions decisions, we do observe application behavior as proxied by score sends. Table 7 shows instrumental variables estimates of the impact of retaking on
the number of colleges to which students send their SAT scores. We divide colleges into three categories corresponding to important enrollment margins observed earlier, those with graduation
rates below 50 percent, between 50 and 80 percent, and above 80 percent. The first two columns
show little evidence of changing application behavior to the colleges where we previously observed changed enrollment rates. Point estimates are generally small, negative and statistically
insignificant, particularly for the disadvantaged subsamples where we observe increased enrollment.28 This suggests that retaking shifts students from below average to above average colleges not by changing application behavior but by increasing the strength of applications students
would have sent anyway.
We observe reductions in applications to colleges with the highest graduation rates. We suspect this is not the impact of retaking. Instead, scoring below round-number thresholds may
discourage students from applying to highly selective colleges where they perceive such small
score differences can reduce their admissions chances (Bond et al., 2018). This fact is less relevant
to lower scoring students, who rarely apply to or enroll in highly selective colleges and for whom
retaking’s effects appear largely on the margin between non-selective two-year and less selective
four-year colleges. Reduced applications to highly selective colleges suggest, however, that our
instrument may cause us to underestimate the impact of retaking for the college choices of higher
28

In our data, each additional score send to colleges with graduation rates below 80 percent is associated with a 3.2
percentage point increase in the probability of attending a four-year college (controlling for a cubic in first SAT scores).
To understand how much reduced application numbers due to missing round number thresholds might downward
bias our enrollment estimates, we multiply this by the 0.1-0.6 decrease in score sends observed in total across those
first two columns for various subgroups. This suggests that reduced applications would drive only a one percentage
point decrease in overall enrollment, even less for disadvantaged subgroups, and less than a two percentage point decrease for advantaged subgroups. This would not materially affect our conclusions about retaking’s impact on college
enrollment.

21

scoring students.29

4

Gaps in SAT Scores and College Enrollment

4.1

SAT Score Gaps

We use the estimated impacts of retaking on SAT scores to model what portion of income and
racial gaps in admissions-relevant SAT scores would be closed by eliminating disparities in retake
rates. The main assumption required to model this is that the marginal students induced to retake by a future intervention would have similar test score gains to the average complier. This
assumption seems plausible given that compliers have similar test score gains as the average retaker, though newly induced retakers could differ in ability or willingness to study or otherwise
prepare for the second take.
Raising the retake rate of low income students to that of high income students would close
about nine percent of the admissions-relevant SAT score gap by income. To show this, we begin
with the fact from Table 2 that low income students are 20.6 percentage points less likely than
high income students to retake. Our estimates in Table 4 imply that retaking once increases the
superscores of low income students by 109 points. Inducing 20.6 percent of low income students to
retake once would thus boost the average superscores of low income students by 23 points (0.206
* 109). This represents nine percent of the 250 point gap in superscores between low and high
income students. This lower 227 point income gap we estimate under equalized retake rates is
remarkably close to the actual 226 point gap in first SAT scores.30 This suggests that our estimates
of the extent to which retaking contributes to income-based gaps in SAT scores is reasonable.
A similar exercise suggests that equalizing retakes rates by race would close about four percent of the gap in admissions-relevant SAT scores between URM and non-URM students. URM
29

Each additional score send to colleges with graduation rates above 80 percent is associated with a 2.6 percentage
point increase in the probability of attending a four-year college (controlling for a cubic in first SAT scores). Multiplying
this by the observed decreases in score sends to such colleges suggests that reduced applications would drive a four
percentage point decrease in overall enrollment, or a three percentage point decrease for low income and URM students.
The latter number is quite small relative to the estimated impact of retaking on those subgroups, again suggesting the
bias from this channel does not meaningfully alter our conclusions.
30
For detailed income and race gaps in retake rates and SAT scores, see Table A.11.

22

students are 11.3 percentage points less likely to retake than non-URM students and retaking once
increases the superscores of URM students by 94 points. Inducing 11.3 percent of URM students to
retake once would boost the average superscores of URM students by 11 points (0.113 * 94), which
represents about four percent of the 269 point gap in superscores between URM and non-URM
students. Again, this lower 258 point gap we estimate under equalized retake rates is fairly close
to the actual 252 point gap between URM and non-URM students in first SAT scores.

4.2

College Enrollment Gaps

We also use the estimated impacts of retaking to model what portion of income and racial gaps
in four-year college enrollment would be closed by eliminating disparities in retake rates. This
requires two assumptions. First, as with our SAT score gap analysis, we assume that the marginal
students induced to retake by an intervention would have similar enrollment gains as the average
complier here. Second, we ignore general equilibrium effects that might result from populationwide increases in retake rates. Such effects might come from colleges raising admission standards
in reaction to higher-scoring applicant pools or from high income and non-URM students increasing their retake rates or numbers of retakes due to increased competition in the admissions process. We begin by calculating the impact of equalizing retake rates on income and race gaps among
the SAT-taking population, which requires only the College Board data described previously. We
then bring in one additional data set, the National Center for Education Statistics’ High School
Longitudinal Study of 2009 (HSLS), to estimate the impact on closing gaps among all high school
graduates, the full population among which college enrollment gaps are typically estimated.
Raising the retake rates of low income students to that of high income students would close
about 18-25 percent of the income gap among SAT takers in four-year college enrollment. To show
this, we again begin with the fact from Table 2 that low income SAT-takers are 20.6 percentage
points less likely than high income SAT-takers to retake. Our estimates in Table 5 imply that the 1.4
retakes induced by round-number thresholds in low income SAT-takers increase their four-year
college enrollment rate by 29.9 percentage points. Inducing 20.6 percent of low income SAT-takers
to retake 1.4 times would thus boost the average four-year college enrollment rate of low income

23

SAT-takers by six percentage points (0.206 * 29.9). This represents 25 percent of the 24.9 percentage
point enrollment gap between low and high income SAT-takers.31 If the impact of retaking grows
linearly with the number of retakes, then inducing low income SAT-takers to retake once at the
same rate as high income SAT-takers would close the enrollment gap by about 18 percent (25/1.4).
Given that first retakes have larger impacts on SAT scores than subsequent retakes, the true impact
of inducing one additional retake in low income SAT-takers is likely somewhere between these 18
and 25 percent estimates.
We similarly estimate that equalizing retakes rates by race would close 10-14 percent of the
race gap among SAT-takers in four-year college enrollment. URM SAT-takers are 11.3 percentage points less likely to retake than non-URM SAT-takers and the 1.4 retakes induced by roundnumber thresholds increase their four-year college enrollment rate by 20.4 percentage points. Inducing 11.3 percent of URM SAT-takers to retake 1.4 times would boost the average four-year
college enrollment rate of URM SAT-takers by two percentage points (0.113 * 20.4). This represents about 14 percent of the 16.3 percentage point enrollment gap between URM and non-URM
SAT-takers. Our best per-retake estimate suggests inducing URM SAT-takers to retake once at the
same rate as non-URM SAT-takers would close the enrollment gap by about 10 percent (14/1.4).
The true impact of inducing one additional retake in URM SAT-takers is likely somewhere between these 10 and 14 percent estimates.
To compute how equalizing retakes rates among SAT-takers affect college enrollment gaps
among all high school graduates, we need to supplement our data with information on high school
graduates who do not take a college entrance exam. We use HSLS, which allows us to construct
a nationally representative sample of the high school class of 2012. This in turn provides us with
estimates of the fraction of students (by race and income) who do not take a college entrance exam
at all, as well as the four-year college enrollment rates of such students. HSLS does not distinguish
between students who take the SAT and the ACT, the other major college entrance exam, so we
make the additional assumption that estimates on the impact of SAT retaking would apply to
students retaking the ACT.
31

For detailed income and race gaps in four-year college enrollment, see Table A.11.

24

The extent to which equalizing retake rates closes college enrollment gaps shrinks by half after incorporating students who do not take college entrance exams, because we assume efforts to
increase retaking would not affect non-takers. Estimates from HSLS suggest that 58 percent of
low income high school graduates never take the SAT or ACT, compared to 39 percent of their
high income peers. Similarly, 57 percent of URM high school graduates never take college entrance exams, compared to 49 percent of their non-URM peers. Incorporating these facts, plus
information from HSLS on the college enrollment rates of these non-takers, implies that equalizing retake rates by income would shrink the income gap in four-year college enrollment among
all high school graduates by 10 percent. Similarly, equalizing retake rates by race would shrink
the racial gap in four-year college enrollment by seven percent.
These estimated enrollment gap closures among all high school graduates are roughly half the
size of those estimated within the SAT-taking population. That difference can be explained by two
facts documented in HSLS. First, only about half of high school graduates take a college entrance
exam. Second, race- and income-based college enrollment gaps among those who do not take
college entrance exams are fairly similar to the gaps among exam-takers. As a result, the effect of
equalizing retake rates on gaps as measured among all high school graduates is a nearly evenly
weighted average between the effect on the gap within the exam-taking population and zero, the
effect on the non-taking population of high school graduates.

5

Conclusion

Millions of American students take college entrance exams each year but only half choose to retake such exams. We provide the first causal evidence that retaking can substantially improve the
college enrollment outcomes of students, particularly for those who are initially low-scoring or
traditionally underrepresented in higher education. Retaking appears to improve college enrollment by increasing admissions-relevant test scores and likely improving the odds of admission.
Though we cannot identify the precise reason why retake scores tend to be higher than first scores,
our empirical strategy eliminates the possibility that such gains are driven solely by selection into
retaking of students who expect to improve. The specific channel through which retaking im25

proves scores does not affect the conclusion that many students who take the SAT only once would
benefit from taking it at least one more time. That meaningful portions of college enrollment gaps
by income and race could be closed by eliminating disparities in retake rates suggests that efforts
to encourage retaking among disadvantaged populations might be worth pursuing.32
How might additional retaking be encouraged? Intervening to encourage students to take their
first SAT at an earlier date seems particularly promising. Our data suggest that earlier first takes
are strongly associated with increased retaking rates. Low income and URM students are substantially more likely to first take the SAT in 12th grade rather than in the 11th grade, at which point
they have little opportunity to retake prior to college application deadlines. Encouraging earlier
first takes would give students additional time to assess the strength of their college applications
and retake the SAT if they thought it helpful.
Intervening to make retakes less costly might also be effective. Our descriptive evidence is
consistent with testing fees discouraging retaking, so that efforts to lower such fees or improve
take-up rates of fee waivers might be fruitful. Many low income students do not use the available
fee waiver. In our data, 43 percent of students with self-reported family income under $30,000
do not use a fee waiver. Retake rates might be improved by making the fee waiver application
process more transparent or by sending automated reminders that retakes are free for those who
used a fee waiver on the first take. Financial barriers cannot, however, fully explain low retaking
rates given that 53 percent of students who use a fee waiver on their first take do not then retake,
even though that second take would be free.
A lack of clarity about the test-taking and admissions processes suggests that informational
campaigns could boost retaking rates. Evidence from web searches suggest that many students
do not know whether they can retake the SAT or do not understand the potential benefits of
retaking, particularly if colleges’ use of multiple scores in admissions is unclear. Typing “retaking
the SAT is” into Google yields two auto-complete suggestions: “Is retaking the SAT bad?” and “Is
it worth retaking the SAT?”, suggesting that these are two common questions students have about
32
An alternative way of equalizing retake rates is to prohibit retaking entirely and limit all students to one SAT
attempt. We do not focus on this alternative because increasing the stakes associated with any college entrance exam
would generate substantial opposition and is thus unlikely to be implemented. It would also likely generate substantial
behavioral changes among test-takers, the effects of which would be hard to predict.

26

retaking. Typing “retake SAT” into Google Trends shows the top related query is “Can you retake
the SAT?”, implying that some students are unclear about whether retaking is even an option.33
Much more research could be done on the phenomenon of retaking and the college admissions
processes that incentivize it. We have no evidence on interventions designed to increase retaking
rates and retaking is very rarely the primary focus of research papers.34 We also know little about
how or why colleges choose to admit students on the basis of their entire test score history, their
single highest score on a given take, or their highest combined score across takes. Such institutional decisions bear directly on students’ incentives to retake college entrance exams. Anecdotal
evidence from admissions officers suggests that college rankings publications incentivize colleges
to admit students on the basis of superscores, mechanically raising that component of the ranking. Research to study individual colleges’ incentives to adopt one scheme over another would be
helpful, given that Vigdor and Clotfelter (2003) find the most common choice made by colleges is
also “the costliest, least accurate, and most biased” among all available options.
Finally, the large retaking benefits we document are partial equilibrium effects comparing current retakers to non-retakers. Whether the general equilibrium effects of policies to broadly increase retaking rates resemble these estimates depends in part on whether the supply of college
slots is fixed (Krishna, Lychagin and Robles, 2015). Evidence suggests that the postsecondary sector is often slow to react to changing demand for college education, in part because public funding
lags such changes (Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010, 2012; Kelly, 2016). If colleges do not expand enrollment, then retaking changes which students gain admission to and enroll in college
but not how many. If enrollment expands faster than per-pupil funding, such additional enrollment may not translate into degree completion (Bound and Turner, 2007; Deming and Walters,
2017). The net impact of interventions to increase retaking rates depends heavily on the broader
landscape of higher education policy.

33

Both Google queries were conducted on July 16, 2018.
Google Scholar searches for papers with “retaking” or “retake” and “SAT”, “ACT”, or “college” in the title yield no
peer-reviewed academic articles on the topic other than Vigdor and Clotfelter (2003).
34

27

References
Abadie, Alberto. 2003. “Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response
models.” Journal of Econometrics, 113(2): 231–263.
Abadie, Alberto, Joshua Angrist, and Guido Imbens. 2002. “Instrumental variables estimates of
the effect of subsidized training on the quantiles of trainee earnings.” Econometrica, 70(1): 91–
117.
Allen, Eric J., Patricia M. Dechow, Devin G. Pope, and George Wu. 2017. “Reference-Dependent
Preferences: Evidence from Marathon Runners.” Management Science, 63(6): 1657–1672.
Angrist, Joshua D, Sarah R Cohodes, Susan M Dynarski, Parag A Pathak, and Christopher R
Walters. 2016. “Stand and deliver: Effects of Boston’s charter high schools on college preparation, entry, and choice.” Journal of Labor Economics, 34(2): 275–318.
Bond, Timothy N, George Bulman, Xiaoxiao Li, and Jonathan Smith. 2018. “Updating human
capital decisions: Evidence from SAT score shocks and college applications.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 36(3): 807–839.
Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2007. “Cohort crowding: How resources affect collegiate attainment.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(5): 877–899.
Bound, John, Michael F Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why have college completion
rates declined? An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 129–157.
Bound, John, Michael F Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Increasing time to baccalaureate
degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy, 7(4): 375–424.
Bowman, Nicholas A, and Michael N Bastedo. 2017. “What Role May Admissions Office Diversity and Practices Play in Equitable Decisions?” Research in Higher Education, 1–18.
Bulman, George. 2015. “The Effect of Access to College Assessments on Enrollment and Attainment.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7: 1–36.
Busse, Meghan R, Nicola Lacetera, Devin G Pope, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Justin R Sydnor. 2013.
“Estimating the Effect of Salience in Wholesale and Retail Car Markets.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings, 103: 575–579.
Canaan, Serena, and Pierre Mouganie. 2018. “Returns to education quality for low-skilled students: Evidence from a discontinuity.” Journal of Labor Economics, 36(2): 395–436.
Chetty, Raj. 2015. “Behavioral economics and public policy: A pragmatic perspective.” The American Economic Review, 105(5): 1–33.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017. “Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 23618.

28

Cohodes, Sarah R, and Joshua S Goodman. 2014. “Merit aid, college quality, and college completion: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an in-kind subsidy.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 6(4): 251–285.
Deming, David, and Chris Walters. 2017. “The impacts of price and spending subsidies on US
postsecondary attainment.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23736.
Foellmi, Reto, Stefan Legge, and Lukas Schmid. 2016. “Do Professionals Get It Right? Limited
Attention and Risk-taking Behaviour.” The Economic Journal, 126(592): 724–755.
Frisancho, Veronica, Kala Krishna, Sergey Lychagin, and Cemile Yavas. 2016. “Better luck next
time: Learning through retaking.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 125: 120–135.
Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. 2017. “Access to 4-Year Public Colleges and Degree Completion.” Journal of Labor Economics, 35(3): 829–867.
Goodman, Sarena. 2016. “Learning from the Test: Raising Selective College Enrollment by Providing Information.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98: 671–684.
Hurwitz, Michael, Jonathan Smith, Sunny Niu, and Jessica Howell. 2015. “The Maine Question:
How Is 4-Year College Enrollment Affected by Mandatory College Entrance Exams?” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37: 138–159.
Hyman, Joshua. 2017. “ACT for All: The Effect of Mandatory College Entrance Exams on Postsecondary Attainment and Choice.” Education Finance and Policy, 12: 281–311.
Kelly, Andrew P. 2016. “The Supply Side of College Match.” In Matching Students to Opportunity:
Expanding College Choice, Access, and Quality. , ed. Andrew P Kelly, Jessica S Howell and Carolyn
Sattin-Bajaj, Chapter 5, 99–119. Cambridge, MA:Harvard Education Press.
Klasik, Daniel. 2013. “The ACT of Enrollment: The College Enrollment Effects of State-Required
College Entrance Exam Testing.” Educational Researcher, 42: 151–160.
Krishna, Kala, Sergey Lychagin, and Verónica Frisancho Robles. 2015. “Retaking in High Stakes
Exams: Is Less More?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21640.
Lacetera, Nicola, Devin G Pope, and Justin R Sydnor. 2012. “Heuristic Thinking and Limited
Attention in the Car Market.” The American Economic Review, 102: 2206–2236.
Lavecchia, Adam M, Heidi Liu, Philip Oreopoulos, et al. 2016. “Behavioral Economics of Education.” Handbook of the Economics of Education, 5: 1–74.
Lee, David S, and David Card. 2008. “Regression discontinuity inference with specification error.”
Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 655–674.
Levitt, Steven D, John A List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. 2016. “The behavioralist
goes to school: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve educational performance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(4): 183–219.
McFarland, Joel, and Bill Hussar. 2018. “The Condition of Education 2018.” National Center for
Education Statistics.
29

Page, Lindsay C, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2016. “Improving college access in the United States:
Barriers and policy responses.” Economics of Education Review, 51: 4–22.
Pallais, Amanda. 2015. “Small differences that matter: Mistakes in applying to college.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 33(2): 493–520.
Pope, Devin, and Uri Simonsohn. 2011. “Round numbers as goals: Evidence from baseball, SAT
takers, and the lab.” Psychological science, 22(1): 71–79.
Smith, Jonathan. 2018. “The Sequential College Application Process.” Education Finance and Policy,
13(4): 545–575.
Staiger, Douglas, and James H Stock. 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 557–586.
Vigdor, Jacob L, and Charles T Clotfelter. 2003. “Retaking the SAT.” The Journal of Human Resources, 38: 1–33.
Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. “The returns to college admission for academically marginal students.” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 711–754.

30

0

0

.1

.2

Density

Retook SAT
.3
.4

.5

.6

.7

.05

Figure 1: Round Number Thresholds and SAT Retaking

600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400

First SAT score
Notes: Shown above are average SAT retaking rates as a function of students’ first SAT scores. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 with valid math, reading
and writing scores, and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. The dashed line
shows the density of observations.

31

0.59

Retook SAT

0.60

Figure 2: Retake Rates Averaged across All Thresholds

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

Distance of first SAT score to nearest multiple of 100
Notes: Shown above are average SAT retaking rates as a function of students’ first SAT score
distance from the nearest multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high
school classes of 2006-14 with valid math, reading and writing scores, and who took their first
SAT by November of senior year.

32

40

0

Estimated discontinuity in retake rates

.12

Figure 3: Retaking Effects at Each Threshold

700

800

900

1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300

Notes: Shown above are estimated discontinuities in retaking due to one’s first SAT score falling
below a given multiple of 100. Estimates come from the local linear model described in the first
stage Equation 1 but run separately for each threshold.

33

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Impact of retaking on superscores

Figure 4: Retaking and Admissions-Relevant SAT Scores

1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300

Threshold near first SAT score
Notes: Shown above are instrumental variables estimates at each threshold of the impact of retaking on SAT superscores. Estimates come from the instrumental variable model described in
Equation 2 but run separately for each threshold. The lowest thresholds (700-900) are omitted for
scaling purposes.

34

1.25
1
.75
.5
.25
0
-.25
-.5

Impact of retaking on 4-year college enrollment

Figure 5: Retaking and Four-Year College Enrollment

1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300

Threshold near first SAT score
Notes: Shown above are instrumental variables estimates at each threshold of the impact of retaking on four-year college enrollment. Estimates come from the instrumental variable model
described in Equation 2 but run separately for each threshold. The lowest thresholds (700-900) are
omitted for scaling purposes.

35

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Regression discontinuity sample
All
students
(1)

All
students
(2)

Lower
scoring
(3)

Low
income
(4)

URM
(5)

0.53
0.56
0.27
0.11
0.21
0.20

0.54
0.58
0.24
0.11
0.19
0.18

0.56
0.50
0.34
0.09
0.23
0.25

0.59
0.37
0.43
0.14
1.00
0.44

0.57
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.35
0.46

1475
1531
0.54
1.74
12.4

1500
1562
0.61
1.82
13.5

1319
1376
0.56
1.76
12.6

1391
1442
0.53
1.69
12.4

1328
1378
0.56
1.70
12.3

0.57
0.18
0.45
47.0

0.61
0.17
0.48
48.8

0.51
0.23
0.39
41.5

0.51
0.21
0.39
43.4

0.52
0.21
0.38
43.7

13,656,612

11,990,736

7,576,646

2,233,159

3,067,528

(A) Demographics
Female
White
URM
Asian
Low income
Fee waiver
(B) SAT-taking
First SAT score
SAT superscore
Retook SAT
SAT takes
Months available to retake
(C) College enrollment
Four year college
Two year college
College’s graduation rate
College’s mean income (000s)
N

Notes: Listed above are mean values of key variables, with standard deviations of select variables in parentheses.
Column 1 consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing
scores. Columns 2-5 limit that sample to students who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Columns
3-5 respectively include students whose first score places them nearest to a threshold below 1600, those with family
income below $50,000, and underrepresented minority (Black, Hispanic, or Native American) students.

36

Table 2: Predictors of SAT Retaking
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.196∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.108∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.164∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.171∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.091∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.102∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.141∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.131∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.129∗∗∗
(0.016)

0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.108∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.042∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.033∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.021∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.022∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.026∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.048∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.044∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.05

0.05

0.20

(A) Income
Low income
Middle income

-0.206∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.112∗∗∗
(0.002)

(B) Race
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.119∗∗∗
(0.017)

URM
Asian
(C) Gender

0.033∗∗∗
(0.001)

Female
(D) SAT factors
First score (100s)
Fee waiver
Months to retake

R2

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.03

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by high school are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 ***
p<.01). Each column regresses an indicator for retaking the SAT on the variables shown. Low income students
are those with family incomes below $50,000 and middle income students have family incomes between $50,000
and $100,000. Underrepresented minority (URM) students are those who identify as Black, Hispanic, or Native
American. Months to retake represents the number of months between a student’s first SAT take and June of senior
year. All regressions include cohort fixed effects, as well as indicators for missing income or race, so that high
income and White students are the reference groups. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school
classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores. Each regression uses 13,656,612 observations.

37

Table 3: Round-Number Thresholds and SAT Retaking
All
students
(1)

Lower
scoring
(2)

Higher
scoring
(3)

Low
income
(4)

High
income
(5)

URM
(6)

Non-URM
(7)

Retook (FS)

0.009∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.010∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.010∗∗∗
(0.001)

Takes (RF)

0.012∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.012∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.011∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.013∗∗∗
(0.001)

Takes (IV)

1.331∗∗∗
(0.053)

1.438∗∗∗
(0.131)

1.275∗∗∗
(0.040)

1.436∗∗∗
(0.139)

1.383∗∗∗
(0.107)

1.394∗∗∗
(0.079)

1.284∗∗∗
(0.047)

180.6

144.1

82.9

71.3

83.4

89.6

149.8

1682
0.19
0.22

1265
0.33
0.35

1912
0.12
0.14

1520

1817

1440
0.42

1757
0.13

0.44

0.17

1499
0.19
0.26

1292
0.24
0.36

1774
0.12
0.12

1391

1599

1328
0.33

1569
0.14

0.45

0.12

14,368,305

8,201,406

6,166,899

2,677,386

2,661,691

3,677,470

9,810,789

First stage F-statistic
Complier characteristics
First SAT score
Low income
URM
Mean characteristics
First SAT score
Low income
URM
N

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient in the first two rows is an estimate of the impact of scoring below a multiple of 100
on retaking behavior. Each coefficient in the third row is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of initial
retaking on the total number of retakes, SAT retaking, where initial retaking is instrumented with an indicator for
scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who
had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Columns 2 and
3 split the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300
thresholds. Columns 4 and 5 split the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000.
Columns 6 and 7 split the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native
American) and those who are not (White or Asian). The bottom panels show complier and mean characteristics for
each subgroup.

38

Table 4: Retaking and SAT Scores
After two potential takes

After all takes

Most recent
total score
(1)

Superscore
(2)

Superscore
(3)

Superscore
increase of
150+ points
(4)

46.4∗∗∗
(7.9)

87.7∗∗∗
(5.0)

101.9∗∗∗
(5.9)

0.237∗∗∗
(0.035)

Lower scoring

90.7∗∗∗
(13.3)

114.1∗∗∗
(9.3)

136.1∗∗∗
(11.8)

0.438∗∗∗
(0.068)

Higher scoring

22.4∗∗
(9.0)

73.3∗∗∗
(5.3)

83.6∗∗∗
(5.4)

0.128∗∗∗
(0.035)

Low income

72.1∗∗∗
(16.3)

108.9∗∗∗
(12.2)

118.9∗∗∗
(15.5)

0.397∗∗∗
(0.088)

High income

39.4∗∗
(16.2)

81.4∗∗∗
(12.3)

99.5∗∗∗
(14.1)

0.168∗∗
(0.081)

URM

59.5∗∗∗
(15.5)

93.8∗∗∗
(11.6)

106.1∗∗∗
(13.0)

0.296∗∗∗
(0.072)

Non-URM

37.5∗∗∗
(9.2)

83.8∗∗∗
(6.1)

97.5∗∗∗
(6.8)

0.213∗∗∗
(0.042)

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is
instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the
high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds
and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes below
$50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black,
Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

39

40
-0.192∗∗
(0.077)
0.29
-0.032
(0.035)
0.11

0.084∗
(0.046)
0.71

-0.093
(0.071)
0.13

-0.238∗∗∗
(0.088)
0.25

0.020
(0.029)
0.04

-0.209∗∗
(0.081)
0.33

-0.060
(0.037)
0.15

0.204∗∗
(0.089)
0.55

0.025
(0.084)
0.76

0.299∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.51

0.014
(0.040)
0.82

0.329∗∗∗
(0.088)
0.39

0.125∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.67

0.046
(0.030)
0.57

0.074∗
(0.044)
0.43

0.004
(0.050)
0.62

0.155∗∗∗
(0.058)
0.40

0.021
(0.029)
0.65

0.138∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.32

0.062∗∗
(0.024)
0.53

0.066
(0.045)
0.66

0.097
(0.069)
0.47

0.044
(0.078)
0.72

0.308∗∗∗
(0.091)
0.43

0.038
(0.043)
0.76

0.182∗∗
(0.070)
0.34

0.088∗∗
(0.038)
0.61

-0.014
(0.037)
0.31

0.019
(0.050)
0.15

0.015
(0.079)
0.38

0.076
(0.073)
0.15

0.001
(0.038)
0.40

0.003
(0.050)
0.04

0.001
(0.030)
0.27

College’s graduation rate
Overall
>50%
>80%
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.543
(2.369)
57.20

-0.456
(3.186)
48.71

-1.821
(4.311)
61.02

3.242
(4.243)
47.66

-2.509
(2.941)
64.89

6.877∗∗∗
(2.561)
37.25

0.724
(2.104)
55.11

0.083
(0.053)
0.55

0.038
(0.072)
0.42

0.131
(0.083)
0.59

0.275∗∗∗
(0.102)
0.36

0.045
(0.053)
0.68

0.150∗
(0.077)
0.21

0.081∗
(0.044)
0.51

-0.028
(0.041)
0.33

-0.037
(0.050)
0.16

-0.066
(0.083)
0.35

0.027
(0.078)
0.21

-0.083∗
(0.047)
0.42

0.053
(0.051)
0.04

-0.036
(0.035)
0.29

College’s mean income
Overall
> $50,000
> $65,000
(6)
(7)
(8)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an
instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300
thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who
are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

Control complier mean

Non-URM

Control complier mean

URM

(D) By race/ethnicity

Control complier mean

High income

Control complier mean

Low income

(C) By income

Control complier mean

Higher scoring

Control complier mean

Lower scoring

(B) By initial score

Control complier mean

All

(A) All students

College type
Four-year
Two-year
(1)
(2)

Table 5: Retaking and College Enrollment

41
-0.287∗∗
(0.113)
0.40
-0.202∗∗
(0.099)
0.32

0.296∗∗∗
(0.110)
0.44

-0.319
(0.321)
0.49

-0.396∗∗∗
(0.130)
0.43

0.320∗∗
(0.137)
0.34

0.023
(0.355)
0.50

0.407∗∗
(0.169)
0.27

0.150∗∗
(0.067)
0.36

0.094
(0.066)
0.28

-0.079
(0.171)
0.44

0.171∗∗
(0.081)
0.26

0.200∗
(0.103)
0.39

0.116
(0.099)
0.28

-0.001
(0.325)
0.45

0.418∗∗∗
(0.114)
0.20

0.016
(0.085)
0.06

0.001
(0.056)
0.02

-0.019
(0.151)
0.05

0.009
(0.110)
0.03

College’s graduation rate
Overall
>50%
>80%
(3)
(4)
(5)

9.228∗∗
(4.434)
38.83

3.410
(3.885)
35.75

5.968
(9.187)
40.64

7.292
(4.994)
35.97

0.204
(0.126)
0.23

0.050
(0.103)
0.21

0.217
(0.273)
0.36

0.302∗∗
(0.145)
0.17

0.124
(0.084)
0.05

-0.020
(0.051)
0.03

0.278∗∗
(0.138)
0.02

0.054
(0.095)
0.04

College’s mean earnings
Overall
> $50,000
> $65,000
(6)
(7)
(8)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an
instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who took their first SAT by November of senior year and whose first score was
nearest to a threshold of at most 1500. Panel A splits the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel B splits the
sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

Control complier mean

Non-URM

Control complier mean

URM

(B) By race/ethnicity

Control complier mean

High income

Control complier mean

Low income

(A) By income

College type
Four-year
Two-year
(1)
(2)

Table 6: Retaking and College Enrollment among Lower Scoring Students

Table 7: Retaking and College Applications
Score sends,
by college graduation rate
0-50%
(1)

50-80%
(2)

80-100%
(3)

-0.161∗
(0.094)
0.67

-0.213
(0.183)
2.03

-1.654∗∗∗
(0.263)
3.15

-0.093
(0.222)
0.76

-0.059
(0.366)
2.03

-0.566
(0.375)
0.76

-0.198∗∗∗
(0.075)
0.63

-0.296
(0.198)
2.02

-2.241∗∗∗
(0.310)
4.47

-0.077
(0.325)
0.90

-0.242
(0.397)
2.13

-1.193∗∗
(0.578)
1.94

-0.242
(0.199)
0.58

-0.289
(0.345)
2.26

-1.777∗∗∗
(0.664)
4.15

-0.099
(0.263)
0.86

0.144
(0.384)
2.11

-1.237∗∗
(0.521)
2.01

-0.183∗
(0.094)
0.60

-0.387∗
(0.201)
2.05

-1.916∗∗∗
(0.293)
3.48

(A) All students
All
Control complier mean
(B) By initial score
Low scoring
Control complier mean
High scoring
Control complier mean
(C) By income
Low income
Control complier mean
High income
Control complier mean
(D) By race/ethnicity
URM
Control complier mean
Non-URM
Control complier mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is
instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the
high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds
and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes below
$50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black,
Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

42

0

Density

.0013

Figure A.1: Density of First SAT Scores

600

700

800

900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400

First SAT score
Notes: Shown above is the density of students’ first SAT scores. The sample consists of all SATtakers from the high school classes of 2006-14 with valid math, reading and writing scores, and
who took their first SAT by November of senior year.

43

0

URM

0

-1

-1

Low income

1

1

Figure A.2: Covariate Balance

10001100120013001400150016001700180019002000210022002300

Threshold near first SAT score

Threshold near first SAT score

1
0

Female

0

-1

-1

Mom or dad has B.A.

1

10001100120013001400150016001700180019002000210022002300

10001100120013001400150016001700180019002000210022002300

10001100120013001400150016001700180019002000210022002300

Threshold near first SAT score

Threshold near first SAT score

Notes: Shown above are estimated discontinuities in various demographic characteristics due to
one’s first SAT score falling below a given multiple of 100. Vertical lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. The lowest thresholds (700-900) are omitted for scaling purposes. The sample
consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 with valid math, reading and
writing scores, and who took their first SAT by November of senior year.

44

Figure A.3: Using the Prior SAT Scale

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
0

Retook SAT

(A) First take lacked writing section

400

500

600

700

800

900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600

First SAT score (math + reading)

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
0

Retook SAT

(B) First take had writing section

400

500

600

700

800

900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600

First SAT score (math + reading)

Notes: Shown above are average SAT retaking rates as a function of students’ first math plus
reading scores. The sample in panel A consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of
2004-6 with valid math and reading scores but not writing scores, and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. The sample in panel B consists of all SAT-takers from the high school
classes of 2006-14 with valid math, reading and writing scores, and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year.

45

Figure A.4: Individual Subject Scores

.6
.5
.4
.3

Retook SAT

.7

(A) Math score

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

700

800

700

800

First math score

.6
.5
.4
.3

Retook SAT

.7

(B) Reading score

200

300

400

500

600

First reading score

.6
.5
.4
.3

Retook SAT

.7

(C) Writing score

200

300

400

500

600

First writing score

Notes: Shown above are average SAT retaking rates as a function of students’ first scores on each
individual subject. The sample in all panels consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes
of 2006-14 with valid math, reading and writing scores, and who took their first SAT by November
of senior year.
46

Figure A.5: Bandwidth Robustness - Four-Year College Enrollment

40

50

60

70

80

.6
.4

90 100

30

50

60

70

80

90 100

(C) Low income students

(D) Under-represented minorities

50

60

70

80

90 100

.3
.2
.1
0

.6
.4
.2
0

40

.4

Bandwidth (SAT points)

-.2
30

40

Bandwidth (SAT points)

Impact of Retaking

30

Impact of Retaking

.2
0

.1

.2

Impact of Retaking

.3

(B) Low scorers

0

Impact of Retaking

(A) All students

30

Bandwidth (SAT points)

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

Bandwidth (SAT points)

Notes: The above figure shows instrumental variables estimates from Equation 2 of the impact of
retaking on four-year college enrollment across a variety of bandwidths.

47

Figure A.6: Bandwidth Robustness - College’s Graduation Rate

50

60

70

80

90 100

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

Bandwidth (SAT points)

(C) Low income students

(D) Under-represented minorities

50

60

70

80

90 100

-.05 0

Impact of Retaking

.2
.1
0

40

.05 .1 .15

Bandwidth (SAT points)

-.1
30

0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25

Impact of Retaking

.2
.15
.1
.05

40

.3

30

Impact of Retaking

(B) Low scorers

0

Impact of Retaking

(A) All students

30

Bandwidth (SAT points)

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

Bandwidth (SAT points)

Notes: The above figure shows instrumental variables estimates from Equation 2of the impact of
retaking on the graduation rate of college chosen across a variety of bandwidths.

48

Table A.1: Covariate Balance
Low
income
(1)

URM
(2)

Mom or dad
has B.A.
(3)

Female
(4)

Bandwidth = 40

-0.075∗
(0.043)

-0.012
(0.036)

0.058
(0.041)

-0.000
(0.047)

Bandwidth = 60

-0.052
(0.036)

-0.002
(0.034)

0.022
(0.038)

0.023
(0.045)

Bandwidth = 80

-0.051
(0.038)

0.005
(0.035)

0.030
(0.036)

0.023
(0.048)

Bandwidth = 100

-0.058
(0.039)

0.015
(0.038)

0.026
(0.039)

0.031
(0.046)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is
instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the
high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year.

49

Table A.2: Missing Round Number Thresholds and SAT Scores (Reduced Form)
Mean gain,
1st retake
(1)

Superscore gain
by 2nd take
(2)

Superscore
by last take
(3)

150+ point
increase
(4)

0.429∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.810∗∗∗
(0.055)

0.941∗∗∗
(0.063)

0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)

Lower scoring

0.528∗∗∗
(0.078)

0.664∗∗∗
(0.064)

0.792∗∗∗
(0.077)

0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)

Higher scoring

0.307∗∗∗
(0.110)

1.004∗∗∗
(0.098)

1.144∗∗∗
(0.112)

0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)

Low income

0.606∗∗∗
(0.152)

0.916∗∗∗
(0.139)

1.000∗∗∗
(0.157)

0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)

High income

0.409∗∗
(0.163)

0.844∗∗∗
(0.139)

1.032∗∗∗
(0.155)

0.002∗∗
(0.001)

URM

0.470∗∗∗
(0.132)

0.741∗∗∗
(0.116)

0.838∗∗∗
(0.130)

0.002∗∗∗
(0.001)

Non-URM

0.372∗∗∗
(0.080)

0.831∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.967∗∗∗
(0.074)

0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient is a reduced form estimate of the impact of one’s first SAT score missing a multiple of
100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and
writing scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students
with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits
the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into
students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White
or Asian).

50

Table A.3: Retaking and SAT Scores
Raised score in
Math
Reading
Writing
(1)
(2)
(3)

Raised score in at least
1 section
2 sections
3 sections
(4)
(5)
(6)

(A) All students
0.526∗∗∗
(0.044)

0.625∗∗∗
(0.047)

0.573∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.920∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.602∗∗∗
(0.049)

0.203∗∗∗
(0.034)

Lower scoring

0.531∗∗∗
(0.091)

0.815∗∗∗
(0.090)

0.757∗∗∗
(0.070)

1.017∗∗∗
(0.039)

0.758∗∗∗
(0.091)

0.327∗∗∗
(0.066)

Higher scoring

0.525∗∗∗
(0.047)

0.521∗∗∗
(0.051)

0.474∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.867∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.517∗∗∗
(0.057)

0.135∗∗∗
(0.039)

Low income

0.567∗∗∗
(0.084)

0.557∗∗∗
(0.112)

0.538∗∗∗
(0.094)

0.927∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.529∗∗∗
(0.112)

0.207∗∗∗
(0.073)

High income

0.568∗∗∗
(0.082)

0.611∗∗∗
(0.093)

0.622∗∗∗
(0.103)

1.013∗∗∗
(0.046)

0.602∗∗∗
(0.091)

0.185∗∗
(0.077)

URM

0.510∗∗∗
(0.087)

0.670∗∗∗
(0.086)

0.561∗∗∗
(0.084)

0.962∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.577∗∗∗
(0.102)

0.203∗∗∗
(0.068)

Non-URM

0.519∗∗∗
(0.053)

0.607∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.559∗∗∗
(0.053)

0.899∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.593∗∗∗
(0.054)

0.194∗∗∗
(0.039)

All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 ***
p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of retaking the SAT once, where retaking
is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the
high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds
and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes below
$50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black,
Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

51

Table A.4: Robustness Checks: SAT Superscore
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

102.9∗∗∗
(6.7)

101.9∗∗∗
(5.9)

98.9∗∗∗
(6.2)

96.7∗∗∗
(6.5)

101.7∗∗∗
(5.9)

101.9∗∗∗
(6.8)

Low scoring

130.0∗∗∗
(10.7)

136.1∗∗∗
(11.8)

132.7∗∗∗
(16.3)

120.3∗∗∗
(15.2)

137.4∗∗∗
(11.7)

136.1∗∗∗
(15.0)

High scoring

85.2∗∗∗
(7.0)

83.6∗∗∗
(5.4)

83.1∗∗∗
(4.6)

84.4∗∗∗
(5.4)

82.2∗∗∗
(5.4)

83.6∗∗∗
(6.9)

Low income

102.6∗∗∗
(17.1)

118.9∗∗∗
(15.5)

124.4∗∗∗
(15.5)

111.7∗∗∗
(15.7)

117.2∗∗∗
(15.9)

118.9∗∗∗
(16.4)

High income

87.6∗∗∗
(16.1)

99.5∗∗∗
(14.1)

93.9∗∗∗
(13.9)

97.2∗∗∗
(14.0)

99.8∗∗∗
(14.4)

99.5∗∗∗
(14.7)

URM

101.3∗∗∗
(13.4)

106.1∗∗∗
(13.0)

103.8∗∗∗
(12.9)

97.6∗∗∗
(13.4)

106.0∗∗∗
(12.7)

106.1∗∗∗
(14.1)

Non-URM

98.6∗∗∗
(8.0)

97.5∗∗∗
(6.8)

95.2∗∗∗
(6.9)

94.8∗∗∗
(7.0)

96.9∗∗∗
(7.0)

97.5∗∗∗
(7.7)

40
N
Y

60
N
Y

80
N
Y

100
N
Y

60
Y
Y

60
N
N

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Bandwidth
Covariates
Clustered standard errors

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors (clustered by first SAT score in all but the final column) are in
parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT
retaking on SAT superscore, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing
scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first
scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample
into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who
are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

52

53

0.0002
(0.0005)

Higher scoring

0.0003
(0.0009)

High income

-0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0008∗
(0.0004)

Non-URM

0.0005
(0.0003)

0.0006
(0.0004)

0.0000
(0.0005)

0.0013∗∗
(0.0005)

0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0008∗∗∗
(0.0002)

0.0006∗∗∗
(0.0002)

0.0007
(0.0004)

0.0008
(0.0006)

0.0005
(0.0008)

0.0026∗∗∗
(0.0008)

0.0005
(0.0006)

0.0011∗∗∗
(0.0004)

0.0008∗∗
(0.0003)

-0.0001
(0.0004)

0.0001
(0.0004)

0.0002
(0.0008)

0.0006
(0.0006)

0.0000
(0.0005)

0.0000
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0003)

College’s graduation rate
Overall
>50%
>80%
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.0054
(0.0235)

-0.0036
(0.0251)

-0.0189
(0.0445)

0.0273
(0.0363)

-0.0343
(0.0400)

0.0400∗∗∗
(0.0144)

0.0067
(0.0194)

0.0008
(0.0005)

0.0003
(0.0006)

0.0014
(0.0009)

0.0023∗∗∗
(0.0009)

0.0006
(0.0007)

0.0009∗
(0.0004)

0.0007∗
(0.0004)

-0.0003
(0.0004)

-0.0003
(0.0004)

-0.0007
(0.0009)

0.0002
(0.0007)

-0.0011∗
(0.0006)

0.0003
(0.0003)

-0.0003
(0.0003)

College’s mean earnings
Overall
> $50,000
> $65,000
(6)
(7)
(8)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is a reduced
form estimate of the impact of one’s first SAT score missing a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14
who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with
first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes
below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American)
and those who are not (White or Asian).

-0.0015∗∗
(0.0006)

0.0016∗∗
(0.0007)

-0.0010
(0.0007)

-0.0020∗∗∗
(0.0007)

0.0003
(0.0004)

-0.0012∗∗
(0.0005)

-0.0006
(0.0003)

URM

(D) By race/ethnicity

0.0025∗∗∗
(0.0009)

Low income

(C) By income

0.0019∗∗∗
(0.0005)

0.0012∗∗∗
(0.0004)

Lower scoring

(B) By initial score

All

(A) All students

College type
Four-year
Two-year
(1)
(2)

Table A.5: Missing Round Number Thresholds and College Enrollment (Reduced Form)

54
0.006
(0.043)
0.81

0.026
(0.079)
0.88

0.026
(0.058)
0.83

0.123
(0.120)
0.81

0.029
(0.027)
0.03

-0.034
(0.078)
0.10

-0.041
(0.043)
0.04

-0.026
(0.098)
0.03

0.008
(0.031)
0.64

0.052
(0.043)
0.66

0.027
(0.047)
0.66

0.107
(0.077)
0.60

0.017
(0.046)
0.76

0.080
(0.080)
0.76

0.056
(0.056)
0.78

0.130
(0.130)
0.71

-0.023
(0.040)
0.40

0.063
(0.094)
0.36

0.032
(0.093)
0.45

0.138
(0.093)
0.32

College’s graduation rate
Overall
>50%
>80%
(3)
(4)
(5)

-2.573
(2.724)
64.02

-5.219
(5.161)
69.30

-3.616
(5.044)
66.04

-3.675
(7.273)
63.03

0.039
(0.055)
0.66

0.043
(0.087)
0.76

0.116
(0.079)
0.65

0.213
(0.131)
0.59

-0.082∗
(0.046)
0.43

-0.044
(0.102)
0.37

-0.145
(0.100)
0.43

-0.032
(0.133)
0.44

College’s mean earnings
Overall
> $50,000
> $65,000
(6)
(7)
(8)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an
instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who took their first SAT by November of senior year and whose first score was
nearest to a threshold of at least 1600. Panel A splits the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel B splits the
sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

Control complier mean

Non-URM

Control complier mean

URM

(B) By race/ethnicity

Control complier mean

High income

Control complier mean

Low income

(A) By income

College type
Four-year
Two-year
(1)
(2)

Table A.6: Retaking and College Enrollment among High Scorers

Table A.7: Robustness Checks: Four-Year College Enrollment
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.135∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.125∗∗∗
(0.042)

0.113∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.111∗∗
(0.045)

0.115∗∗∗
(0.042)

0.125∗∗
(0.051)

Low scoring

0.261∗∗∗
(0.081)

0.329∗∗∗
(0.088)

0.314∗∗∗
(0.105)

0.254∗∗
(0.1)

0.314∗∗∗
(0.089)

0.329∗∗∗
(0.113)

High scoring

0.049
(0.052)

0.014
(0.04)

0.020
(0.038)

0.036
(0.038)

0.016
(0.041)

0.014
(0.049)

Low income

0.123
(0.106)

0.299∗∗∗
(0.109)

0.272∗∗
(0.122)

0.281∗∗
(0.112)

0.314∗∗∗
(0.112)

0.299∗∗
(0.137)

High income

-0.119
(0.101)

0.025
(0.084)

0.164∗
(0.09)

0.116
(0.089)

0.014
(0.083)

0.025
(0.1)

URM

0.178∗
(0.094)

0.204∗∗
(0.089)

0.159
(0.097)

0.156
(0.095)

0.209∗∗
(0.089)

0.204∗
(0.121)

Non-URM

0.102∗
(0.052)

0.084∗
(0.046)

0.084∗
(0.047)

0.086∗
(0.045)

0.072
(0.045)

0.084
(0.057)

40
N
Y

60
N
Y

80
N
Y

100
N
Y

60
Y
Y

60
N
N

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Bandwidth
Covariates
Clustered standard errors

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors (clustered by first SAT score in all but the final column) are in
parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of
SAT retaking on four-year college enrollment, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a
multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math,
reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into
students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C
splits the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample
into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not
(White or Asian).

55

Table A.8: Robustness Checks: College’s Graduation Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.065∗∗
(0.027)

0.062∗∗
(0.024)

0.054∗∗
(0.026)

0.050∗
(0.026)

0.052∗∗
(0.024)

0.062∗∗
(0.031)

Low scoring

0.088∗∗
(0.041)

0.138∗∗∗
(0.042)

0.118∗∗
(0.053)

0.086
(0.053)

0.126∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.138∗∗
(0.061)

High scoring

0.049
(0.037)

0.021
(0.029)

0.026
(0.027)

0.031
(0.027)

0.018
(0.029)

0.021
(0.035)

Low income

0.052
(0.059)

0.155∗∗∗
(0.058)

0.151∗∗
(0.064)

0.14∗∗
(0.059)

0.157∗∗∗
(0.059)

0.155∗∗
(0.078)

High income

-0.072
(0.061)

0.004
(0.05)

0.089∗
(0.053)

0.060
(0.051)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.004
(0.065)

URM

0.038
(0.045)

0.074∗
(0.044)

0.054
(0.053)

0.043
(0.053)

0.076∗
(0.044)

0.074
(0.066)

Non-URM

0.062∗
(0.035)

0.046
(0.030)

0.046
(0.031)

0.045
(0.029)

0.036
(0.030)

0.046
(0.036)

40
N
Y

60
N
Y

80
N
Y

100
N
Y

60
Y
Y

60
N
N

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Bandwidth
Covariates
Clustered standard errors

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors (clustered by first SAT score in all but the final column) are in
parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT
retaking on the chosen college’s graduation rate, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below
a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math,
reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into
students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C
splits the sample into students with family incomes below $50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample
into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black, Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not
(White or Asian).

56

57
2,091,030

0.086∗∗∗
(0.030)
0.132∗∗∗
(0.048)
0.148∗∗
(0.068)
0.110∗
(0.059)

0.139∗∗∗
(0.049)
0.266∗∗∗
(0.097)
0.221
(0.134)
0.185∗
(0.101)

CA
(1)

1,544,628

0.044∗
(0.025)
0.127∗∗∗
(0.047)
0.134∗
(0.068)
0.087∗∗
(0.044)

0.110∗∗
(0.044)
0.351∗∗∗
(0.100)
0.288∗∗
(0.126)
0.262∗∗∗
(0.090)

NY
(2)

1,305,635

0.066∗∗
(0.027)
0.157∗∗∗
(0.045)
0.162∗∗
(0.064)
0.075
(0.052)

0.122∗∗∗
(0.045)
0.339∗∗∗
(0.094)
0.281∗∗
(0.108)
0.209∗∗
(0.103)

TX
(3)

983,854

0.060∗∗
(0.026)
0.143∗∗∗
(0.049)
0.168∗∗∗
(0.063)
0.064
(0.044)

0.129∗∗∗
(0.045)
0.366∗∗∗
(0.098)
0.350∗∗∗
(0.117)
0.200∗∗
(0.094)

PA
(4)

903,840

0.068∗∗∗
(0.024)
0.172∗∗∗
(0.043)
0.132∗∗
(0.061)
0.084∗
(0.048)

0.142∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.395∗∗∗
(0.082)
0.263∗∗
(0.106)
0.246∗∗
(0.096)

FL
(5)

818,201

0.064∗∗
(0.025)
0.131∗∗∗
(0.045)
0.167∗∗∗
(0.059)
0.086∗
(0.044)

0.132∗∗∗
(0.043)
0.321∗∗∗
(0.093)
0.305∗∗∗
(0.110)
0.236∗∗
(0.098)

NJ
(6)

609,131

0.058∗∗
(0.024)
0.127∗∗∗
(0.041)
0.173∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.068∗
(0.041)

0.117∗∗∗
(0.043)
0.299∗∗∗
(0.087)
0.321∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.198∗∗
(0.082)

MA
(7)

559,704

0.066∗∗∗
(0.025)
0.147∗∗∗
(0.044)
0.166∗∗∗
(0.060)
0.080∗
(0.045)

0.135∗∗∗
(0.044)
0.347∗∗∗
(0.092)
0.323∗∗∗
(0.113)
0.228∗∗
(0.092)

GA
(8)

550,609

0.053∗∗
(0.024)
0.132∗∗∗
(0.041)
0.165∗∗∗
(0.057)
0.072∗
(0.043)

0.120∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.324∗∗∗
(0.086)
0.328∗∗∗
(0.108)
0.205∗∗
(0.089)

VA
(9)

510,839

0.063∗∗∗
(0.024)
0.139∗∗∗
(0.044)
0.171∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.060
(0.046)

0.123∗∗∗
(0.042)
0.324∗∗∗
(0.092)
0.310∗∗∗
(0.114)
0.168∗
(0.091)

NC
(10)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an
instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The
sample consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Each column excludes a single state from the sample.

N excluded (all)

URM

Low income

Low scoring

All

(B) College’s grad. rate

URM

Low income

Low scoring

All

(A) Four-year college

State excluded:

Table A.9: Robustness to Exclusion of Individual States

Table A.10: Retaking and College Completion
Maximum
SAT score
(1)

Four-year
college
(2)

College’s
grad. rate
(3)

Earned B.A.
in 6 years
(4)

102.6∗∗∗
(12.4)

0.160
(0.118)

0.058
(0.066)

0.016
(0.092)

Lower scoring

139.9∗∗∗
(28.4)

0.281
(0.282)

0.078
(0.129)

0.078
(0.209)

Higher scoring

85.8∗∗∗
(12.5)

0.096
(0.115)

0.043
(0.076)

-0.017
(0.095)

Low income

167.1∗∗∗
(29.8)

0.351∗
(0.193)

0.216∗
(0.120)

0.267
(0.208)

High income

70.2∗∗∗
(18.4)

-0.002
(0.189)

-0.109
(0.120)

-0.107
(0.156)

URM

93.3∗∗∗
(33.4)

-0.040
(0.257)

-0.053
(0.163)

-0.165
(0.264)

Non-URM

96.6∗∗∗
(13.2)

0.164
(0.127)

0.066
(0.082)

0.033
(0.090)

(A) All students
All
(B) By initial score

(C) By income

(D) By race/ethnicity

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by first SAT score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05
*** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of SAT retaking, where retaking is
instrumented with indicators for scoring below a multiple of 100. The sample consists of all SAT-takers from the
high school classes of 2006-08 who had valid math, reading and writing scores and who took their first SAT by
November of senior year. Panel B splits the sample into students with first scores nearest to the 700-1500 thresholds
and those nearest to the 1600-2300 thresholds. Panel C splits the sample into students with family incomes below
$50,000 and above $100,000. Panel D splits the sample into students who are underrepresented minorities (Black,
Hispanic or Native American) and those who are not (White or Asian).

58

Table A.11: Income and Race Gaps

Retook
(1)

First
SAT score
(2)

Final
superscore
(3)

Four-year
college
(4)

-0.206∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.112∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.638

-226∗∗∗
(6)
-103∗∗∗
(2)
1589

-250∗∗∗
(7)
-117∗∗∗
(2)
1654

-0.249∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.115∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.704

-0.113∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.550

-252∗∗∗
(2)
1550

-269∗∗∗
(2)
1603

-0.163∗∗∗
(0.008)
0.640

(A) Income
Low income
Middle income
High income mean
(B) Race
URM
Non-URM mean

Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by high school are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 ***
p<.01). Each column regresses the listed outcome on the demographic group indicators. All regressions include
cohort fixed effects, as well as indicators for missing income or race, so that high income and non-URM students are
the reference groups. Below each column is the mean outcome for the reference group in each panel. The sample
consists of all SAT-takers from the high school classes of 2006-14 who had valid math, reading and writing scores.
Each regression uses 13,656,612 observations.

59

