                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INVESTING OUTSIDE THE BOX:
           EVIDENCE FROM ALTERNATIVE VEHICLES IN PRIVATE CAPITAL

                                              Josh Lerner
                                            Antoinette Schoar
                                               Jason Mao
                                             Nan R. Zhang

                                          Working Paper 24941
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w24941


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2018




We received helpful comments from participants at the Fiduciary Investments Symposium and the
London Business School Private Equity Symposium, as well as Sabrina Howell, Mark Kritzman, Filippo
Mezzanotti, and Andrea Rossi (discussant). We thank Arnold May and Robin Painter of Proskauer
Rose for helpful conversations about fund structuring. We thank Will Kinlaw and J.R. Lowry for their
support of this research. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research, the Private Capital Research
Institute, and the Smith-Richardson Foundation provided financial support for this project. Lerner
and Schoar have advised institutional investors in private capital funds, private capital groups, and/or
governments designing policies relevant to private capital. State Street provides a variety of custodial
and financial services for limited and general partners in private capital funds, as well as offering private
capital financial products. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed in this material
are the views of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the official views of State Street Global
Exchange, State Street Corporation and its affiliates, and the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Jason Mao, and Nan R. Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investing Outside the Box: Evidence from Alternative Vehicles in Private Capital
Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Jason Mao, and Nan R. Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24941
August 2018, Revised September 2018
JEL No. G1,G2

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper undertakes a comprehensive analysis of alternative investment vehicles in private equity,
using unexplored custodial data about 112 limited partners over four decades. We differentiate between
alternative vehicles that are GP-directed versus those where the LP has some discretion. Of the roughly
5500 distinct investments made by the LPs in our sample, 32% of investments (17% of capital commitments)
were in such alternative vehicles; the allocation increased by more than 10 percentage points over
the last decade. Alternative vehicles were far more likely to be offered by larger and North America-based
buyout funds. The average performance of these alternative vehicles lagged that of the GPs’ corresponding
main funds. The best LP performance was among endowments, private pensions, and insurers. Finally,
LPs with better past performance invested in alternative vehicles with better performance, even after
conditioning on the GPs’ past records. This result suggests that bargaining between GPs and LPs leads
to gradation in investment performance based on the parties’ outside options.


Josh Lerner                                         Jason Mao
Harvard Business School                             State Street Global Exchange
Rock Center 214                                     100 Summer Street
Soldiers Field                                      Boston, MA 02110
Boston, MA 02163                                    XMao@statestreet.com
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu                                     Nan R. Zhang
                                                    State Street Global Exchange
Antoinette Schoar                                   140 Mt Auburn Street
MIT Sloan School of Management                      Cambridge, MA 02138
100 Main Street, E62-638                            United States
Cambridge, MA 02142                                 nzhang2@statestreet.com
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
Introduction

       Financial intermediaries offer an array of services to institutional and individual investors.

Foremost among these is their superior ability to gather and act on information, a point that has

been emphasized in a number of important theoretical papers (e.g., Leland and Pyle, 1977;

Diamond, 1984; Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994). At the same time, financial intermediaries display

significant heterogeneity in their performance, which may be driven by differences in managers’

ability to identify and access the best investments, as well as by the fees that they charge for their

services. In public markets, a large literature suggests that managers of actively managed mutual

fund funds do not persistently outperform passively managed ones, which consequently has led to

a shift of many investors towards passive funds with much lower fees (e.g., Khorana, Servaes, and

Tufano, 2009; Cremers, et al., 2016).



       In private capital markets, the dynamics are somewhat different. On the one hand, asset

owners investing in private markets have expressed similar concerns about the high levels of fund

manager compensation, which, they have argued, has led much of the surplus from these

investments being garnered by the fund managers. Public discussions of this issue (and of the need

for more favorable fund economics) date back at least as far as a controversial study that a number

of large United States public pensions commissioned in the mid-1990s (Mercer, 1996). Academic

studies have similarly documented the substantial magnitude of fees and the large wedge between

gross (pre-fee) and net (realized) returns of investors (e.g., Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Metrick

and Yasuda, 2010; Phalippou, Rauch, and Umber, 2016). But despite these concerns, there has




                                                                                                    2
been relatively limited competition across private capital managers in the pricing of their main

funds (see Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Metrick and Yasuda, 2010).



       On the other hand, and differently from public markets, there is a widespread belief that

manager skill in private equity drives performance and allows some funds to persistently

outperform the industry. The wide dispersion and persistence in private equity returns has been

well documented (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Metrick and Yasuda, 2006). These differences in

perceived skill affect the bargaining power of GPs and their ability to attract capital. But there also

seem to be differences in the desirability of LP investors: for instance, some might have more

connections or deeper pockets to provide GPs with “liquidity insurance” in bad times (see for

example, Lerner and Schoar, 2004). In an important paper, Berk and Green (2004) suggest that if

managers differ in their skill and operate with a decreasing returns-to-scale technology, higher

skill managers will manage larger funds and extract more rents. In the Berk-Green model, all funds

will provide identical marginal returns to investors, since investors are homogenous. If instead LPs

also differ in their attractiveness and sophistication, there will be heterogeneity in the bargaining

power of both LPs and GPs. More powerful and attractive LPs should match with better GPs. And

within the fund offerings of a given GP, we would expect differentiation in the structures that are

offered to LPs of different types. Better LPs should more likely be invited to participate in vehicles

with better terms and better performance, holding constant GP quality.



       Across their portfolios, private capital groups can achieve this differentiation of fund

returns by adjusting either transaction fees or asset quality across investment vehicles. The best

groups may not need to offer discounted separate accounts or co-investments at all. These top GPs



                                                                                                     3
might not be willing to dilute the quality of their main fund, perhaps for reputation reasons, or

because their own investment professionals are major investors. However, since many of these

groups have significant excess demand by LPs would like to invest with them, they might be

willing to set up alternative vehicles which might allow less premier LPs to invest with them.

These LPs might be willing to accept slightly lower returns on investment from these LPs, since

their outside options are also lower than for the top LPs. Of course, all LPs might not be that

rational. Due to the opacity of private capital, some LPs may not understand that they are being

offered inferior opportunities. Thus, asset owners who aggressively pursue discounts may find that

they paradoxically end up with lower returns.



       The evolution of private equity fund structures over the last decade and a half seems to be

well characterized by this model. Case studies and practitioner accounts suggest that certain high-

prestige investors—for instance, the Harvard endowment (Hardymon, Nicholas, and Fouka, 2014)

and the Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board (Lerner, Rhodes-Kropf, and Burbank, 2013) —

have long demanded co-investment opportunities and special terms when investing in

partnerships.2 A key response by private capital groups to LP pressures has been to offer a broader

set of selected investors opportunities to access their investments in non-traditional ways. Many

fund managers have become increasingly creative in terms of offering selected investors products

“outside the box.”




2
  Similarly the Teachers Retirement System of Texas (Rhodes-Kropf, et al., 2014) undertook a
series of ten-figure investments with alternative investment groups on highly favorable terms.
                                                                                                 4
       Despite the intense real-world interest in investment strategies using alternative vehicles,

assessing the extent and success of these approaches has been challenging. The performance of

alternative vehicles is rarely reported in official disclosures by fund managers. Even the services

that track these markets, such as Burgiss, Cambridge Associates, and Preqin (see the overview in

Brown, et al., 2015), focus on documenting the performance of main funds rather than alternative

vehicles. The only exception are studies which focus on select samples of direct investments by

limited partners: Fang, Ivashina, and Lerner (2015) analyzed co-investments and solo investments

using information from only seven large (and undoubtedly non-representative) limited partners,

while Braun, Jenkinson, and Schemmerl (2017) looked at co-investments recorded in the

CapitalIQ database, which only captures a (potentially non-random) selection of transactions.



       In this paper, we explore a much more comprehensive data set, covering investments into

entities organized by private capital funds for 112 asset owners. To do this, we use the records of

State Street Corporation, which plays a custodial role for these asset owners. The data captures all

cash flows between limited partners and the private capital fund managers in their portfolios. In

total, the data set includes over one half-trillion dollars of commitments in twenty thousand distinct

investments by individual LPs between 1980 and mid-2017. We focus on three categories of

vehicles, which we define in detail below: main funds of a general partnership, discretionary

vehicles such as co-investment transactions, and GP-directed vehicles.



       We first document a set of stylized facts concerning the evolution of alternative investment

vehicles in private equity during our sample period:




                                                                                                    5
•   Capital Allocation: The allocation of capital to alternative vehicles has been growing over

    time. In the 1980s, 91% of the vehicles raised and 93% of the capital commitments were

    to main funds. In the 2010s, these shares fell to 64% and 76% respectively. The use of

    alternative vehicles is widespread. For instance, of the 108 asset owners investing in private

    capital in the sample (four made no such investments), 87 invested in GP-directed and 69

    in discretionary vehicles.

•   Vehicle Types: Alternative investment vehicles can be broadly categorized into what we

    term discretionary and GP-directed vehicles. The former are comprised of co-investment

    opportunities that are provided by a GP but in which the LP maintains discretion over

    which deals to invest. The latter typically are funds that invest in similar securities as the

    main funds, where the GP retains key decision-making powers. Of the roughly 5500

    distinct vehicles attracting investments, 32% by number and 17% by capital commitments

    were what we term discretionary and GP-directed vehicles.

•   Performance: In the cross section, the average performance of alternative vehicles was

    very similar to the average main fund in our sample. The one exception was the ratio of

    total value to paid-in capital (TVPI), where main funds performed substantially better.

    When comparing the performance of alternative vehicles to those of the main funds raised

    by the same private capital group in the same year (or in the five years prior), we see that

    on average the alternative vehicles underperform their associated main funds. Using

    weighted average PME performance, discretionary vehicles underperform, by 0.016 and

    GP-directed funds underperform by 0.101, with only the latter being statistically

    significant. When breaking out the results on size-weighted performance by decade, we




                                                                                                6
       further find that discretionary investments did particularly poorly in the 2000s, while GP-

       directed vehicles underperformed their main funds especially after 2010.

   •   Composition: Alternative vehicles were far more likely to be offered by buyout funds than

       venture capital ones, comprising 38% of all vehicles and 18% of all capital raised by

       buyout-focused groups; but only 20% of vehicles and 10% of capital raised by venture-

       focused ones. A corollary is that the tercile of the largest GPs raised 18% of their capital

       through alternative vehicles, as opposed to 2% by the tercile of smallest funds.



       In a second step, we provide evidence consistent with the idea that alternative vehicles can

be seen as the result of a bargaining process between a set of heterogeneous GPs and LPs in the

private equity market. In line with our discussion above, we find that partnerships with higher past

PMEs were able to raise more capital in both their main funds and side vehicles relative to GPs

with lower PMEs. The average performance of alternative vehicles offered by high-PME

partnerships outperformed the average fund in the market. In contrast, those of low-PME

partnerships performed more poorly. But when looking at the relative performance of the different

types of alternative vehicles benchmarked against the main funds of these GPs, we see that GP-

directed vehicles significantly underperformed their main fund, especially for top performing GPs,

while discretionary vehicles outperformed even the main fund. If we believe that discretionary

vehicles are typically offered only to the best LPs, the results support the idea that GPs differentiate

the returns they offer to different type of investors.



        In further support of the bargaining interpretation, we also find that LPs with better past

performance invested in alternative vehicles that had above average market performance: indeed,



                                                                                                      7
these side vehicles even outperformed the main fund of the GP sponsoring these alternative

vehicles. In addition, the categories of LPs that have the highest performance in their alternative

vehicle investment were those that are typically seen as high-prestige LPs, such as endowments

and foundations, private pension funds, and insurance companies. The poorest performance in

alternative vehicles was seen for fund-of-funds. We also find that larger LPs and North America

based LPs were less likely to resort to alternative vehicles, while European LPs are more likely to

invest in these vehicles, even controlling for other LP characteristics. This again might suggest the

idea that LPs whose access to the top funds is more limited—i.e., those whose bargaining power

is lower--were more likely to invest in alternative vehicles.



       Finally, we show that there was an interaction between the past performance of the LPs

and GPs. We classify GPs and LPs by the average performance of their portfolio across all VCPE

investments and test how the performance of the alternative vehicles varied with the quality of the

match between LP and GP, e.g., a top-performing LP investing in a top-performing GP, and so on.

The results show that alternative vehicles have the highest performance on average if the LPs and

GPs involved in the vehicle were both above-median performers. Alternative vehicles where both

LP and GP are below-median performers had the worst performance. And the off-diagonal

matches (top LP,-below median GP, and vice versa) perform at intermediate levels. These results

support the idea that GPs tailor the alternative vehicles they offer their LPs to the outside options

of the LP. Controlling for the type of GP, better LPs get better returns and vice versa for lower-

performing LPs.




                                                                                                   8
       The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the creation of the data

set. Section 3 presents the usage of and analyzes the performance of alternative vehicles in general.

Section 4 presents analyses across different classes of general partners and limited partners. The

final section concludes the paper.



2. Constructing the Sample

    A. State Street

       The data in this paper consists of cash flow from the records of State Street Corporation’s

custodial unit, which provides services for asset owners, including pensions, sovereign wealth

funds, and endowments. As of the end of third quarter of 2017, State Street’s custody business had

$32.1 trillion of assets under ownership and control, just behind the largest custody bank, Bank of

New York Mellon.3 State Street also provides custodial services to fund managers and other

clients, as well as engaging in asset management, securities trading, and securities finance.



       Among the custodial services that State Street (and other custodial banks) provide to their

asset owner clients are keeping track of the securities held, tracking cash flows between the

investors and fund managers, executing the sales of securities and other transactions, assisting with

foreign currency conversions, and documenting the investors’ activities, including for tax

purposes. (For an industry overview, see Clearing House, 2016.) Thus, in their role as a custodian,

State Street has a comprehensive picture of the investments made by the asset owners that they




3
 “State Street Challenging BNY Mellon As Largest Custody Bank,” Forbes, November 16, 2017,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2017/11/16/state-street-challenging-bny-mellon-
as-largest-custody-bank/#1b6e90af63f2.
                                                                                                   9
work for. All cash flows are recorded net of management fees and carried interest charged by the

general partners.



    B. The Data Set

       State Street’s custodial division has a rich array of data on its clients. The 108 asset owners

with private capital exposure have invested into over seventy thousand private financial vehicles

of various types, which include private equity, real estate, hedge funds, securitizations, and many

other assets. For the purposes of this paper, we focus exclusively on private capital funds (buyout,

private debt, and venture capital).



       Identifying and classifying the vehicles associated with these private capital groups may

sound straightforward, but in actuality is quite challenging. For example, TPG Global Advisors’

July 2017 filing of Firm ADV with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission identified in

Section 7B nearly 100 affiliated entities.4 While some of these were clearly identifiable from their

titles (e.g., TPG Parallel III), many had far less obvious names (e.g., Arrow Ridge Capital Master

Fund, FoF Partners III-B, and MLS (B&C) AIV 1-B).



       Moreover, there is not a clear mapping between the titles of these instruments and their

characteristics. Labels like special purpose vehicle (SPV) and affiliated investment vehicle (AIV)

are used by GPs in a seemingly random fashion. Thus, classifications could not be done on the




4
  TPG Global Advisors, “Form ADV: Uniform Application for Investment Adviser Registration
and       Report      by      Exempt     Reporting    Advisers,”    July     19,   2017,
https://adviserinfo.sec.gov/IAPD/content/ViewForm/crd_iapd_stream_pdf.aspx?ORG_PK=1597
32.
                                                                                                   10
basis of fund name, but required manual review. To illustrate the difficulty, AIVs frequently fell

into two categories. The first type, often referred to as a “subsidiary AIV,” was owned directly by

the fund (either in whole or in part with other LPs). Subsidiary AIVs typically held a set of

investments that mirrored the find with which it is paired. The second kind of AIV, usually called

a “side AIV,” was not owned by the fund, but rather by a subset of the fund’s partners, including

the GP. This type of AIV typically co-invested in selected portfolio companies (or a portfolio

company) alongside the fund.



       Using State Street’s internal classification scheme for investment vehicles in its State Street

Global Exchange (GX) Private Equity Index (PEI) database, we identify 22 thousand of the

seventy thousand transactions that appear to be private equity-related. The index covers around

three thousand funds over a thirty-year period, and is used by some of the world’s largest investors

to benchmark their private equity portfolios. Thus, we exclude many investments made by asset

owners into vehicles organized by hedge and real estate groups without private equity funds.



       Using State Street’s “standardized name convention” process, we identified 6,068 unique

investment vehicles with associated LP and GP names. (In many cases, multiple LPs in the

database invested in the same vehicle.) We also included in this total a number of vehicles that did

not have a GP affiliation due to the nature of vehicle, especially what Fang, Ivashina and Lerner

[2015] term “solo” investments by LPs. We then filtered out 746 of these vehicles, including real

estate funds, hedge funds, traditional funds-of-funds and secondary funds, and other non-PE

vehicles (which are not the focus of this research paper).




                                                                                                   11
        We examined the remaining 5,322 vehicles. We associated them with general partners

and classified them into three main categories, based on various sources. The key resources we

used were:

    •   The GXPEI database, which contained identifying links between vehicles and funds. Even

        when there was no identifier, often a text note or other identifier indicated which private

        capital group and/or fund the vehicle was associated with and its characteristics.

    •   A list of vehicles associated with all private equity groups that we assembled from outside

        sources. We used the list to identify the unmatched vehicles listed in the database, as well

        as to determine their characteristics. The sources used to create the list included:

             o SEC Exhibit 21s for publicly traded entities, which lists the names of affiliate and

                subsidiary entities. As SEC regulations note: “A list of subsidiaries must be

                disclosed to the SEC as Exhibit 21 to registration statements filed on Forms S-1, S-

                4, S-11, F-1, F-4, 10, and the annual report filed on Form 10-K.”5

             o We downloaded and analyzed all Form ADVs filed between 2001 and 2016. Since

                the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, these forms must be filled out by all non-

                venture private equity with more than $150 million in assets under management in

                the United States. Section 7B of Form ADV includes the names of all affiliated

                entities.

             o Searches of the SEC database for keywords, “Affiliated Fund,” “Co-invest,”

                “Special Purpose Vehicle,” “Special Investment Vehicle,” “SPV,” and “AIV.”

                These searches generated a wide variety of documents filed by private equity



5
  U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Office of Investor Advocacy and Education,
“Researching Public Companies through EDGAR: A Guide for Investors,” no date,
https://www.sec.gov/oiea/Article/edgarguide.html.
                                                                                                 12
               groups listing affiliate structures, such as Form 400-APP/A, “Applications under

               the Investment Company Act other than those reviewed by Office of Insurance

               Products” and Form D.

           o We finally undertook extensive research on the remaining unmatched entities to

               understand their properties and affiliations. The resources we used included fund

               web sites, media accounts, and the records in Preqin and Thomson Reuters (which

               sometime list a variety of alternative vehicles in addition to main funds).



       Among the 5,322 investments, we were able to identify 3,620 “main funds” by matching

and cross checking with State Street PEI database of PE partnerships. The majority of those in the

database are contained in the State Street Global Exchange Index. Most main funds are traditional

eight-to-ten year limited partnerships, but a few have less common structures, such as the long-

duration funds that a number of private equity groups have raised in recent years.



       Of the remaining entities, they are split between what we term 819 GP-directed vehicles

and 883 discretionary vehicles. We define these as follows:

   •   GP-directed parallel vehicles (henceforth GP-directed) typically invest in similar securities

       as the main funds and the GP retains key decision-making powers. These vehicles contain

       special features to cater to certain classes of limited partners. For instance, they may be

       tailored to:

           o have more favorable economics for a limited partner that is making a sizeable

               capital commitment,




                                                                                                 13
           o avoid domestic tax obligations for non-domestic investors, such as blocker funds

               and offshore vehicles,

           o allow the GP to continue to finance firms when they are running out of capital in

               the main fund,

           o not use using capital call lines to address investors’ concerns about risk, or

           o address many other limited partner concerns.

    •   Discretionary vehicles allow the limited partner to invest in one or more transactions.

        Under this category, we include a number of vehicles. These include co-investments into

        individual companies by one or more LPs; solo investments by LPs in previously private

        capital-financed companies; pledge fund structures where transactions are funded by the

        LP on a deal-by-deal basis (sometimes raised by groups that have encountered poor

        performance who have found raising a traditional fund difficult); co-investment or overage

        funds that are raised alongside a main fund; and co-sponsored transactions between LPs

        and GPs. We also include co-investment funds raised by funds-of-funds and other

        intermediaries (though not the traditional funds-of-funds or secondary funds that they

        raise).6 Many intermediaries have aggressively expanded into this area, especially after the

        widespread disillusionment with traditional funds-of-funds engendered by the Global

        Financial Crisis and the collapse of Bernard Madoff’s hedge funds.



        A natural question is the extent to which the State Street sample is subject to sample

selection bias itself. For instance, State Street could have gained or lost customers for its custodial



6
  These co-investment funds run by funds-of-funds and other intermediaries may not allow that
underlying asset owner to opt into individual investments. Thus, while the intermediary has
discretion where to invest, the underlying LP may not.
                                                                                                    14
business that could have led to dramatic fluctuations in the comprehensiveness of coverage over

time. One way to evaluate this concern is to examine the commitments to main funds in the sample.

We compute the ratio of these capital commitments over time to total capital commitments to

private capital funds. To compute the overall commitments, we use the total global private capital

fundraising as estimated by Preqin from 1995 onward. For the years before 1995, we use estimates

from a variety of sources, including Buyouts, the Private Equity Analyst, and the Venture Capital

Journal for the U.S., the various Yearbooks of the European Venture Capital Association for

Europe, the Asian Venture Capital Journal for Asia, various publications and reports of the Latin

American Venture Capital Association, and the reports of McDonald & Associates for Canada.

Not all these sources go back to 1980; when they do not, we supplement the data series with

estimates based on news stories, case studies, and trade journals.



       This analysis suggests that State Street’s clients have made a reasonably consistent share

of the commitments to the main funds of private capital firms. The funds committed 2.4% of the

capital to the funds in the 1980s (of course, the collective committed capital of the main funds in

which they invested was a much larger share of the industry). In the subsequent three decades, the

shares were 4.8%, 6.3%, and 4.3%. This broad look does not suggest dramatic fluctuations in

coverage, though the coverage was clearly at a lower level during the 1980s than in subsequent

decades.



3. Alternative Vehicles: An Aggregate Look

   A. Distribution of Use




                                                                                                15
       We first look at the use of different vehicles in general. Table 1 provides an overview of

the data set. Of the 108 asset owners active in private capital, fully 87 invest in GP-directed

vehicles and 69 in discretionary ones. Looking at the number of distinct investments and the dollar

size of the commitments, main funds represent 68% of the distinct vehicles and 83% of the capital

committed. GP-directed and discretionary vehicles are roughly equal in number, but the former

represent 50 billion dollars in capital to the latter’s 38 billion. The difference stems not from the

average size of the capital commitments, but rather from the number of investments.



       Table 2 looks at the temporal distribution of the number of investments in and the dollar

commitments to main funds and alternative vehicles. The observations are divided in Table 2 by

the decade of the vehicles’ formation (vintage year in industry parlance). The tabulation for the

2010s only runs until mid-2017. Two patterns are apparent from the table. The first is the

acceleration of private capital activity over time. Dollar commitments to main funds and GP-

directed vehicles increased 100-fold, and to discretionary vehicles more than 200-fold. In part, this

pattern may reflect State Street’s increasing coverage of LPs after the 1980s. But as highlighted

above, the primary driver of this pattern was that the increased allocation to private capital by LPs

over time. Moreover, the share of alternative vehicles among the private capital commitments

increased. As Panel B reports, the share of vehicles that were discretionary went from 6.6% in the

1980s to 18.8% in the 2010s; the share of capital committed to these vehicles went from 5.4% to

10.6%. Among the GP-directed vehicles, the increase was from 2.6% to 16.9% of the vehicles,

and 1.5% to 13.4% of the capital.




                                                                                                  16
       Figures 1 and 2 depict these patterns graphically, focusing on the number of vehicles

formed and capital commitments (note the two different scales in this graph) by vintage years. The

ebbs-and-flows of fundraising—with the peaks of fundraising in 2000 and 2007-08, the crashes of

2001-02 and 2009, and the recovery in recent years—are readily apparent. The seeming downturn

in activity in 2017 is driven by the fact that the total represents only part of the year’s activity.

While the volume of activity in alternative vehicles follows the pattern of the main funds, the

increased share in recent years is apparent.



   B. Relative Performance

       We then turn to understanding the performance of these instruments. The first way to

examine performance is to simply look at the returns from each class of vehicle. Table 3 presents

their performance measured three ways: our baseline measure, the Kaplan-Schoar (2005) PME

computed relative to the Russell 3000, as well as two measures often used by practitioners, the

internal rate of return (IRR) and the ratio of total value to paid-in capital. (Henceforth, the tables

will exclusively focus on PMEs, as this is the standard performance measure used in the academic

literature.) Recall that the State Street data report the cash flows actually realized by the limited

partners. As it is difficult to validate some historical cash flow data, we dropped a modest fraction

of the vehicles from the analysis.



       In this table, we present several performance metrics. First, we use each vehicle as an

observation: there is no added weight if multiple asset owners invested, or if the committed capital

was relatively larger. We present in each case the 25th and 75th percentiles of performance, as well

as the median returns. Second, we compute the weighted average performance, where the weights



                                                                                                   17
are the total capital commitments by all the LPs in the State Street population who invested in the

same vehicle.



       Table 3 shows that there are limited differences between the performances of the three

classes of vehicles. The median discretionary and median GP-directed vehicle performed slightly

better than the median main fund in terms of PME; though the pattern is reversed at other reported

quartiles. The patterns in the other performance measures are also mixed. Discretionary and GP-

directed vehicles outperform in terms of IRR, but one of the sharpest differences is the higher

TVPI for main funds (1.37 versus 1.26 and 1.26). This last result may reflect that main funds are

on average more mature, given the increased popularity of alternative vehicles in recent years. The

dominant impression is the absence of a significant differences in the performance of the different

vehicles in aggregate.



       One natural question relates to the seeming deviation between the relatively low PMEs

generated by our portfolio of main funds and those reported in canonical studies such as Harris, et

al. (2016). These differences spring from five variations: (a) the calculation of performance

through mid-2017, (b) the inclusion of private debt funds in addition to venture and buyout ones,

(c) the inclusion of funds based outside the U.S., (d) the usage of the Russell 3000 rather than the

S&P 500, and, most importantly, (e) the inclusion of recent vintage years. If we repeat the

calculations in Exhibit II of Harris, et al.—that is, only using U.S. funds in vintage years through

2010 and comparing performance against the S&P 500, but calculating performance through mid-

2017—we obtain very similar numbers to theirs. For instance, our average PME for buyout funds

across all vintage years (calculated using 944 funds, to their 781) is 1.22, as compared to their



                                                                                                 18
1.20. Our average PME for venture funds (computed using 669 funds, to their 1095) is 1.44, as

compared to their 1.35. We present the computations for main funds with these adjustments in

Appendix B.



       Figure 3 looks at the temporal patterns in performance. Focusing on Panel A, which

presents the PME-based measures, we see that the return series of the various vehicles tend to track

each other by-and-large. The returns of alternative transactions—which may reflect their less

diversified nature—are more volatile than the others. Particularly noticeable are the high PMEs

from discretionary investments made in 2009-10, a point also made in practitioner accounts

(Leamon, Lerner, and Bosiljevac, 2012).



       This comparisons in Table 3 and Figure 3 may be misleading, however, because not all

private capital groups raised alternative vehicles; and not all investors can invest in all vehicles

separately from the main fund. In particular, one might anticipate that asset owners might be

disinterested in undertaking discounted arrangements with poorly performing fund managers,

while top-tier private capital groups might be unwilling to make such concessions.



       Table 4 presents what we believe to be a more reasonable comparison. We look at the

performance of the alternative vehicles against the main fund that investors presumably could have

(or did) also invested in. We compute the difference in the PME between the performance of each

alternative vehicle (again computing PMEs using the Russell 3000) and that of the main fund(s)

raised by the same group immediately prior to the launch of the alternative vehicle. 58% of the

alternative vehicles are matched to a main fund begun in the same year as the vehicle; 86% to one



                                                                                                 19
in the year of the fund or the two years prior. If there are no main funds raised in the previous five

years, we do not use the alternative vehicle in the analysis. (Thus, the sample size shrinks from

883 to 725 for the discretionary vehicles, and from 819 to 708 for the GP-directed vehicles.7)

Because there are a few extreme outliers, we winsorized the PMEs at the 0.5% and 99.5% level.

We use a similar methodology in subsequent tables when reporting performance.



       The results are robust to the use of alternative methodologies. One approach is to limit the

matches to funds formed in the year of the transaction or the three years prior, which only

eliminates 7% of the observations and has little impact on the results. A second approach is that if

there are multiple main funds during the five years after the observation, we average the

performance of the main funds and use this in the comparison. This methodology tends to depress

the performance of the alternative vehicles to a certain degree.



       We again look at the simple mean and median of returns across vehicles (counting each

vehicle as a single observation), and then the average returns when weighting each by the size of

the State Street LPs’ capital commitments to that vehicle. We term this the Unadjusted Excess

PME Performance of the alternative vehicles.



       The results in Table 4 suggest significant underperformance by the alternative vehicles

relative to their main funds. The underperformance is particularly stark when we examine

weighted average performance, where the average discretionary vehicle underperforms by a PME




7
 The exceptions are when we utilize raw returns in Table 3, Panel B of Table 15, and Table 23,
where we winsorize the return data at the 99th percentile.
                                                                                                   20
of 0.02, and the average GP-directed vehicle by 0.12 (only the underperformance of the GP-

directed vehicles is significant). The simple means and medians are insignificant and much closer

to zero, suggesting that the underperformance is being made more extreme due to the largest

transactions.



       One concern with this methodology is that the alternative vehicles may be raised in later

years than the main fund to which it is paired. As Harris and co-authors (2016) document, PMEs

have been generally falling over time. This pattern may lead to the seeming underperformance of

the alternative vehicles, simply because they were often raised in later vintage years than their

paired main funds. While this correction may be excessively conservative (e.g., it may be

appropriate to pair a co-investment made in 2007 with the 2004 fund which invested alongside the

LP), we correct for the changing investment climate across the various vintage years. To do this,

we compute what we term the Adjusted Excess PME Performance of the alternative vehicles. This

measure is defined as follows:

       (PME(AV) – Mean PME(MFs, VYAV)) – (PME(PMF) – Mean PME(MFs, VYPMF))

where PME(AV) is the PME of the alternative vehicle, Mean PME(MFs, VYAV) is the mean PME

of all main funds of the same vintage year as the alternative vehicle, PME(PMF) is the PME of the

paired main fund, and Mean PME(MFs, VYPMF) is the mean PME of all main funds of the same

vintage year as the main fund that is paired to the alternative vehicle. If the alternative vehicle and

the paired main fund are contemporaneous, the unadjusted and adjusted excess performance will

be identical. In other cases, this adjustment will correct for the differences in investment climate

between the two years.




                                                                                                    21
       Table 5 summarizes the performance using this adjusted measure. The results are similar,

if slightly weaker. When using what we regard as the best approach, the weighted average, the

discretionary and GP-directed funds continue to underperform their paired main funds, with PMEs

that are 0.016 and 0.101 lower. This pattern suggests again that underperformance is more

significant among the larger transactions. These patterns are depicted graphically in Figure 4,

which depicts the distribution of the unadjusted and adjusted performance of the alternative

vehicles of the two types relative to main funds.



       We look at the robustness of the results reported in Tables 3 through 5 in Appendices C

through E. In these supplemental tables, we exclude private debt funds (which are often not

considered in the private equity literature), funds formed after 2011 (whose performance may still

be difficult to discern), and blocker and offshore funds (whose performance might be affected by

tax considerations). We find that these exclusions have little impact of the alternative vehicles’

relative performance.



       Table 6 summarizes the distribution of relative performance of alternative vehicles by

decade. All three decades summarized (the returns during the 1980s are not tabulated due to the

small sample size) were characterized by negative returns using weighted averages. The 1990s

saw the most extreme underperformance. The simple average and median returns in the 2000s and

2010s were positive. An intriguing pattern is the substantial uptick in performance of the

discretionary transactions between the 2000s and 2010s, which move from significantly

underperforming to significantly outperforming. The performance of the GP-directed transactions

is poor during both periods.



                                                                                               22
4. Who Uses Alternative Vehicles

       We now turn to examining the differences between the use and performance of alternative

vehicles across the general partners in the sample. We ask which types of partnerships rely more

heavily on such alternative vehicles and what the returns are that they offer to their investors.



       Table 7 summarizes the basic characteristics of the general and limited partners. The

average GP in the sample was established in 2003, while the mean LP was somewhat older (1998).

(Note that we use in calculating LP age the date of the asset owner’s first private capital

commitment, not the date of the organization’s formation.) The total capital commitments garnered

over their existence by the GPs from the custodial LPs vary widely, with a mean of just over six

hundred million. The mean LP has committed $4.7 billion to private equity.8



    A. Univariate Patterns across General Partners

       We first start by looking at the differences in the prevalence of alternative vehicles across

different classes of GPs. Of course, their usage is likely to be a function of both their willingness

to offer these alternatives, and the interest of asset owners in undertaking these investments.



       Table 8 looks at the differences across private capital groups with various strategies (each

group is assigned to only one strategy, based on where the bulk of its investment activity is

focused). Following State Street’s typology, we divide the groups into those focused on buyout,




8
  The presence of 112 LPs in Table 7 (as opposed to the 108 used elsewhere), reflects the fact that
four asset owners in the sample had made no private equity commitments as of mid-2017.
                                                                                                    23
private debt, and venture capital transactions. We find a substantial disparity between venture

capital-focused groups and the other classes. While 62% and 72% of the vehicles raised by buyout-

and private debt-focused GPs were in main funds, 80% of those by venture capital-focused groups

were. Similarly, the amount of capital raised by the venture-focused groups was much more

concentrated in main funds, representing 90% of the total raised, as opposed to 82% and 83% for

buyout- and private debt-focused groups.



          Table 9 looks at the differences across general partners by size, dividing the groups into

terciles based on total capital raised between 1980 and 2017. The smallest tercile of firms was far

less likely to make use of alternative vehicles: these represented only 7% of the vehicles they

offered and 2% of capital raised. The corresponding numbers for the largest tercile, by way of

contrast, were 40% and 18%.



          In Table 10, similarly dramatic pattern appeared when we examined differences across

geography of the GPs. In each case, we assign the group to the region in which its headquarters is

located. North American-based GPs are far more likely to employ alternative vehicles: 33% of the

vehicles and 17% of the capital raised were of this nature. Meanwhile, for groups outside of Europe

and North America, alternative vehicles represented 21% of the entities and 5% of the capital

raised.



          We then turn to examining the performance across different classes of GPs. We again

examine unadjusted and adjusted excess PME performance, comparing that of the alternative

vehicle and the paired main fund. Focusing on weighted average returns, we see in Table 11 that



                                                                                                 24
alternative vehicles of buyout-focused GPs had consistent negative returns compared to their

paired main funds, regardless of the method of adjustment used. VC investments were similarly

negative. Private debt strategies had more mixed results.



       Tables 12 and 13 look similarly at the relationship of excess performance and fund size

and GP geography. Again, focusing on the results using weighted-average returns, we find that the

performance was poor, frequently at statistically significant levels, for vehicles raised by the

largest tercile of firms (with adjusted PME differences of -0.018 and -0.104 for discretionary and

GP-managed vehicles) and managers based in North America (-0.070 and -0.132 respectively).

The effects were again most negative for GP-directed funds.



   B. Multiple Regression Analysis

       Tables 14 looks at the differences in the use of alternative vehicles across GPs of different

types in regression analyses. (The definition of all independent variables is in Appendix A.) We

use as observations each private equity group that raised funds in a given five-year period (from

1980 to 1984, 1985 to 1989, and so forth). If the private equity raised multiple five-year periods,

there are multiple observations; if the group raised no funds in a five-year period, the period is not

used as an observation. In each table, we present the results weighted and unweighted by the size

of the capital raised by the private equity group in the given five-year period. We also ran the

regressions with and without the performance of earlier funds raised by the GP in the previous five

year period as independent variables. While this variable is of interest, because some firms did not

raise funds during the period, the sample size shrinks.




                                                                                                   25
       Table 14 examines the share of the funds raised by each general partner. The dependent

variable in the first six regressions is the ratio of discretionary and GP-directed vehicle

commitments to total capital commitments in each five-year period for each GP. This variable

measures how GPs raise funds across main funds and alternative vehicles. We regress this variable

on GP characteristics; in particular fund size, fund strategy, the region the GP operates in, and the

performance of the partnership in the five prior years.



       The regressions show that in the more recent period, alternative vehicles as a share of total

fundraising has increased. We interact the time trend (T) with dummies for fund size terciles and

find that over time the largest groups appear to be more likely to offer these vehicles. We also see

that VC funds and debt funds have become less likely to employ alternative vehicles relative to

buyout funds. When we break out these patterns by GP-directed versus discretionary funds, we

see that the effects are primarily driven by the former funds. Finally, we look at the fundraising

pattern in relation to past performance of the partnership. We find a strong negative relationship

between the ratio of fund raising via alternative vehicles and a partnership’s past performance. We

again differentiate between GP-directed versus discretionary vehicles and find that the relationship

is statistically stronger for the discretionary vehicles, but that the coefficients are of a similar

magnitude across both groups. Top-performing funds appear to raise a smaller share of their

overall funds via alternative vehicles. However, when we look at the absolute volume of funds

raised via alternative vehicles in the last column, we see that the sign flips. Better performing

partnerships increase their fund raising in alternative vehicles. But as a share of their total fund

raising, alternative vehicles become smaller, which implies that the better performing partnerships

are able to grow their main funds even more quickly.



                                                                                                  26
       Table 15 looks at the performance of funds, using Adjusted Excess PME Performance as

the dependent variable. Each alternative vehicle is an observation. In Panel A, we look at the

adjusted excess PME performance, i.e., the performance of alternative vehicles relative to their

main fund. Three patterns stand out. The first is that the relative performance of discretionary

vehicles is significantly lower than the GP-directed vehicles. The performance difference was less

evident in the univariate comparison, where we did not control for the time trend and fund type.

The second finding is that alternative investments offered by general partners in the rest of the

world significantly outperformed in the early years, though this advantage seems to fade over time.

Finally, there is a negative relationship between a partnership’s five-year prior performance and

the performance of its alternative vehicles (relative to their main fund). The results are not

significant in the full sample. But when we examine GP-directed and discretionary funds

separately, we see a stark asymmetry. GP-directed vehicles offered by groups with historically

high PMEs have lower relative performance compared to those offered by groups with lower PME.

In contrast, discretionary funds offered by groups with better past performance also performed

better, but the relationship is only marginally significant.



       These patterns are provocative and seem to support our story of bargaining between GPs

and LPs. As discussed above, there are two channels which could explain that lower performance:

The first is that high-performing groups may exploit their market power by offering alternative

vehicles with less favorable economics. Another possibility is that these GPs have higher levels

of performance in their main funds, but since they only have limited access to proprietary top deals,

the quality of assets in the alternative vehicles is lower. It is important to note that these vehicles



                                                                                                    27
might still provide very reasonable returns to investors who are not able to invest in the very top

partnerships.



       To test this question about the absolute performance of the alternative vehicles, Panel B

looks at the raw PMEs (that is, with no adjustment for the performance of proximate main funds)

of each alternative vehicle. We find that top-performing groups are more likely to have high

performing alternative vehicles when we look at raw performance. In the univariate statistics

above, we saw that on average alternative vehicles perform as well as the market. This suggests

that better performing GPs offer alternative vehicles which perform worse than their main funds,

but still offer investors a return that is commensurate with the rest of the market.



       We also see that discretionary vehicles perform worse on average, but this difference

weakens over time. But in both specifications, we find that funds with better past performance

offer discretionary vehicles that perform better and even outperform the main fund of the

partnership. This result seems surprising if GPs have market power as we argued before. However,

it might be the result of assortative matching, where better GPs are more likely to be matched with

more powerful LPs, which might demand co-investment opportunities. To test these ideas we will

now turn to looking at the interaction between LPs and GPs.



       .

   C. Patterns across Limited Partners

       We then look at the patterns across different classes of limited partners in their usage of

alternative vehicles. As has been documented in the finance literature (Lerner, Schoar, and



                                                                                                28
Wongsunwai, 2007; Sensoy, Wang, and Weisbach, 2014), investment decisions regarding and the

performance of private capital investments varied across classes of LPs (though in ways that may

have varied over time). These considerations may also have affected the interest in alternative

vehicles by different classes of limited partners. Of course, their usage of alternative vehicles was

also likely to be a function of the willingness of general partners to offer them opportunities to

invest in alternative vehicles.



       Table 16 looks at the differences across classes of limited partners. We see substantial

variations across the different investor types. The most striking pattern related to the share of the

total capital devoted to alternative vehicles, where public pensions stand out. While their $31

billion of commitments to alternative vehicles was the largest of any class of investor, they had so

much committed to traditional funds that their 12% share of commitments was considerably

smaller than every other class of investor, such as sovereign wealth funds, endowments and

foundations, and private pensions.



       Tables 17 and 18 look at the use of these vehicles across limited partners of different sizes

and geographies. There were relatively few patterns in regard to size and the share of vehicles that

were alternative ones. When it comes to the share of capital committed to such vehicles, smaller

LPs were more active users of alternative vehicles. Turning to differences in the location of the

LPs, there are few differences in the count of vehicles invested in. When we turn to capital

deployment, LPs based outside of Europe and the North America (22% of total capital), and

especially European ones (28%), made far more use of alternative vehicles than the North

American asset owners (14%).



                                                                                                  29
       The next three tables look at the performance of the alternative vehicle investments by

limited partner type. In Table 19, we see that funds-of-funds (FoF) had consistently negative

relative performance across all three measures, with weighted average adjusted PME differences

of -0.144 and -0.106 for discretionary and GP-managed vehicles (both statistically significant).

Continuing to focus on weighted average relative returns, the alternative investments of public

pensions were also consistent underperformers (-0.083 and -0.065 respectively), though they look

better when we examine medians. Insurance and finance institutions, in contrast did quite well in

their alternative investments, with adjusted excess PMEs of 0.177 and 0.013 for discretionary and

GP-directed vehicles, respectively. And finally, SWF did quite poorly on GP-directed investments

(-0.213) but moderately well on the discretionary vehicles (0.082). When we look across LPs of

different sizes in Table 20, we see that for the top tercile of largest funds, performance of GP-

directed funds is significantly lower than the main fund (-0.094), while the difference in

performance of discretionary funds to the main fund is close to zero (0.011)



       In Table 21, we examine the differences across LPs with different geographic bases. We

see a disparity, with those funds based in North America consistently underperforming in their

alternative vehicle investments: their weighted average adjusted PME differences are -0.041 for

both discretionary and GP-managed vehicles. Europe-based LPs did better in alternative vehicle

investing (+0.18 and -0.02 respectively).



   D. Matching between LPs and GPs




                                                                                              30
       In Table 22, we first analyze which types of LPs do better in their alternative vehicle

investments. Each investment by an individual LP in an alternative vehicle is an observation. The

dependent variable is the vehicle’s Adjusted Excess PME Performance. We include controls for

the features of the LPs and GPs. We see the superior performance of insurers (which may have

more experience in many instances with investments in alternative vehicles, as alluded to above),

endowments and foundations (who have historically been skilled private market investors, as

documented by Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai, 2007)), and private pensions. LPs with

historically high performance also do better in selecting alternative vehicles, which may suggest

the persistence of skill effect (consistent with Cavagnaro, et al. 2017). Interestingly, LPs with

historically high performance do better in both GP-directed and discretionary funds. This suggests

that there is a group of LPs that has the skill to identify good co-investment vehicles but also does

better with GP-directed funds.



       Finally, Table 23 looks at the matching between GP and LP. Each investment by an

individual LP in an alternative vehicle is an observation. The dependent variable is the vehicle’s

raw PME. We regress the performance of the alterative vehicle on a measure of the LP’s and GP’s

performance in their entire portfolio, with controls for the GP size and strategy. In Columns 1, 3,

and 5, we use the average performance over the total VCPE portfolio and the entire time period an

LP or GP is in our sample. This is a time-invariant measure of LP and GP performance, which

captures cross-sectional differences in performance. We then classify LPs into above median

versus below median performers. We do the same for the GPs. We form four dummies to

characterize the match between the LP and the GP: (1) LP and GP above median, (2) LP and GP

below median, (3) LP above and GP below median, and (4) vice versa. In the even columns, we



                                                                                                  31
repeat the same regression set–up, but use as the performance measure the average volume-

weighted PME in the five years prior to the inception of the alternative vehicle. We include GP

fixed effects here, since this measure of performance varies over time.



       The results show that the PME of an alternative vehicle where the LP and the GP are above

median performers is 0.38 points higher than the base category of a below-median GP–LP pair.

The dummies on the uneven matches is 0.18 points higher than the base category. All these

differences are statistically significant. When breaking the results out by type of alternative

vehicles, we find that the magnitudes of the results are larger for the discretionary vehicles, but the

differences are also significant for the GP-directed vehicles. As discussed above, these results are

in line with a bargaining explanation, where the top LPs receive better returns, even conditional

on the performance of the GPs with which they invest.



5. Conclusions

       Using hitherto-unexplored custodial data, we take a broad look at private capital

investments by 108 LPs, including transactions involving assets outside the traditional fund

structure. We show that alternative vehicles have been a major—and rapidly growing—portion of

these investors’ portfolios over the past four decades. We also document the disparity in the

performance across the limited and general partners participating in such vehicles, as well as across

the two broad classes of alternative vehicles.



       Several avenues for future research follow naturally from this paper. One of these relates

to the contractual terms in these “outside-the-box” investments. While the partnership agreements



                                                                                                    32
between GPs and LPs in main funds have been well scrutinized, we know very little about the

nature of these alternative vehicle arrangements. In this analysis, as the earlier literature on co-

investments, we only observe the net cash flows to the LPs, not the payments that went to the GPs.

Another intriguing question is whether the patterns seen here are replicated in other asset classes.

One natural arena to investigate is real estate, where “blind pool” funds were far later in arriving

than in private capital. Understanding how the use of such “outside the box” investments varies

across asset classes, and the performance of such transactions, are important and interesting open

questions.




                                                                                                 33
References

Admati, Anat, and Paul Pfleider, Robust financial contracting and the role of venture capitalists.
Journal of Finance, 49, 1994, 371-402

Braun, Reiner, Tim Jenkinson, and Christoph Schemmerl, Adverse selection and the performance
of      private    equity    co-investments,   Unpublished     working      paper,     2017,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2871458.

Brown, Gregory W., Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and David T. Robinson,
What do different commercial data sets tell us about private equity performance?, Unpublished
working paper, 2015, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2706556.

Cavagnaro, Daniel R., Berk A. Sensoy, Yingdi Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, Measuring
institutional investors’ skill at making private equity investments, Journal of Finance,
forthcoming,       https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/u.osu.edu/dist/8/7843/files/2017/10/CSWW-
October-2017-187cbq4.pdf.

The Clearing House, The Custody Services of Banks, Washington, The Clearing House, 2016,
https://www.davispolk.com/files/20160728_tch_white_paper_the_custody_services_of_banks.pd
f.

Cremers, Martijn, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Laura Starks, Indexing and active fund
management: International evidence, Journal of Financial Economics, 120, 2016, 539-560.

Diamond, Douglas, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of Economic
Studies, 51, 1984, 393-414.

Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner, The disintermediation of financial markets: Direct
investing in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics, 116, 2015, 160-178.

Hardymon, G. Felda, Tom Nicholas, and Vasiliki Fouka, Venture capital at the Harvard
Management Company in historical perspective, Harvard Business School case no. 9-815-047,
2014.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, How well do private equity investments
perform relative to public equity?, Journal of Investment Management, 14 (3), 2016, 1-24.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, Private equity performance: returns, persistence, and
capital flows, Journal of Finance, 60, 2005, 1791-1823.

Khorana, Ajay, Henri Servaes, and Peter Tufano, Mutual fund fees around the world, Review of
Financial Studies, 22, 2009, 1279-1310.

Leamon, Ann, Josh Lerner, and Vladimir Bosiljevac, Measurement, Governance, and Long-Term
Investing, Geneva, World Economic Forum, 2012.

                                                                                               34
Leland, Hayne E., and David H. Pyle, Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial
intermediation, Journal of Finance, 32, 1977, 371-387.

Lerner, Josh, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Nathaniel Burbank, Canadian Pension Plan Investment
Board: October 2012, Harvard Business School case no. 9-813-103, 2013.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, The illiquidity puzzle: Theory and evidence from private
equity, Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 2004, 3–40.
Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wongsunwai, Smart institutions, foolish choices: The
limited partner performance puzzle, Journal of Finance, 62, 2007, 731–764.

William M. Mercer, Key Terms and Conditions for Private Equity Investing, New York: William
M. Mercer, 1996.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation, New York,
Wiley, 2006.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, The economics of private equity funds, Review of Financial
Studies, 23, 2010, 2303-2341.

Phalippou, Ludovic, Christian Rauch, and Marc P. Umber, Private equity portfolio company fees,
Saïd Business School Working Paper no. 2015-22, 2016.

Preqin, Private Equity Co-Investment Outlook, London, Preqin, 2015.

Preqin, Preqin Global Private Equity and Venture Capital Report, London, Preqin, 2017.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, Luis Viceira, John Dionne, and Nathaniel Burbank, Texas Teachers and
the new Texas way, Harvard Business School case no. 9-214-091, 2014.

Robinson, David T., and Berk Sensoy, Do private equity fund managers earn their fees?
Compensation, ownership, and cash flow performance, Review of Financial Studies, 26, 2013,
2760-97.

Sensoy, Berk, Yingdi Wang, and Michael Weisbach, Limited partner performance and the
maturing of the private equity industry, Journal of Financial Economics, 112, 2014, 320–343.




                                                                                               35
Figure 1: Vehicle Number by Vintage Year

 300

 250

 200

 150

 100

  50

   0
    80

    82

    84

    86

    88

    90

    92

    94

    96

    98

    00

    02

    04

    06

    08

    10

    12

    14

    16
  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20
                               Discretionary          GP-Directed   Main


Figure 2: Vehicle Size (Commitments USD Millions) by Vintage Year

$10,000                                                                            $60,000
 $9,000
                                                                                   $50,000
 $8,000
 $7,000
                                                                                   $40,000
 $6,000
 $5,000                                                                            $30,000
 $4,000
                                                                                   $20,000
 $3,000
 $2,000
                                                                                   $10,000
 $1,000
       $-                                                                          $-
              80
              82
              84
              86
              88
              90
              92
              94
              96
              98
              00
              02
              04
              06
              08
              10
              12
              14
              16
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            19
            20
            20
            20
            20
            20
            20
            20
            20
            20




                Discretionary (Left)           GP-Directed (Left)   Main (Right)




                                                                                         36
Figure 3: Median Performance by Vehicle Type and Vintage Year

Panel A. Median PME (relative to the Russell 3000) by fund type and vintage year.

 3.5

  3

 2.5

  2

 1.5

  1

 0.5

  0
    80

    82

    84

    86

    88

    90

    92

    94

    96

    98

    00

    02

    04

    06

    08

    10

    12

    14

    16
  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20
                              Discretionary    GP-Directed      Main


Panel B. Median IRR by fund type and vintage year.

  80
  70
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0
 -10
 -20
 -30
    80

    82

    84

    86

    88

    90

    92

    94

    96

    98

    00

    02

    04

    06

    08

    10

    12

    14

    16
  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20

  20




                              Discretionary    GP-Directed      Main




                                                                                    37
Panel C. Median TVPI by fund type and vintage year.

 6

 5

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0
   80

   82

   84

   86

   88

   90

   92

   94

   96

   98

   00

   02

   04

   06

   08

   10

   12

   14

   16
 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20
                             Discretionary     GP-Directed   Main




                                                                    38
Figure 4: Excess Performance of Alternative Vehicles, by Vehicle Type. Excess PMEs are
winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.

Panel A. Histogram of Unadjusted Excess PME Performance of Discretionary Vehicles.




Panel B. Histogram of Adjusted Excess PME of Discretionary Vehicles.




                                                                                         39
Panel C. Histogram of Unadjusted Excess PME Performance of GP-Directed Vehicles.




Panel D. Histogram of Adjusted Excess PME Performance of GP-Directed Vehicles.




                                                                                   40
Table 1: Vehicle Count, Vehicle Investment Count, GP Count, LP Count, and Total and
Average USD LP Commitment, by Vehicle Type.

                                                               Total LP      Average LP
                      Vehicle   Investment    GP      LP
    Vehicle type                                             Commitment      commitment
                       count      count      count   count
                                                              (USD MM)        (USD MM)
                      3,620        15,553                       444,190
       Main                                   868    108                          29
                     (68.0%)      (78.7%)                       (83.5%)
                       883          1,800                        37,874
   Discretionary                              197     69                          21
                     (16.6%)       (9.1%)                        (7.1%)
                       819          2,411                        49,848
    GP-Directed                               261     87                          21
                     (15.4%)      (12.2%)                        (9.4%)




                                                                                          41
Table 2: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by Decade of Vehicle Vintage Year: Vehicle Count,
Vehicle Investment Count, and Total USD Commitment, by Vehicle Type

Panel A: Counts by Vehicle Type and Decade of Vehicle Vintage Year.

                        VY       Vehicle        Investment        Total LP Commitment (USD
 Vehicle type
                     decade       count              count                            MM)
    Main               1980          69                 148                           2,020
    Main               1990         491               1,376                         27,200
    Main               2000       1,589               8,588                        217,565
    Main               2010       1,470               5,440                        197,350
 Discretionar
                      1980              5                 5                                 118
      y
 Discretionar
                      1990            109              113                                  789
      y
 Discretionar
                      2000            324              835                                 9,034
      y
 Discretionar
                      2010            429              826                                27,642
      y
 GP-Directed          1980              2                 4                                   32
 GP-Directed          1990             45               125                                  885
 GP-Directed          2000            384             1,450                               13,916
 GP-Directed          2010            386               830                               34,855



Panel B: Vehicle Type and Decade of Vehicle Vintage Year, as a Share of Total Activity.

     Vehicle type         VY decade    % Vehicles    % Investments      % Total Commitment
         Main                  1980        90.8%             94.3%                   93.1%
         Main                  1990        76.1%             85.3%                   94.2%
         Main                  2000        69.2%             79.0%                   90.5%
         Main                  2010        64.3%             76.7%                   75.9%
     Discretionary             1980         6.6%              3.2%                    5.4%
     Discretionary             1990        16.9%              7.0%                    2.7%
     Discretionary             2000        14.1%              7.7%                    3.8%
     Discretionary             2010        18.8%             11.6%                   10.6%
     GP-Directed               1980         2.6%              2.5%                    1.5%
     GP-Directed               1990         7.0%              7.7%                    3.1%
     GP-Directed               2000        16.7%             13.3%                    5.8%
     GP-Directed               2010        16.9%             11.2%                   13.4%




                                                                                              42
Table 3: Performance by Vehicle Type. The performance metrics reported are Kaplan-Schoar
Public Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000, Internal Rate of Return, and Total Value
divided by Paid-In Capital. Weighted averages are by vehicle’s total commitment by limited
partners in the sample. PME, IRR, and TVPI are winsorized at 99th percentile.

                                              Russell 3000 KS PME
    Vehicle type               N      25%         50%          75%          Weighted Average
       Main                 3562       1.23        0.97         0.77                    1.02
 Main AV-Associated          679       1.20        0.97         0.76                    1.02
   Discretionary             840       1.23        0.99         0.77                    0.99
    GP-Directed              799       1.24        1.01         0.81                    0.97

                                                  IRR
    Vehicle type               N      25%         50%          75%          Weighted Average
       Main                 3562       0.17        0.09         0.00                    0.09
 Main AV-Associated          679       0.17        0.09         0.00                    0.10
   Discretionary             840       0.24        0.10        -0.01                    0.09
    GP-Directed              799       0.22        0.12         0.03                    0.11

                                                 TVPI
    Vehicle type               N      25%         50%          75%          Weighted Average
       Main                 3562       1.70        1.28         1.00                    1.37
 Main AV-Associated          679       1.66        1.22         1.00                    1.37
   Discretionary             840       1.57        1.16         0.95                    1.26
    GP-Directed              799       1.70        1.32         1.05                    1.26


Table 4: Unadjusted Excess PME Performance of Alternative Vehicles. The performance of each
alternative vehicle is compared to that of the main fund (or funds) raised by the same group of
the same type in the past five years. The performance metric used is the Kaplan-Schoar Public
Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are computed using commitment
size. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.


  Vehicle type        N      Weighted average      p-value    Average     p-value     median
       All          1433          -0.079            0.000      -0.008      0.715       0.003
  Discretionary      725          -0.022            0.521       0.006      0.869       0.009
  GP-Directed        708          -0.117            0.000      -0.022      0.343       0.002




                                                                                             43
Table 5: Adjusted Excess PME Performance of Alternative Vehicles. The performance of each
alternative vehicle is compared to that of the main fund (or funds) raised by the same group of
the same type in the past five years, but where both funds are computed relative to the mean
PME for main funds in the vintage of the vehicles formation. The performance metric used is the
Kaplan-Schoar Public Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are
computed using commitment size. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th
percentiles.

  Vehicle type        N      Weighted average      p-value     Average     p-value    median
       All          1433          -0.066            0.001       -0.006      0.795      0.004
  Discretionary      725          -0.016            0.657        0.004      0.912      0.012
  GP-Directed        708          -0.101            0.000       -0.016      0.499      0.001




                                                                                             44
Table 6: Excess Performance of Alternative Vehicles, by Decade of Vehicle Formation. The
performance of each alternative vehicle is compared to that of the main fund (or funds) raised by
the same group of the same type in the past five years. The performance metric used is the
Kaplan-Schoar Public Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are
computed using commitment size. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th
percentiles.


Panel A. Unadjusted Excess PME Performance.

 Vehicle type      Decade     N     Weighted average     p-value   Average    p-value    median
      All          1990s    105               -0.018       0.848     -0.567     0.000     -0.055
      All          2000s    636               -0.222       0.000      0.022     0.470      0.001
      All          2010s    692               -0.024       0.298      0.049     0.054      0.006
 Discretionary     1990s     71               -0.071       0.624     -0.879     0.000     -0.405
 Discretionary     2000s    288               -0.429       0.000      0.047     0.394     -0.060
 Discretionary     2010s    366                0.146       0.000      0.146     0.000      0.036
 GP-Directed       1990s     34                0.032       0.777      0.087     0.605      0.007
 GP-Directed       2000s    348               -0.071       0.030      0.001     0.965      0.007
 GP-Directed       2010s    326               -0.138       0.000     -0.058     0.076      0.000

Panel B. Adjusted Excess PME Performance.


 Vehicle type      Decade     N     Weighted average     p-value   Average    p-value    median
      All           1990s   105                0.010       0.918     -0.564     0.000     -0.007
      All           2000s   636               -0.206       0.000      0.022     0.475      0.000
      All           2010s   692               -0.014       0.558      0.054     0.038      0.009
 Discretionary      1990s    71               -0.049       0.750     -0.900     0.000     -0.405
 Discretionary      2000s   288               -0.419       0.000      0.047     0.395     -0.042
 Discretionary      2010s   366                0.151       0.000      0.146     0.000      0.046
 GP-Directed        1990s    34                0.066       0.549      0.139     0.366      0.087
 GP-Directed        2000s   348               -0.049       0.127      0.001     0.977      0.005
 GP-Directed        2010s   326               -0.124       0.000     -0.049     0.138      0.000




                                                                                               45
Table 7: Characteristics of GPs and LPs.

                                                                   Standard
           GP               Count      Average        Median                         10%     90%
                                                                   Deviation
    1st activity year          870      2003.4           2005           7.96      2014       1993
 commitment (USD MM)           870       $611            $134         $2,065     $1,213       $ 15
    commitment %               870      0.11%           0.03%         0.39%      0.23%      0.00%

                                                                   Standard
           LP               Count      Average        Median                         10%     90%
                                                                   Deviation
    1st activity year         112      1998.36          1999            9.32     2010        1983
   commitment (USD            112       $4,749          $775         $11,308   $12,106        $43
          MM)
     commitment%              112        0.89%         0.15%          2.13%      2.28%      0.01%


Table 8: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by GP Strategy.

Panel A. Vehicle counts by GP strategy and vehicle structure.

      Vehicle type                                      Private
                                           Buyout                  Venture Capital    Grand Total
                                                           Debt
          Main                       2008 (37.7%)    443 (8.3%)       1169 (22.0%)    3620 (68.0%)
      Discretionary                   671 (12.6%)     73 (1.4%)         139 (2.6%)     883 (16.6%)
      GP-Directed                     564 (10.6%)     98 (1.8%)         157 (3.0%)     819 (15.4%)
      Grand Total                    3243 (60.9%)   614 (11.5%)       1465 (27.5%)            5322
                                                                                         (100.0%)


Panel B. USD commitment (millions) amount by GP strategy and vehicle structure.

    Vehicle type                 Buyout     Private Debt       Venture Capital      Grand Total
        Main            $333,084 (62.6%) $57,231 (10.8%)       $53,875 (10.1%) $444,190 (83.5%)
    Discretionary         $30,140 (5.7%)   $5,657 (1.1%)         $2,077 (0.4%)    $37,874 (7.1%)
    GP-Directed           $40,379 (7.6%)   $5,669 (1.1%)         $3,800 (0.7%)    $49,848 (9.4%)
    Grand Total         $403,603 (75.9%) $68,557 (12.9%)       $59,752 (11.2%) $531,912 (100.0%)




                                                                                                46
Table 9: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by GP Size. GPs are divided into terciles by the
amount of capital they raised between 1980 and 2017. The top tercile has largest GP size.

Panel A. Vehicle counts by GP size tercile.

                                           GP size tercile
     Vehicle type              Bottom           Middle                   Top      Grand Total
         Main               456 (8.6%)     902 (16.9%)          2262 (42.5%)     3620 (68.0%)
     Discretionary           17 (0.3%)       64 (1.2%)           802 (15.1%)      883 (16.6%)
     GP-Directed             14 (0.3%)      124 (2.3%)           681 (12.8%)      819 (15.4%)
     Grand Total            487 (9.2%)    1090 (20.5%)          3745 (70.4%)    5322 (100.0%)

Panel B. USD commitment (Millions) amount by GP size tercile.

                                              GP size tercile
    Vehicle type               Bottom           Middle                  Top        Grand Total
                               $8,074          $37,437             $398,679          $444,190
       Main
                              (1.52%)          (7.04%)             (74.95%)          (83.51%)
                                  $43             $709              $37,122           $37,874
   Discretionary
                              (0.01%)          (0.13%)              (6.98%)           (7.12%)
                                  $92           $1,380              $48,376           $49,848
    GP-Directed
                              (0.02%)          (0.26%)              (9.09%)           (9.37%)
                               $8,209          $39,526             $484,177          $531,912
    Grand Total
                              (1.54%)          (7.43%)             (91.03%)         (100.00%)

Table 10: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by GP Geography.

Panel A. Investment counts by GP Geography and vehicle structure

     Vehicle type              Europe                   NA              RoW       Grand Total
         Main              541 (10.2%)         2858 (53.7%)        221 (4.2%)     3620 (68.0%)
     Discretionary           89 (1.7%)          778 (14.6%)         16 (0.3%)      883 (16.6%)
     GP-Directed            156 (2.9%)          621 (11.7%)         42 (0.8%)      819 (15.4%)
     Grand Total           786 (14.8%)         4257 (80.0%)        279 (5.2%)    5322 (100.0%)

Panel B. USD commitment (Millions) amount by GP Geography and vehicle structure

     Vehicle type              Europe                    NA            RoW         Grand Total
                               $58,238              $367,828         $18,125          $444,191
         Main
                               (10.9%)               (69.1%)          (3.4%)           (83.5%)
                                $4,067               $33,167            $640           $37,874
     Discretionary
                                (0.8%)                (6.2%)          (0.1%)            (7.1%)
                                $7,825               $41,267            $756           $49,848
     GP-Directed
                                (1.5%)                (7.8%)          (0.1%)            (9.4%)
                               $70,130              $442,262         $19,521          $531,913
     Grand Total
                               (13.2%)               (83.1%)          (3.7%)         (100.00%)




                                                                                            47
Table 11: Adjusted Excess Performance of Alternative Vehicles by GP Strategy. The
performance of each alternative vehicle is compared that of the main fund (or funds) raised by
the same group of the same type in the past five years. The performance metric used is the
Kaplan-Schoar Public Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are
computed using commitment size. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th
percentiles.
                                         Weighted
  GP Strategy      Vehicle type     N                p-Value   Average       p-Value     Median
                                          average
    Buyout         Discretionary   559      -0.045     0.294      -0.029       0.513       0.009
    Buyout         GP-Directed     499      -0.102     0.000      -0.003       0.911       0.007
  Private Debt     Discretionary    51       0.235     0.005       0.249       0.007       0.137
  Private Debt     GP-Directed      76      -0.109     0.081      -0.029       0.715       0.002
    Venture        Discretionary   115      -0.107     0.047       0.057       0.424       0.000
    Capital
    Venture        GP-Directed     133      -0.059     0.083      -0.055       0.303      -0.006
    Capital


Table 12: Adjusted Excess Performance of Alternative Vehicles by GP Size. The performance of
each alternative vehicle is compared that of the main fund (or funds) raised by the same group of
the same type in the past five years. The performance metric used is the Kaplan-Schoar Public
Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are computed using commitment
size. GPs are divided into terciles by the amount of capital they raised between 1980 and 2017.
Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.

 GP Size   Vehicle type       N    Weighted average     p-Value   Average      p-Value   Median
 Bottom    Discretionary      7               0.232       0.567      0.353       0.688     0.099
 Bottom    GP-Directed        8              -0.054       0.688     -0.065       0.731    -0.094
 Middle    Discretionary     51               0.102       0.397      0.331       0.035     0.011
 Middle    GP-Directed       96               0.032       0.398     -0.031       0.553     0.001
  Top      Discretionary    667              -0.018       0.619     -0.025       0.507     0.009
  Top      GP-Directed      604              -0.104       0.000     -0.013       0.624     0.003




                                                                                                 48
Table 13: Adjusted Excess Performance of Alternative Vehicles by GP Geography. The
performance of each alternative vehicle is compared that of the main fund (or funds) raised by
the same group of the same type in the past five years. The performance metric used is the
Kaplan-Schoar Public Market Equivalent versus the Russell 3000. Weighted averages are
computed using commitment size. NA (i.e. North America) includes US and Canada. Excess
PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.

   GP Region     Vehicle type    N   Weighted average p-Value Average p-Value Median
      NA         Discretionary   637           -0.070   0.051   -0.016  0.690   0.004
      NA         GP-Directed     547           -0.132   0.000   -0.038  0.158   0.001
    Europe       Discretionary    73            0.436   0.003    0.184  0.149   0.105
    Europe       GP-Directed     127            0.077   0.057    0.086  0.092   0.007
     RoW         Discretionary    15           -0.077   0.573   -0.040  0.823   0.002
     RoW         GP-Directed      34           -0.154   0.023   -0.032  0.672  -0.025




                                                                                                 49
Table 14. Analysis of Alternative Vehicle Activity by GP Characteristics. The dependent
variable in the first six columns is the ratio of discretionary and GP-directed vehicle
commitments to total capital commitments in each five-year period for each GP. The dependent
variable in last column is the log10 of 1 + alternative vehicle commitment in each five-year
period for each GP. Weighted regressions use the sum of the GPs’ capital commitments in the
current five-year period as weights. GP prior five-year mean PME is an average over the
previous five-year period, weighted by vehicle commitments. The reference categories are North
America (US & Canada) for GP region, buyout for GP strategy, and bottom tercile for GP size.
Standard errors are clustered by GP and shown in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. T is a five year series time trend variable
starting with 0 for 1980-84.

                                                                                                                       All
                                                                                    Discretionary   GP-Directed   alternative
                                    All alternative vehicles (ratio)
                                                                                       (ratio)        (ratio)      vehicles
                                                                                                                     (level)
      Variables        Unweighted     Weighted        Unweighted       Weighted      Weighted        Weighted     Weighted
  𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./        0.160          0.173            0.192           0.261         -0.044          0.305        0.745
                        (0.075)**       (0.112)        (0.088)**       (0.131)**       (0.116)       (0.084)***     (1.901)
   𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1          0.054          0.187            -0.156          0.054         -0.091          0.144        8.571
                         (0.076)        (0.132)         (0.168)         (0.233)        (0.173)        (0.111)       (5.713)
   𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67         0.010          0.321            0.002           0.190          0.069          0.120        -2.129
                         (0.037)      (0.110)***        (0.062)         (0.098)*       (0.078)        (0.063)*      (1.656)
  𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:        0.014          0.263            0.024           0.370          0.207          0.163        4.783
                         (0.051)      (0.116)**         (0.104)        (0.179)**      (0.122)*       (0.082)**      (4.030)
    𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/        -0.115         -0.025           -0.035          0.006          0.004          0.002        1.578
                       (0.032)***       (0.046)         (0.067)         (0.084)        (0.052)        (0.049)       (1.806)
     𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.          -0.082         -0.105           -0.085          -0.052        -0.017          -0.035       3.107
                        (0.036)**       (0.074)         (0.059)         (0.076)        (0.052)        (0.047)      (1.679)*
 𝐺𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸                                        -0.020          -0.061        -0.030          -0.032       0.693
                                                       (0.009)**       (0.027)**      (0.014)**       (0.019)     (0.312)**

                         0.004          0.044            0.020           0.060          0.026          0.034        0.392
         𝑇
                         (0.006)      (0.013)***        (0.015)        (0.018)***     (0.014)*       (0.012)***     (0.314)
 𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./     -0.026         -0.032           -0.031          -0.046         0.005          -0.051       -0.177
                        (0.014)*        (0.024)         (0.017)*        (0.027)*       (0.024)       (0.017)***     (0.305)
  𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1       -0.019         -0.050           0.010           -0.033         0.005          -0.038       -1.679
                         (0.014)      (0.024)**         (0.031)         (0.041)        (0.030)       (0.019)**     (0.911)*
 𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67       -0.004         -0.067           -0.005          -0.049        -0.018          -0.031       0.015
                         (0.008)      (0.019)***        (0.013)        (0.020)**       (0.015)       (0.013)**      (0.292)
 𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:     -0.003         -0.051           -0.008          -0.072        -0.038          -0.035       -1.079
                         (0.011)      (0.022)**         (0.019)        (0.029)**      (0.020)*       (0.015)**      (0.674)
  𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/      0.033          0.013            0.020           0.004          0.003          0.002        -0.028
                       (0.007)***       (0.009)         (0.015)         (0.017)        (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.328)
   𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.        0.040          0.046            0.037           0.031          0.014          0.017        0.348



                                                                                                                              50
                     (0.007)***   (0.013)***   (0.013)***   (0.014)**   (0.010)   (0.009)*   (0.302)
   Observations        2161         2161         1164         1164       1164      1164       1164
Adjusted R-squared     0.070        0.133        0.061       0.145      0.084      0.085     0.145




                                                                                                       51
Table 15. Regression Analyses of Alternative Vehicle Performance by GP Characteristics. Each
alternative vehicle is an observation; the dependent variable is the Adjusted Excess PME
Performance in Panel A and the PME performance in Panel B. Weighted regressions use the sum
of the vehicles’ capital commitments as weights. GP prior five-year mean PME is an average
over the previous five years, weighted by vehicle commitments. The reference categories are
North America (US & Canada) for GP region, buyout for GP strategy, and bottom tercile for GP
size. T is a time trend variable equal to vintage year less 1980. Standard errors are clustered by
GP and shown in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% level, respectively. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles in Panel A;
and at the 99th percentile in Panel B.

Panel A. Adjusted Excess PME performance of alternative vehicle as dependent variable.
                                                All Alternative vehicles               Discretionary   GP-Directed
            Variables              Unweighted   Weighted      Unweighted    Weighted    Weighted        Weighted
     𝑉𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒8=LM,/:=-NO,P       -1.270      -1.615          -1.321      -1.670
                                    (0.561)**    (1.189)        (0.554)**    (1.228)
         𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./             0.282       -0.541           0.295      -0.576       -2.052          0.096
                                     (0.588)     (0.854)         (0.591)     (0.918)      (1.778)        (0.769)
          𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1               1.782       1.654            1.020      1.187        2.561          -0.039
                                    (0.693)**   (0.825)**        (0.736)     (0.780)     (1.306)**       (1.211)
         𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67               0.946       0.161            1.142      0.326        2.355          -0.896
                                    (0.521)*     (0.720)        (0.573)**    (0.803)      (1.697)        (0.775)
         𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:             0.855       0.506            0.726      0.496        1.027          -0.342
                                     (0.567)     (1.178)         (0.594)     (1.256)      (1.811)        (1.055)
          𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/              0.954       -1.517           2.062      -2.198       -0.376          1.844
                                     (2.022)     (1.374)         (3.090)     (1.469)      (1.619)        (0.961)*
            𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.               1.496       -2.300           3.131      -2.628       -2.553          2.015
                                     (2.009)    (1.318)*         (3.050)    (1.484)*     (1.498)*        (1.069)*
       𝐺𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸                                          -0.067      -0.031       0.643          -0.297
                                                                 (0.104)     (0.180)     (0.336)*       (0.139)**
                𝑇                    0.058       -0.080           0.117      -0.091       -0.020          0.054
                                     (0.071)    (0.047)*         (0.103)    (0.053)*      (0.058)        (0.028)*
   𝑇 × 𝑉𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒8=LM,/:=-NO,P     0.046       0.054            0.048      0.055
                                    (0.019)**    (0.036)        (0.019)**    (0.037)
      𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./            -0.006      0.026           -0.006      0.028        0.072           0.004
                                     (0.020)     (0.030)         (0.020)     (0.032)      (0.059)        (0.025)
        𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1             -0.060      -0.054          -0.037      -0.040       -0.080         -0.002
                                   (0.023)***   (0.025)**        (0.024)    (0.024)*     (0.039)**       (0.038)
       𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67             -0.034      -0.006          -0.039      -0.010       -0.075          0.032
                                    (0.018)*     (0.024)        (0.019)**    (0.026)      (0.051)        (0.027)
      𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:            -0.027      -0.012          -0.023      -0.012       -0.023          0.011
                                     (0.020)     (0.036)         (0.020)     (0.039)      (0.057)        (0.033)
        𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/            -0.035      0.050           -0.078      0.070        0.011          -0.062


                                                                                                                    52
                                     (0.071)     (0.044)         (0.105)     (0.049)        (0.054)        (0.033)*
         𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.              -0.056      0.072           -0.115       0.081         0.073          -0.072
                                     (0.071)    (0.042)*         (0.104)     (0.049)*       (0.049)       (0.036)**
           Observations               1433        1433            1359        1359           702             657
        Adjusted R-squared           0.055       0.049            0.062       0.049         0.095           0.027



Panel B. PME performance of alternative vehicle as dependent variable.
                                                All Alternative vehicles                 Discretionary   GP-Directed
            Variables              Unweighted   Weighted      Unweighted    Weighted      Weighted        Weighted
     𝑉𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒8=LM,/:=-NO,P       -0.809      -1.019          -0.559       -0.777
                                   (0.269)***   (0.469)**       (0.272)**    (0.434)*
         𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./             -0.221      -0.067          -0.278       -0.295        -2.022          0.298
                                     (0.461)     (0.645)         (0.493)     (0.692)        (1.276)        (0.386)
          𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1               -0.093      -0.154          -0.584       -0.073        1.951          -1.418
                                     (0.903)     (0.706)         (0.588)     (0.471)       (0.849)**      (0.580)**
         𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67               -0.254      -0.462           0.197       -0.030        1.299          -0.633
                                     (0.357)     (0.488)         (0.352)     (0.506)        (1.113)        (0.421)
         𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:             -0.618      -0.765          -0.687       -0.693        -0.578         -0.992
                                    (0.289)**    (0.646)        (0.309)**    (0.758)        (1.221)        (0.510)*
          𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/              1.218       -0.910           1.637       -2.218        -0.794          0.975
                                     (1.580)     (1.093)         (2.416)    (1.075)**       (1.327)        (1.001)
            𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.               1.906       -1.004           2.655       -2.275        -2.002          1.152
                                     (1.567)     (1.062)         (2.384)    (1.030)**      (0.989)**       (0.948)
       𝐺𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸                                           0.290       0.375         0.925           0.163
                                                               (0.065)***   (0.123)***    (0.252)***     (0.057)***
                𝑇                    0.041       -0.061           0.082       -0.093        -0.039          0.012
                                     (0.058)    (0.035)*         (0.086)    (0.035)***      (0.033)        (0.033)
   𝑇 × 𝑉𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒8=LM,/:=-NO,P     0.028       0.034            0.020       0.026
                                   (0.009)***   (0.014)**       (0.009)**   (0.013)**
      𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./            0.009       0.008            0.011       0.015         0.065          -0.005
                                     (0.015)     (0.023)         (0.016)     (0.024)        (0.044)        (0.013)
        𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1             0.001       0.003            0.015       -0.001        -0.060          0.040
                                     (0.027)     (0.021)         (0.018)     (0.015)       (0.027)**      (0.018)**
       𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67             0.004       0.011           -0.009       -0.003        -0.044          0.018
                                     (0.011)     (0.017)         (0.011)     (0.017)        (0.036)        (0.013)
      𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:            0.017       0.023            0.019       0.021         0.021           0.029
                                    (0.010)*     (0.021)        (0.010)*     (0.025)        (0.041)        (0.015)*
        𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/            -0.045      0.037           -0.066       0.083         0.029          -0.020
                                     (0.059)     (0.035)         (0.088)    (0.036)**       (0.043)        (0.034)
         𝑇 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.              -0.068      0.039           -0.099       0.081         0.058          -0.028
                                     (0.058)     (0.034)         (0.087)    (0.034)**      (0.032)*        (0.033)
           Observations               1433        1433            1359        1359           702             657


                                                                                                                      53
Adjusted R-squared   0.025   0.041   0.053   0.083   0.130   0.104




                                                                     54
Table 16: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by LP Type. Note one vehicle may have multiple
LPs.


Panel A. Investment counts by vehicle structure and LP type.

                                                 Vehicle type
          LP_TYPE                   Main         Discretionary     GP-Directed    Grand Total
                                    1730                    63            168           1961
             FoF
                                  (8.8%)               (0.3%)          (0.9%)         (9.9%)
                                    1424                   119            123           1666
  Foundation & Endowment
                                  (7.2%)               (0.6%)          (0.6%)         (8.4%)
    Insurance & Financial           6280                   808           1535           8623
          institution            (31.8%)               (4.1%)          (7.8%)        (43.6%)
                                     717                    43              73           833
       Private Pension
                                  (3.6%)               (0.3%)          (0.4%)         (4.2%)
                                    4576                   640            387           5603
        Public Pension
                                 (23.2%)               (3.2%)          (2.0%)        (28.3%)
                                     826                   127            125           1078
   Sovereign Wealth Fund
                                  (4.2%)               (0.6%)          (0.6%)         (5.5%)
                                   15553                  1800           2411          19764
         Grand Total
                                 (78.7%)               (9.1%)         (12.2%)       (100.0%)

Panel B. USD commitment (Millions) amount by LP type and vehicle structure

                                                  Vehicle type
          LP_TYPE                    Main          Discretionary    GP-Directed        Grand Total
                                  $21,897                   $948        $4,996            $27,841
             FoF
                                   (4.1%)                 (0.2%)        (0.9%)             (5.2%)
                                  $21,383                 $2,756        $3,529            $27,668
  Foundation & Endowment
                                   (4.0%)                 (0.5%)        (0.7%)             (5.2%)
    Insurance & Financial         $58,794                 $3,426       $10,833            $73,053
          institution             (11.1%)                 (0.6%)        (2.0%)            (13.7%)
                                  $18,345                 $2,702        $2,592            $23,639
       Private Pension
                                   (3.4%)                 (0.5%)        (0.5%)             (4.4%)
                                 $239,949               $17,441        $13,789           $271,179
        Public Pension
                                  (45.1%)                 (3.3%)        (2.6%)            (51.0%)
                                  $83,823               $10,601        $14,109           $108,533
   Sovereign Wealth Fund
                                  (15.8%)                 (2.0%)        (2.7%)            (20.4%)
                                 $444,191               $37,874        $49,848           $531,913
         Grand Total
                                  (83.5%)                 (7.1%)        (9.4%)           (100.0%)




                                                                                           55
Table 17: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by LP Size. Note, one vehicle may have multiple
LPs.

Panel A. Investment counts by vehicle structure and LP commitment size tercile.

                                  LP commitment size tercile
  Vehicle type               Bottom           Middle                  Top            Grand Total
      Main                355 (1.8%)     1737 (8.8%)       13461 (68.1%)           15553 (78.7%)
  Discretionary            14 (0.1%)      113 (0.6%)          1673 (8.5%)            1800 (9.1%)
  GP-Directed              41 (0.2%)      219 (1.1%)         2151 (10.9%)           2411 (12.2%)
  Grand Total             410 (2.1%)    2069 (10.5%)       17285 (87.5%)          19764 (100.0%)


Panel B. USD commitment (Millions) amount by LP commitment size tercile and vehicle
structure.

                                 LP commitment size tercile
  Vehicle type               Bottom          Middle                    Top         Grand Total
      Main             $2,605 (0.5%) $22,451 (4.2%)      $419,135 (78.8%)     $444,191 (83.5%)
  Discretionary         $341 (0.1%)    $3,232 (0.6%)        $34,301 (6.4%)      $37,874 (7.1%)
  GP-Directed           $579 (0.1%)    $3,850 (0.7%)        $45,419 (8.5%)      $49,848 (9.4%)
  Grand Total          $3,525 (0.7%) $29,533 (5.6%)      $498,855 (93.8%)    $531,913 (100.0%)


Table 18: Breakdown of Vehicle Formation by LP Geography.

Panel A. Investment counts by vehicle structure and LP Geography.

                                           Region
  Vehicle type                 Europe              NA                RoW             Grand Total
      Main               2150 (10.9%)    12303 (62.2%)        1100 (5.6%)          15553 (78.7%)
  Discretionary            182 (0.9%)      1487 (7.5%)         131 (0.7%)            1800 (9.1%)
  GP-Directed              296 (1.5%)      1963 (9.9%)         152 (0.8%)           2411 (12.2%)
  Grand Total            2628 (13.3%)    15753 (79.7%)        1383 (7.0%)         19764 (100.0%)

Panel C. USD commitment (Millions) amount by LP Geography and vehicle structure.

                                          Region
  Vehicle type               Europe                NA                RoW             Grand Total
                            $27,671           $328,170            $88,349              $444,190
      Main
                             (5.2%)            (61.7%)            (16.6%)               (83.5%)
                             $3,713            $23,500            $10,661               $37,874
  Discretionary
                             (0.7%)             (4.4%)             (2.0%)                (7.1%)
                             $7,044            $28,080            $14,724               $49,848
  GP-Directed
                             (1.3%)             (5.3%)             (2.8%)                (9.4%)
                            $38,428           $379,750           $113,734              $531,912
  Grand Total
                             (7.2%)            (71.4%)            (21.4%)              (100.0%)


                                                                                              56
Table 19: Adjusted Excess PME Performance (Russel 3000 KS PME) of Alternative Vehicles by
LP Type. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles. One vehicle may have
more than one LP.

                                                Weighted
       LP type            Vehicle type     N                p-Value   Average   p-Value   Median
                                                 Average
         FoF              Discretionary    35      -0.144     0.025    -0.107     0.385     -0.075
                           GP-Directed     89      -0.106     0.088    -0.078     0.374     -0.021
    Foundation &
                          Discretionary    53       0.064     0.420     0.026     0.773     -0.039
     Endowment
                          GP-Directed      74      -0.028     0.319     0.002     0.949      0.005
    Insurance &
                          Discretionary   162       0.177     0.002     0.247     0.000      0.081
 Financial institution
                           GP-Directed    390       0.013     0.677     0.050     0.187      0.020
   Private Pension        Discretionary    29       0.195     0.002    -0.041     0.723      0.027
                           GP-Directed     54      -0.001     0.985    -0.045     0.567     -0.016
    Public Pension        Discretionary   390      -0.083     0.205    -0.044     0.470      0.038
                           GP-Directed    120      -0.065     0.122     0.023     0.606      0.013
   Sovereign Wealth
                          Discretionary   102       0.082     0.093    -0.005     0.933     -0.086
        Fund
                          GP-Directed     100      -0.213     0.004    -0.220     0.004     -0.063

Table 20: Adjusted Excess PME Performance of Alternative Vehicles by LP Size. Excess PMEs
are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.

   LP size      Vehicle type     N   Weighted Average   p-Value   Average    p-Value   Median
   Bottom      Discretionary    10             -0.310     0.010      0.087     0.689     0.099
   Bottom      GP-Directed      35             -0.005     0.945     -0.102     0.177    -0.015
   Middle      Discretionary    78              0.090     0.112     -0.050     0.630    -0.087
   Middle      GP-Directed     152             -0.080     0.067     -0.020     0.755    -0.001
    Top        Discretionary   665              0.011     0.781      0.039     0.310     0.029
    Top        GP-Directed     585             -0.094     0.000     -0.001     0.981     0.004

Table 21: Adjusted Excess PME Performance of Alternative Vehicles by LP Geography. NA
(i.e. North America) includes US and Canada. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th
percentiles.

   LP region   Vehicle type      N Weighted Average p-Value Average p-Value Median
      NA       Discretionary   587           -0.041   0.397    0.012  0.781   0.013
      NA       GP-Directed     523           -0.041   0.056    0.009  0.747   0.005
    Europe     Discretionary    78            0.177   0.000    0.218  0.013   0.159
    Europe     GP-Directed     139           -0.023   0.588    0.063  0.383   0.000
     RoW       Discretionary   104            0.081   0.095   -0.010  0.854  -0.086
     RoW       GP-Directed     115           -0.205   0.002   -0.183  0.005  -0.050


                                                                                            57
Table 22. Analysis of Alternative Vehicle Performance by GP and LP Characteristics. Each
investment by an individual LP in an alternative vehicle is an observation; the dependent variable
is their Adjusted Excess PME Performance. Weighted regressions use the individual capital
commitments as weights. GP and LP prior five-year mean PME are averages, weighted by
commitments, over the prior five years. The reference categories are Fund of Funds for LP type,
North America (US & Canada) for LP Region, and bottom tercile for LP Size. T is a time trend
variable equal to vintage year less 1980. Standard errors are clustered by GP and LP and shown
in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively. Excess PMEs are winsorized at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles.

                                                          All alternative vehicles                 Discretionary   GP-Directed
               Variables                    Unweighted   Weighted       Unweighted    Weighted      Weighted        Weighted
       𝑉𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒>=LM,/:=-NO,P              0.195        -0.137          0.179        -0.194
                                              (0.136)     (0.351)          (0.161)     (0.370)
    𝐿𝑃_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒R-+N>O:=-N & /N>-TU/N:             0.230        0.261           0.244        0.341         -0.269          0.174
                                            (0.084)***    (0.151)*       (0.112)**    (0.173)**       (0.446)        (0.121)
 𝐿𝑃_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒=NL+,ONM/ & R=NONM=O? =NL:=:+:=-N     0.223        0.308           0.215        0.198         -0.490          0.219
                                            (0.057)***   (0.091)***      (0.094)**     (0.174)        (0.406)       (0.111)**
         𝐿𝑃_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒.,=VO:/ ./NL=-N               0.218        0.309           0.229        0.336         -0.202          0.256
                                             (0.088)**   (0.112)***      (0.116)**    (0.119)***      (0.483)       (0.066)***
         𝐿𝑃_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒.+9?=M ./NL=-N                0.189        -0.097          0.172        0.032         -0.528          0.186
                                             (0.105)*     (0.267)         (0.096)*     (0.180)        (0.446)        (0.177)
      𝐿𝑃_𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒L-V/,=WN T/O?:X R+N>             -0.196       0.033           -0.145       0.129         -1.943          -0.070
                                              (0.186)     (0.149)          (0.176)     (0.215)        (1.273)        (0.164)
           𝐿𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./                    0.191        0.247           0.176        0.096         0.013           0.100
                                              (0.129)     (0.162)          (0.113)     (0.140)        (0.256)        (0.104)
            𝐿𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1                      -0.017       -0.059          -0.049       -0.102        1.138           0.133
                                              (0.183)     (0.173)          (0.208)     (0.221)        (1.128)        (0.163)
             𝐿𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒U=>>?/                    0.044        0.351           0.011        -0.030        -1.664          -0.018
                                              (0.145)     (0.219)          (0.140)     (0.227)       (0.920)*        (0.120)
               𝐿𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒:-.                     0.076        0.430           0.048        0.007         -0.812          0.086
                                              (0.113)    (0.213)**         (0.127)     (0.250)        (0.643)        (0.098)
         𝐿𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸                                                  0.127        1.849         4.679           0.212
                                                                           (0.088)    (0.877)**     (1.632)***      (0.086)**
           𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛*+,-./                    0.301        0.637           0.328        0.610         1.194           0.229
                                            (0.109)***   (0.301)**       (0.114)***   (0.257)**     (0.385)***      (0.113)**
            𝐺𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛0-1                      1.814        0.802           1.951        0.907         0.077           1.755
                                              (1.362)     (0.720)          (1.480)     (0.755)        (0.441)        (1.460)
             𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/                    0.101        -0.226          -0.074       -0.424        -1.876          -0.193
                                              (0.236)     (0.208)          (0.267)     (0.304)      (0.701)***       (0.257)
              𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.                      0.179        -0.076          0.116        -0.229        -2.026          0.139
                                              (0.232)     (0.175)          (0.300)     (0.335)      (0.769)***       (0.162)



                                                                                                                                58
 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67       0.438     0.378     0.442      0.482       0.428       0.470
                     (0.325)   (0.276)   (0.304)   (0.272)*    (0.318)      (0.327)
 𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:     -0.037    0.267     -0.050     0.316       0.737       0.007
                     (0.209)   (0.241)   (0.204)   (0.228)     (0.434)*     (0.106)
𝐺𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸                         -0.217    -0.081       0.080       -0.435
                                         (0.329)   (0.355)     (1.207)     (0.179)**
        𝑇            0.072     0.253     0.069      0.275       0.784       -0.077
                     (0.064)   (0.204)   (0.084)   (0.217)    (0.293)***    (0.105)
   Observations       3615      3615      3364      3364        1468         1896
Adjusted R-squared   0.062     0.043     0.068      0.090       0.222       0.091




                                                                                       59
Table 23. Analysis of LP and GP matching in alternative vehicles. Each investment by an
individual LP in an alternative vehicle is an observation; the dependent variable is their PME
performance. Weighted regressions use the individual capital commitments as weights. The
reference categories are buyout for GP strategy and bottom tercile for GP size. In Columns 1, 3,
and 5, we use the average performance over the total VCPE portfolio and the entire time period
an LP or GP is in our sample. We then classify LPs and GPs into above median versus below
median performers. We form four dummies to characterize the match between the LP and the
GP: (1) LP and GP above median, (2) LP and GP below median, (3) LP above median and GP
above, and (4) vice versa. In the even columns, we repeat the same regression set–up, but use as
the performance measure the average volume-weighted PME in the five years prior to the
inception of the alternative vehicle. We include GP fixed effects here, since this measure of
performance varies over time. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. PMEs are winsorized at the
99th percentile.

       Variables          All alternative vehicles             Discretionary                    GP-Directed
     𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒<=>>?/        0.229                          -0.069                         0.424
                         (0.312)                        (0.649)                        (0.294)
      𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒@-.          0.149                          -0.309                         0.437
                         (0.306)                        (0.637)                        (0.288)
    𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦67         0.025                          -0.053                         0.116
                         (0.043)                        (0.080)                       (0.044)***
   𝐺𝑃_𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦8/9:        0.002                          0.167                          -0.100
                         (0.033)                       (0.061)***                     (0.034)***
 𝐿𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)𝐺𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(−)       0.181             0.023        0.246             0.082        0.174                 0.007
                        (0.039)***          (0.027)    (0.083)***         (0.062)     (0.037)***          (0.025)
 𝐿𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(−)𝐺𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)       0.185             0.141        0.274             0.339        0.162                 0.042
                        (0.034)***        (0.034)***   (0.073)***        (0.076)***   (0.032)***          (0.031)
 𝐿𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)𝐺𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)       0.376             0.155        0.588             0.003        0.263                 0.143
                        (0.034)***        (0.030)***   (0.072)***         (0.071)     (0.033)***        (0.027)***
   𝐺𝑃_𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑_𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠        No                Yes          No                   Yes       No                   Yes
      Observations        3615               3364        1544              1468         2071                  1896
   Adjusted R-squared     0.041             0.307        0.064             0.346        0.036                 0.439




                                                                                                                      60
Appendix A: Variable Definitions

             Variables                 Definition
             GP_strategyiii            Dummy variable for GP main strategy: Venture Capital, Debt Related, Buy out

               GP_sizeiii              Dummy variable for GP size tercile: Bottom, Middle and Top.

           GP_prior_5yr_PME            weighted average of the GP's prior 5 year PME

           𝐺𝑃_𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑_𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠            Dummy variable for individual GP
                                       Dummy for LP types: FoF (reference group): Foundations and Endowments, Insurance and
               LP_typeiii
                                       Financial Institutions, Private Pension, Public Pension, Sovereign Wealth Funds
             𝐿𝑃_𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛qqq              Dummy for LP region: US (reference group), Europe and RoW

               𝐿𝑃_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒qqq              Dummy for LP size tercile: Bottom (reference group), Middle and Top

          𝐿𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸             weighted average of the LP's prior 5 year PME
                                       Interaction between weighted average of the LP's prior 5 year PME and weighted average of the
 𝐿𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸 × 𝐺𝑃_𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟_5𝑦𝑟_𝑃𝑀𝐸
                                       GP's prior 5 year PME
                                       Time trend variable indicating the five-year period of the dependent variable. We start with 0
           𝑇 (five-year series)
                                       for 1980-1984, 1 for 1985-1989 and so on.
         𝑇 (Vintage year – 1980)       Time trend variable defined as the vintage year of the alternative vehicle minus 1980

           T × GP_regioniii            Interaction between GP region and time trend variable
           T × GP_strategyiii          Interaction between GP strategy and time trend variable
             T × GP_sizeiii            Interaction between GP size tercile and time trend variable
          T × Vehicle_typeiii          Interaction between vehicle type and time trend variable

            Vehicle_typeiii            Dummy for vehicle type: Discretionary or GP-directed (reference group)

        𝐿𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)𝐺𝑃_𝑃𝑀𝐸(+)             Dummy for LP performance above median and GP performance above median




                                                                                                                                61
Appendix B: Replicating the main fund performance calculations of Harris, et al. (2016).
S&P 500 PME of North American GP’s buyout and venture capital main funds.

                              Buyout                           Venture Capital
                      Media   Mea         Weighted        Media   Mea            Weighted
  Vintage year   N        n      n         average   N        n      n            average
         1985    1     0.93   0.93            0.93
         1986                                         1    1.58    1.58              1.58
         1987     1    0.98   0.98            0.98
         1988     7    1.01   1.22            1.00    8    1.28    1.12              1.35
         1989     3    1.17   1.29            1.69    8    1.12    1.24              1.20
         1990     6    0.93   0.88            0.87    7    1.14    1.55              1.79
         1991     6    1.09   1.15            1.22    5    0.88    0.72              0.61
         1992     8    1.24   1.21            1.13    9    1.15    1.65              1.48
         1993    10    1.07   1.36            1.13   13    1.13    1.33              1.46
         1994    17    1.07   1.20            1.49   16    1.47    2.36              1.37
         1995    13    0.98   1.22            1.17    9    1.68    2.05              2.69
         1996    19    1.28   1.33            1.35   12    1.52    2.35              1.49
         1997    37    1.44   1.46            1.39   21    1.27    1.69              1.13
         1998    52    1.33   1.43            1.39   30    1.28    2.20              1.08
         1999    45    1.39   1.26            1.22   56    0.67    0.77              0.61
         2000    49    1.32   1.48            1.48   74    0.76    0.98              0.84
         2001    47    1.46   1.44            1.59   36    0.92    0.96              0.92
         2002    40    1.37   1.45            1.35   21    0.65    0.73              0.70
         2003    42    1.36   1.53            1.54   15    0.81    3.03              0.87
         2004    58    1.30   1.26            1.40   29    0.78    1.47              0.95
         2005    84    1.02   1.06            1.10   52    0.87    1.24              1.18
         2006    96    0.98   1.17            0.98   67    0.86    1.08              0.97
                 11
          2007    6    0.98   1.23            1.02   63    0.92    1.02              0.97
                 10
          2008    1    0.91   0.92            0.90   52    0.87    1.07              1.02
          2009   41    0.96   1.02            0.99   30    1.05    1.11              1.03
          2010   45    1.00   0.94            0.75   35    1.11    1.17              1.21
                 94                                  66
Average           4    1.14   1.22            1.20    9    1.07    1.44              1.19
Average          71                                  47
2000s             9    1.15   1.23            1.19    4    0.87    1.26              0.97
Average          21                                  17
1990s             3    1.18   1.25            1.24    8    1.22    1.67              1.37
Average
1980s            12    1.02   1.11            1.15   17    1.33    1.31              1.38




                                                                                       62
Appendix C: Tables 3, 4, and 5 without private debt.

Table 3 without private debt GPs
                                              Russell 3000 KS PME
 Vehicle type           N              25%          50%          75% Weighted Average PME
 MAIN                       3126       1.25        0.97         0.76                    1.03
 Main AV-Associated          605       1.25        0.99         0.77                    1.02
 DISCRETIONARY               768       1.24        0.99         0.76                    0.99
 GP-DIRECTED                 706       1.28        1.01         0.82                    0.98

                                              IRR
 Vehicle type           N              25%           50%         75% Weighted Average IRR
 MAIN                       3126       0.18          0.09        0.00                   0.09
 Main AV-Associated          605       0.17          0.09       -0.01                   0.10
 DISCRETIONARY               768       0.25          0.10       -0.02                   0.08
 GP-DIRECTED                 706       0.24          0.12        0.03                   0.11

                                              TVPI
 Vehicle type           N              25%           50%         75% Weighted Average TVPI
 MAIN                       3126       1.74          1.29        0.99                   1.38
 Main AV-Associated          605       1.68          1.25        0.99                   1.37
 DISCRETIONARY               768       1.56          1.15        0.94                   1.27
 GP-DIRECTED                 706       1.75          1.32        1.05                   1.26

Table 4 without private debt GPs

 Vehicle type     N     Weighted average      p-value       Average    p-value     median
      All        1306        -0.090            0.000         -0.015     0.522       0.002
 Discretionary   674         -0.051            0.170         -0.010     0.789       0.001
 GP-Directed     632         -0.115            0.000         -0.020     0.424       0.002

Table 5 without private debt GPs

 Vehicle type      N    Weighted average      p-value       Average    p-value     median
      All        1306        -0.080            0.000         -0.014     0.538       0.002
 Discretionary    674        -0.049            0.197         -0.014     0.709       0.002
 GP-Directed      632        -0.100            0.000         -0.014     0.560       0.001




                                                                                            63
Appendix D: Table 3, 4, and 5 with vintage years before 2012.

Table 3 with vintage years before 2012
                                             Russell 3000 KS PME
 Vehicle type          N              25%          50%          75% Weighted Average PME
 MAIN                      2447       1.33        0.99         0.72                    1.05
 Main AV-Associated         430       1.35        0.98         0.71                    1.03
 DISCRETIONARY              498       1.29        1.00         0.65                    0.92
 GP-DIRECTED                501       1.35        1.02         0.76                    1.03

                                             IRR
 Vehicle type          N              25%           50%          75% Weighted Average IRR
 MAIN                      2447       0.18          0.09         0.02                   0.10
 Main AV-Associated         430       0.16          0.08        -0.01                   0.10
 DISCRETIONARY              498       0.27          0.09        -0.02                   0.04
 GP-DIRECTED                501       0.23          0.12         0.02                   0.12

                                             TVPI
 Vehicle type          N              25%           50%         75% Weighted Average TVPI
 MAIN                      2447       1.91          1.44        1.05                   1.50
 Main AV-Associated         430       1.87          1.36        0.98                   1.48
 DISCRETIONARY              498       1.78          1.20        0.88                   1.32
 GP-DIRECTED                501       1.93          1.48        1.10                   1.50

Table 4 with vintage years before 2012

 Vehicle type    N     Weighted average      p-value       Average     p-value     median
      All        953              -0.166         0.000        -0.040       0.149      0.000
 Discretionary   461              -0.287         0.000        -0.087       0.082     -0.025
 GP-Directed     492              -0.099         0.000         0.003       0.910      0.003

Table 5 with vintage years before 2012

 Vehicle type    N     Weighted average      p-value       Average     p-value     median
      All        953              -0.149         0.000        -0.037       0.189      0.000
 Discretionary   461              -0.276         0.000        -0.089       0.080     -0.022
 GP-Directed     492              -0.077         0.002         0.012       0.670      0.003




                                                                                          64
Appendix E: Tables 3, 4, and 5 without blocker and off-shore funds.

Table 3 without blocker and off-shore funds
                                              Russell 3000 KS PME
 Vehicle type           N              25%          50%          75% Weighted Average PME
 MAIN                       3556       1.23        0.97         0.77                    1.02
 Main AV-Associated          642       1.20        0.97         0.75                    1.02
 DISCRETIONARY               829       1.22        0.99         0.77                    0.99
 GP-DIRECTED                 688       1.26        1.01         0.80                    0.97

                                              IRR
 Vehicle type           N              25%           50%         75% Weighted Average IRR
 MAIN                       3556       0.17          0.09        0.00                   0.09
 Main AV-Associated          642       0.17          0.09       -0.01                   0.10
 DISCRETIONARY               829       0.24          0.09       -0.01                   0.09
 GP-DIRECTED                 688       0.24          0.12        0.03                   0.11

                                              TVPI
 Vehicle type           N              25%           50%         75% Weighted Average TVPI
 MAIN                       3556       1.70          1.28        1.00                   1.37
 Main AV-Associated          642       1.65          1.22        0.99                   1.37
 DISCRETIONARY               829       1.55          1.16        0.95                   1.26
 GP-DIRECTED                 688       1.73          1.30        1.04                   1.26

Table 4 without blocker and off-shore funds

 Vehicle type      N    Weighted average      p-value       Average    p-value     median
      All        1323        -0.090            0.000         -0.008     0.742       0.004
 Discretionary    714        -0.037            0.327          0.004     0.924       0.008
 GP-Directed      609        -0.132            0.000         -0.021     0.422       0.004

Table 5 without blocker and off-shore funds

 Vehicle type      N    Weighted average      p-value       Average    p-value     median
      All        1323        -0.076            0.001         -0.005     0.825       0.004
 Discretionary    714        -0.027            0.476          0.003     0.936       0.010
 GP-Directed      609        -0.116            0.000         -0.015     0.562       0.004




                                                                                            65
