                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRAUMATIC HEALTH SHOCKS AND SPIRITUAL CAPITAL

                                          Resul Cesur
                                        Travis Freidman
                                        Joseph J. Sabia

                                      Working Paper 24954
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24954


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2018, Revised February 2020




Previously circulated as "Death, Trauma and God: The Effect of Military Deployments on
Religiosity." We are grateful to Laurence R. Iannaccone, Rohit Ticku, Ryan Abman, and Aaron
Yelowitz as well as seminar participants at the Association for the Study of Religion, Economics,
and Culture (ASREC) 2017 Annual Conference in Boston, MA, Society of Economics of the
Household (SEHO) 2017 Meeting in San Diego, CA, and Southern Economic Association 2017
Meeting in Tampa, FL for invaluable comments and suggestions. We thank Thanh Tam Nguyen,
Alex Vornsand, Samuel Safford, and Isaac Baumann for excellent editorial assistance. Dr. Sabia
acknowledges research support from the Charles Koch Foundation and the Troesh Foundation
while a faculty member at both San Diego State University and the University of New
Hampshire. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Resul Cesur, Travis Freidman, and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Traumatic Health Shocks and Spiritual Capital
Resul Cesur, Travis Freidman, and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 24954
August 2018, Revised February 2020
JEL No. I10,J24,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

While the relationship between adverse health shocks and health care utilization has been studied
extensively, next to nothing is known about the effect of health shocks on religiosity, which may
serve as an alternative to secular psychological services and interventions. Filling this gap in
knowledge is important given that religious-based psychological counseling services have grown
substantially in recent decades, and the relative mental health benefits of religion as compared to
secular counseling services are not well-known. This study uses the setting of war to study the
impact of health trauma on religiosity. Exploiting the administrative procedures by which U.S.
Armed Forces senior commanders conditionally randomly assign active-duty servicemen to war
deployments as a natural experiment, we find that post-9/11 combat exposure substantially
increases the probability that a serviceman subsequently attends religious services and engages in
private prayer. Estimated effects are largest for enlisted servicemen, those under age 25, and
servicemen wounded in combat. The physical and psychological health effects of war, as well as
the presence of military chaplains in combat zones, emerge as partial mechanisms to explain
increases in religiosity. We find only weak evidence that combat service differentially affects
servicemen’s demand for religious counseling as compared to secular psychological services.

Resul Cesur                                      Joseph J. Sabia
University of Connecticut                        San Diego State University
School of Business                               Department of Economics
2100 Hillside Road                               Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
Storrs, CT 06269                                 5500 Campanile Drive
and IZA                                          San Diego, CA 92182
and also NBER                                    and IZA & ESSPRI
cesur@uconn.edu                                  jsabia@sdsu.edu

Travis Freidman
University of New Hampshire
Peter T. Paul College of Business and Economics
10 Garrison Avenue
Durham, NH 03824 -234
dtf1000@wildcats.unh.edu
                                                    1. Introduction

        “[F]or many trauma survivors, spirituality may be a resource that can be associated with
        resilience and recovery. However, for some, the circumstances of the trauma may lead to
        the questioning of important and previously sustaining beliefs. This can lead to spiritual
        struggle or even loss of faith.” – U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (2012)



        The United States is the most religious developed nation in the world, with nearly 90

percent of adults claiming a belief in God, 44 percent attending religious services at least once

per month, and 73 percent asserting a belief in life after death (Smith et al. 2016). Learning to

cope with traumatic life events, including illness and death, is common to the doctrines of the

world’s major religions (Bousso et al. 2010). Doctrinal promises of an afterlife for those who

practice good works, obey religious law, and are faithful to God provide believers with a

psychological framework for coping with adverse health shocks (Pargament and Brant 1998).

By providing public goods, encouraging social capital development, and insuring against

(financial and psychological) risks from health shocks (Iannaccone 1992b; Berman 2000; Gruber

2005; Iyer 2016; Fruehwirth et al. 2016), religion may provide important mental health benefits

to adherents. 1,2 While causal evidence is limited, a handful of studies that have accounted for

the endogeneity of religiosity find evidence that religious participation is associated with




1
  Economists have also studied how religiosity is impacted by the level of competition in the market for religion
(Bisin and Verdier 2000; Iannacocone and Berman 2008), including secular forces (Gruber and Hungerman 2008;
Cesur and Mocan 2018; Hungerman 2014; Becker et al. 2017), population diversity (Cesur and Yildirim 2020),
income (Chen, 2010; Buser 2015), and welfare generosity (Hungerman 2005).
2
  There is also evidence that religiosity is associated with increased educational attainment and earnings (Gruber
2005), improved physical health (Deaton 2009; Mellor and Freeborn 2011; Fruehwirth et al. 2016), lower crime
rates (Gruber and Hungerman 2008), reduced welfare receipt (Gruber 2005), and greater trust among citizens (Smidt
1999; Daniels and von der Ruhr 2010).

                                                        1
improved mental health of both U.S. adults (Cohen-Zada and Sander 2011) and adolescents

(Fruehwirth et al. 2016). 3

        A wide body of research has examined the impacts of adverse health shocks on health

care utilization and the demand for health insurance. 4 In contrast, very little is known about how

negative health shocks affect religiosity. This gap in knowledge is important to fill for a number

of reasons. First, most of the world’s religious doctrines and practices purport to help adherents

cope with health trauma, including mortality (Slater et al. 2016). Moreover, the rise of religious

counseling services as an alternative to professional, secular psychological counseling services

(Besterman-Dahan et al. 2012; Paul and Kelly 2005) has raised some concern among mental

health professionals because the relative psychological benefits of religious as compared to

secular counseling is unclear (Pargament et al. 2013; Koenig 2012; Sloan 2006; Sloan et al.

2000), as is whether their joint use could augment the effectiveness of each (Post et al. 2009).

Finally, those who experience a negative health shock may be in a particularly vulnerable

psychological state as they select among a variety of secular and religious services advertising

important mental health benefits.

        Much of public health and social psychology literatures that have studied the relationship

between health-related trauma and religiosity has treated health as exogenous to other

determinants of religiosity (see, for example, Ter Kuile 2014; Mclntosh 2011; Koenig et al.

2012; VanderWeele et al. 2016). This may be problematic to the extent that exposure to

traumatic health events may be non-random. For example, adverse health conditions may be

related to economic circumstances of the household (Fox et al. 2014; Mock et al. 2003), access



3
  A recent survey of members of the American Psychological Association found that 82 percent agreed with the
statement, “[B]eing religious is beneficial to mental health” (Park et al. 2017, p. 7).
4
  See, for example, Feldstein 1973; McGure 2011; Malani and Jaffe 2018; Doyle 2005; 2011; Liu 2016.

                                                       2
to quality, affordable medical care (Hadley and Reschovsky 2012; Mays and Smith 2011; Miller

et al. 2019; Orsini 2019) or job characteristics (Gonzalez-Mule and Cockburn 2017), each of

which may also be correlated with religiosity (Guiso et al. 2003; Deaton 2009). 5 Thus, an

important challenge in estimating the causal impact of health-related trauma is isolating

exogenous variation in health events.

        This study improves upon the prior literature by using the setting of modern war to

explore the causal impact of combat-induced traumatic health shocks on veterans’ religiosity.

War is a life-and-death struggle that generates substantial health trauma to servicemembers and

their families (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008; Cesur and Sabia 2016). Servicemen deployed to

combat face imminent-threat of physical injury and death (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019; Shen et

al. 2009) and may witness or participate in the deaths of enemy combatants, civilians, and

comrades-in-arms (Fontana and Rosenheck 2004; Drescher et al. 2011; Steenkamp et al. 2011).

In part due to these traumatic events, post-9/11 war deployments have been linked to Post-

Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), and over 50,000 combat-

related injuries (McKee and Robinson 2014; Zarembo 2014; Cesur et al. 2013; Okie 2005),

estimated to cost over $150 billion in health care costs to the Department of Veterans Affairs

(Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). 6




5
  To take another example, victims of crime-related health trauma may be targeted because they are financially,
socially, or psychologically vulnerable (Nunziata 2015; Bateson 2012), traits that are difficult to measure and may
be related to religiosity (Schieman 2010; Bjorck and Thurman 2007).
6
  The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has identified the provision of mental health services to combat veterans
as a top policy priority (Litz and Schlenger 2009; Marx 2009). In January 2018, President Donald Trump issued
Executive Order 13822, which mandated the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Defense, and Veterans Affairs
develop a Joint Action Plan to provide psychological services to combat veterans more effectively.

                                                         3
         The effect of war-induced health trauma on religiosity is theoretically ambiguous. 7 On

the one hand, fear of death, battlefield injury, and war-related psychological harm may cause

combat veterans to question, or even abandon, religious faith, as life-and-death experiences

challenge religious doctrines of good and evil (Fontana and Rosenheck 2004; Falsetti et al. 2003;

Ogden 2011). In addition, health trauma may cause combat veterans to substitute away from

religion and toward secular counseling or, less healthily, toward risky behaviors, such as illicit

drug use, to numb emotional pain (Cesur et al. 2016; Cesur et al. 2019). Alternatively, the

adverse physical and mental health effects of warfare, including fear of death, could increase

religiosity by increasing the demand for social support networks or doctrinal philosophies that

promise life after death (Bentzen 2019). Moreover, because seeking religious counseling for

mental health problems is perceived to carry less military career risk and less social stigma than

seeking professional psychological counseling services (Morgan et al. 2016; Besterman-Dahan et

al. 2012), combat service could increase religiosity. In addition, war could create tighter bonds

among combat units that generate religious peer effects. Finally, military chaplains stationed in

war zones may affect religiosity by proselytizing in environments where competition from

secular counselors is relatively limited.

         This study is the first to study the causal impact of war deployments on religion. We

exploit administrative procedures carried out by senior commanders in the U.S. Armed Forces

that conditionally randomly assign active-duty servicemen to war deployments to estimate the

causal impact of combat service on religious participation, private prayer, and spiritual salience

among servicemen. Our analysis focuses on modern warfare waged in Afghanistan and Iraq in



7
 For example, in a mental health production framework (Grossman 1972), life-and-death trauma may affect the
marginal product of religiosity, the marginal rate of technical substitution between religious and other mental health-
generating inputs (such as secular counseling) and the marginal utility of religiosity.

                                                          4
the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT). Using data from the military module of the National

Longitudinal Study of Adolescent and Adult Health (NLSAAH), we find that servicemen

deployed to combat zones are 7.9 percentage-points more likely to attend religious services

weekly and 8.6 percentage-points more likely to engage in private prayer than their counterparts

assigned to non-combat overseas deployments. Then, using data from the Department of

Defense Survey of Health and Related Behaviors (HRB) Among Active-Duty Personnel, we find

that exposure to enemy firefight during combat deployments substantially increases the

probability of both public and private expressions of religion. The magnitudes of the impacts are

largest for enlisted servicemen as compared to officers, junior servicemen under age 25, and

those physically injured in combat.

        Descriptive evidence suggests that the psychological and physical burdens of war

deployments as well as the presence of military chaplains in war zones help to explain combat-

induced increases in religiosity. However, we find only weak evidence that combat service

differentially affects the likelihood that veterans seek religious as compared to secular

psychological counseling. We conclude that traumatic health shocks have important impacts on

religiosity.


                                          2. Background

2.1 The Global War on Terrorism

        The Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) was launched by the United States in response to

the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks and included major combat operations in Afghanistan

and Iraq, chiefly Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF),

respectively. More than 2.5 million U.S. servicemen were deployed in OEF and OIF, with peak

deployments at over 100,000 in Afghanistan and nearly 60,000 in Iraq (Marx 2009; Epstein and

                                                 5
Williams 2016). In contrast to prior wars, multiple deployments for longer durations were more

common in both OEF and OIF (Marx 2009). Thirty-seven percent of servicemembers deployed

to Iraq and Afghanistan were deployed on multiple occasions (Litz and Schlenger 2009) and the

duration of combat tours was, on average, 28 percent higher relative to prior conflicts (Baiocchi

2013). As of January 2020, OEF and OIF resulted in 5,390 servicemembers killed in action and

over 52,000 wounded (Defense Manpower Data Centers Defense Casualty Analysis System

2016).

         While casualty rates in post-September 11 wars were about 70 percent lower than in

draft-era conflicts —due, in part, to improvements in battlefield medicine, increased use of body

armor, and the rise of unmanned drones — modern warfare also altered the nature of injuries

among those who survived (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). The waging of asymmetric warfare,

characterized by enemies’ use of improvised explosive devices, roadside bombs, and mines

resulted in Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) being the distinctive injury of GWOT (McKee and

Robinson 2014; Okie 2005).

         War experiences in GWOT also generated substantial “invisible wounds of war,” or

psychological scars, for combat veterans (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008). Such invisible wounds

have taken the form of increased risk of PTSD (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008), suicide ideation

(Cesur et al. 2013), and substance use (McFall et al. 1992; Price et al. 2004). Estimates from

RAND suggest that nearly one-quarter of returning deployed servicemembers suffered from

depressive symptomatology, substance use, homelessness, or PTSD (Tanielian and Jaycox

2008).

         The sources of war-related psychological trauma has been studied extensively by both

military health researchers (McFarlane 2010) and health economists (Cesur et al. 2013). Combat



                                                6
experiences such as (i) witnessing deaths and injuries to unit members, coalition members, or

civilians, (ii) engaging the enemy in firefight (including rocket or mortar fire), and (iii) killing

others, are associated with substantially increased levels of trauma (Litz and Schlenger 2009;

Steenkamp et al. 2011), which is often manifest in the form of PTSD (Fontana and Rosenheck

2004; Litz and Schlenger 2009; Cesur et al. 2013; Gubkin 2016). Moreover, there is evidence

that the fear and guilt associated with the threat of trauma, even if they do not materialize, may

generate symptoms of PTSD (Steenkamp et al. 2011; Cesur et al. 2013).

       The rise of TBI, PTSD, and physical wounds of war (Polimanti et al. 2017; Ling and

Ecklund 2011; Tanielian and Jaycox 2008), in conjunction with liberalization of eligibility

standards (Angrist et al. 2011; Autor et al. 2016), have driven a nearly threefold increase in

spending on the Veterans Disability Compensation (VDC) program for veterans (U.S.

Congressional Budget Office 2014).



2.2 Theory on Effects of Traumatic Health Shocks on Religion

       Both economic and socio-psychological theories inform the expected impact of traumatic

health shocks on religiosity. Adverse health shocks may induce greater religiosity as a response

to the fear of death, injury, or psychological harm in battle. This may come from newly induced

demand for services provided by religious institutions or via "withdrawals" on prior investments

in religious capital (Berman 2000; Chen 2010; Hungerman 2005). Such religious investments

could increase combat veterans' net present discounted utility, which may include the afterlife.

Moreover, the increase in religiosity may be transitory and pass after the imminent threat of

death has receded.




                                                  7
         The demand for religion may also rise if religiosity aids in the production of mental

health, perhaps dampening the adverse mental health effects of war-related trauma (De Castella

and Simmonds 2013; Harris et al. 2015). 8 This could occur, for example, through the provision

of social support networks (Iannaccone 1992a; Iyer 2016) such as the Knights of Columbus,

informal weekly prayer groups, or counseling sessions with pastoral agents. Moreover, doctrinal

philosophies may provide meaning in the wake of trauma (De Castella and Simmonds 2013),

leading to a strengthening of personal faith. For example, prior work has found that individuals

may turn to religion to cope with unpredictable natural disasters such as earthquakes (Bentzen

2019). Combat veterans may also turn to religion because of the adverse impacts of combat on

family life, including increased risk of divorce (Negrusa, Negrusa, and Hosek 2014) and

domestic violence (Cesur and Sabia 2016).

         On the other hand, some psychological theories, including the shattered assumptions

hypothesis, suggests that trauma could reduce religiosity. Adverse health shocks may lead some

to abandon religious faith because it has shattered their notions of how their lives were promised

to unfold (Overcash et al. 1996; De Castella and Simmonds 2013; Ter Kuile and Ehring 2014;

Harris et al. 2015). That is, individuals may turn away from religion because of perceived

doctrinal promises of delivering outcomes that are just (Lyons 1991; McLaughlin 1994; Falsetti

et al. 2003; Fontana and Rosenheck 2004). 9

         In addition, the effects of health trauma on religion could differ by dimensions of

religiosity (Glock 1962; Glock and Stark 1965; Koeing et al. 1997). 10,11 For example, if


8
  See also Overcash et al. (1996); Shaw et al. (2005); Peres et al. (2007); and Koenig (2009).
9
  Along these lines, Falsetti et al. (2003) argue that combat veterans with wartime trauma may substitute away from
religion and toward secular mental health services to improve their mental health.
10
   Glock (1962) and Glock and Stark (1965) classify religiosity into five dimensions: belief, ritual, experience,
knowledge, and consequence.
11
   For a detailed overview of the literature, see Koenig et al. (2001). See also Egbert et al. (2004), Bjarnson (2007),
and Berry (2005) for a discussion of several different measures of religiosity.

                                                           8
participation in religious services, but not private religious beliefs are affected by life-and-death

shocks, this could suggest that the insurance function of religion may be the primary channel. On

the other hand, if combat trauma impacts the strength of belief, but not religious-based social

interactions, this could suggest that doctrinal philosophies drive increased demand for religion.



2.3 Other Mechanisms

       War service could also affect religiosity through channels unrelated to fear of death or

trauma, at least directly. Peer effects have been documented to be quite important among those

serving in the military (Lyle 2007; Carrell et al. 2009; 2011). Those who select into military

service have, at least historically, been more likely to identify with religion than their non-

serving counterparts (Burdette et al. 2009). Combat experiences could intensify bonds among

comrades-in-arms and increase the likelihood that religious doctrines spread through peers

(Fontana and Rosenheck 2004). Furthermore, the buildup of spiritual capital in combat may

incentivize the members of the armed forces to seek connections with religious communities

when they transition to civilian life and therefore increase religiosity. Consistent with this

explanation, time away from former peers in servicemembers’ stateside religious communities

could lead to a loosening of religious ties, leading to less engagement upon return. Alternatively,

peer effects may operate in the opposite direction and lead to a reduction in piousness if peers of

servicemembers are composed of less religious individuals.

       There may be other “supply-side” channels at work as well, including military chaplain

availability, which advocates claim are indispensable in improving servicemembers’ mental

health and healing invisible wounds of war (Litz et al. 2009; Drescher et al. 2011; Worthington

and Langberg 2012). The Armed Forces Chaplains Board appoints chaplains to each service



                                                  9
branch with the charge of tending to the religious, spiritual, and overall personal well-being of

servicemembers and their families. The primary focus of the chaplaincy is “religious ritual,

instruction, and counseling: for example, ‘religious services, rites, sacraments, ordinances, and

religious ministrations,’ as well as religious pastoral care and teaching” (Waggoner 2014, p. 14).

A 2006 Congressional report concluded that there were 2,859 regular duty chaplains and 1,740

reserve chaplains serving as members of the Armed Forces (Jindal 2006). Each chaplain may

have over 1,500 servicemembers entrusted to his care (Johns 2017).

          In 2012, there were over 1,400 military chaplains deployed to combat zones. Military

chaplains are employed as staff officers and are considered non-combatants, as they do not

possess the duties and responsibilities of military command and are prohibited from bearing

arms. Their roles include ensuring freedom of religion for servicemembers, facilitating dialog

with civilian organizations on religious issues, and promoting joint military endeavors. 12 While

the Armed Forces Uniform Code of Conduct and the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution

prohibit military chaplains from promoting or establishing a religion, military chaplains are

encouraged to form close relationships with servicemembers and to provide psychological

support as needed. 13 There is evidence that servicemembers may be more likely to approach

chaplains than secular mental health counselors to treat the psychological impacts of war because

there is less social stigma attached to such services (Besterman-Dahan et al. 2012).

         Despite prohibitions against proselytizing, the presence of chaplains could encourage

such behaviors (Astore 2010), including among soldiers with prior religious exposure, which




12
   A description of the role of military chaplains in the Armed Forces is provided by the U.S. Department of Defense
here: http://prhome.defense.gov/M-RA/MPP/AFCB/.
13
   Historically, the military chaplaincy has been viewed as a strategic asset that aids in the successful prosecution of
military operations (Waggoner 2012).

                                                          10
could increase religious adherence. 14 Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that religion has

been employed as an ingroup coordination tool during intergroup violence (Kurzban and

Christner 2011; MacNeill 2004; Johnson and Reeve 2013). As such, religion may aid success in

war by promoting within-group cohesion, self-sacrifice, and heroism, as well as justifying killing

(Reeve 2013).



2.4 Existing Literature on War and Religiosity

         The literature on the relationship between war service and religiosity is thin and mostly

descriptive. 15 One set of studies describes the characteristics of those who select into the all-

volunteer U.S. Armed Forces. 16 While military personnel are more religious, on the whole, than

the civilian population (Burdette et al. 2009), it is unclear whether this association is causal given

the self-selection of military personnel into the U.S. Armed Forces. 17

         Descriptive evidence suggests that servicemembers with mental health problems

frequently turn to clergy (often military chaplains) for mental health services. Besterman-Dahan

et al. (2012) find that nearly one-third of active-duty servicemembers utilize mental health

services offered by military chaplains compared to 44 percent who seek support from non-

religious healthcare professionals. Along the same lines, Kopacz et al. (2017) find that about

one-third of suicide attempt survivors received chaplaincy services in the 30 days following their


14
   This issue is of some concern to civil libertarians, who worry that government-sanctioned zealous proselytizing
could violate the First Amendment's Establishment Clause. Supporters of chaplains argue that they are
indispensable to servicemembers' mental health and the achievement of military objectives.
15
   While the causal evidence on the link between war service and piousness is sparse, Henrich et al. (2019) find that
exposure to war increases the religious participation of Christian and Muslim civilians using data on 1,709
individuals in Uganda, Sierra Leone and Tajikistan. The authors attribute these findings to religion’s ability to foster
cooperation in intergroup conflict. In return, the associated increases in religious adherence generate a feedback loop
that promotes subsequent religiosity.
16
   US Draft was abolished on January 27th, 1973.
17
   There is evidence of increasing diversity in religions in recent years, mirroring diminished religiosity in the
millennium generation (Military Leadership Diversity Commission 2010).

                                                          11
suicide attempt. Moreover, there is evidence that those who seek out chaplain services are often

most in need of psychological services (Morgan et al. 2016).

        Several other studies have explored the relationship between symptoms of war trauma

and religiosity, with mixed findings. 18 A study of 120 Bosnian-Herzegovinian veterans of the

Bosnian war finds that PTSD is negatively related to religiosity (Hasanović and Pajević 2015).

On the other hand, Tran et al. (2012) evaluated a sample of 449 U.S. veterans from veterans

Administration (VA) hospitals who had experienced military-related health trauma and sought

mental health treatment. The authors find that veterans who turned to religion for “socially

motivated reasons” were less likely to suffer severe symptoms of PTSD or depressive

symptomatology. They conclude that “evaluating religiosity in patients may be an important area

to address in PTSD and depression treatment” (Tran et al. 2012, p. 313).

        Finally, Harris et al. (2011) examine a small sample (54) of veterans who had suffered

from psychological trauma. They estimate the impact of a group intervention therapy designed

to utilize veterans' pre-existing religious beliefs to improve the management of combat-related

trauma and find that religiosity mitigates the adverse psychological consequences of war.



                                            3. Data and Measures


Our analysis uses data drawn from two national datasets, which include data on military

servicemen, their combat assignments, and religiosity.



3.1 The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (NLSAAH)



18
  See also Chen and Koenig (2006) for a review of the broader literature on trauma, including exposure to domestic
violence, and religiosity.

                                                       12
           The NLSAAH is a nationally representative longitudinal survey that began by collecting

information on high school students in the 1994-1995 academic year. Three follow-up surveys

were conducted and the last to date, collected in 2007-2008, contains information on respondents

ages 24 to 34. These data are useful for our purposes because, at Wave IV, the NLSAAH

includes a military module with a broad set of military characteristics and war experiences from

current active-duty personnel and prior service veterans. Servicemembers' war experiences

mainly include post-9/11 GWOT deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan.

           Our NLSAAH analysis sample focuses on 482 active-duty overseas-deployed servicemen

who, at the time of the Wave IV survey, provided information on their current religiosity, and

reported that their military service began after the Wave I survey interview. 19 Among these 482

deployed servicemen, 298 (59.3 percent) completed their military service before the Wave IV

survey interview, while 196 (40.7 percent) were currently serving in the military.

           Our primary measure of combat, Combat Assignment, is a dichotomous variable

generated from self-reports of combat deployments. 20 Combat Assignment is set equal to 1 if the

respondent reported being deployed overseas to a combat zone and set equal to 0 for

deployments to non-combat zones.

           We also exploit additional information collected in the NLSAAH military module to

capture war theatre experiences among those deployed to combat zones. We generate the

variable Enemy Engagement, set equal to 1 if the respondent reported ‘‘engaging the enemy in


19
   Because the NLSAAH does not provide information on the age of high school completion, we exclude survey
respondents for whom the start of military service precedes the Wave I interview. Including these 13 individuals in
the analysis does not affect our estimates.
20
     This variable is constructed using the following survey questions in the Wave IV of NLSAAH.

           “Was your military service in the US, outside the US, or both?”
           “What is the total amount of time you (have) served in a combat zone?”


                                                         13
firefight” while in a combat zone and set equal to 0 otherwise. 21 This allows us to estimate the

independent effect of combat exposure.

           We generate three measures of religiosity at the time of the Wave IV interview to capture

both public and private expression of religion. First, respondents are asked:

           "How often have you attended church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or religious services

           in the past 12 months?"

We generate a dichotomous variable, Weekly Religious Attendance, set equal to 1 if the

respondent reported attending his place of worship or religious services at least once per week in

the last year, and set equal to 0 otherwise. 22 In addition, servicemen are asked:

           “How often do you pray privately, that is, when you're alone, in places other than a

           church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or religious assembly?”

The variable Prayer is coded as 1 if the respondent reports praying outside of a religious service

and 0 otherwise. Finally, respondents are asked:

           “How important (if at all) is your religious faith to you?”

Religious Importance is set equal to 1 if the respondent reported that his faith was “very

important” or “more important than anything else,” and set equal to 0 otherwise.

           A key advantage of the NLSAAH data is its inclusion of information on a wide set of

military characteristics (e.g., military rank, the branch of service, the timing of military service,

occupation), which is vital for the "conditional random assignment" identification strategy




21
     The following questionnaire item from the Wave IV NLSAAH is used to construct Enemy Engagement.

           “During your combat deployment, how many times did you engage the enemy in a firefight?”
22
  We also experimented with alternative measures of frequency of church attendance, including whether the
respondent had ever attended religious services to gauge the extensive margin of behavior. The results from this
definition of religious service attendance appear in Appendix Table 1.

                                                        14
described in Section 4 below. 23 Moreover, because the data are longitudinal in nature, we are

able to test the robustness of findings to controls for pre-enlistment religiosity.

        Despite these important advantages, the NLSAAH data set also has some shortcomings.

Small sample sizes limit both the power of our research design and our ability to examine

heterogeneous impacts of combat, such as by branch of service or specific combat experiences.



3.2 Department of Defense (DOD) Health and Related Behaviors (HRB) Survey, 2008

        To compensate for limitations with the NLSAAH data, we next turn to the HRB survey.

Administered by RTI International, the HRB survey collects information on the health and well-

being of active-duty military personnel, measured at nearly the same time as Wave IV of the

NLSAAH. The survey is designed to be representative of active-duty servicemembers across all

branches and pay grades of the U.S. Armed Forces. Individuals who were absent without official

leave (AWOL), incarcerated at the time of data collection, or attending a service academy were

excluded from the interview.

        Our analysis sample is comprised of 11,598 active-duty servicemen between the ages of

18 and 50 who were deployed overseas and provided non-missing information on religiosity.

Included are 2,563 soldiers, 2,563 marines, 3,374 sailors, and 3,098 airmen. While the HRB

survey does not contain information on lifetime combat and non-combat zone deployments that

would allow us to construct a measure analogous to Combat Service, we can use the information

available in the survey to construct an analogous measure of Enemy Engagement. Respondents

were asked:




23
 In fact, the NLSAAH contains information on the military observables available to Human Resources Command
when making unit assignments.

                                                    15
           “Thinking about all of your deployments, [have you] or members of [your] unit, received

           incoming fire from small arms, artillery, rockets, or mortars…or [has your] unit fired on

           the enemy?”

Enemy Engagement is set equal to 1 for those who reported exposure to enemy firefight while

they were deployed, either through incoming fire or firing on the enemy, and 0 otherwise.

           To capture the intensity of war experiences that may explain the potential mechanisms

between combat and religion in the HRB survey, we take advantage of more specific measures of

combat experiences, which can help explain the mechanisms through which combat exposure

affects religiosity. These measures include Combat Injury and Witness Death, dichotomous

variables that capture whether the respondent was injured in combat and witnessed deaths in war,

respectively. 24

           Outcomes in the HRB survey are measured analogously to the NLSAAH military

module. Religious attendance is measured using responses to the following survey item:

           “During the past 12 months, how many times did you attend religious/spiritual services?

           (Please do not include special occasions, such as weddings, christenings, funerals, or

           other special events in your answer.)”

Frequent Religious Attendance is set equal to 1 if the respondent attends services 25 or more

weeks per year and is set equal to 0 otherwise. 25


24
     These measures were generated using servicemen’s responses to the following questionnaire items:

           “Thinking about all of your deployments, how many times have you had each of the following experiences?
           I was wounded in combat.”

           “Thinking about all of your deployments, how many times have you had each of the following experiences?
           I saw dead bodies or human remains.”
25
  Responses to this survey item do not allow us to distinguish between biweekly and weekly church attendance as
each is contained in the same category of possible responses. Therefore, our measure of religious attendance in the
HRB survey is slightly different than in the NLSAAH. Analyses using alternate measures of religious service

                                                         16
        While the HRB data does not ask whether the respondents pray on their own in an

identical fashion to the NLSAAH, it asks the following survey question to measure if the

respondents pray under stressful circumstances:

        “When you feel pressured, stressed, depressed, or anxious, how often do you engage in

        each of the following activities: Say a prayer”

        Prayer is set equal to 1 for those who frequently pray when they are stressed, depressed

or anxious and 0 if they do so only sometimes, rarely or never. Finally, servicemen were asked

to agree or disagree along a Likert scale with the following statement:

        “My religious/spiritual beliefs are a very important part of my life.”

We generate an indicator, Religious Importance, set equal to 1 if the respondent agrees or

strongly agrees that religious beliefs are a very important part of his life and 0 otherwise.

        As is the case with the NLSAAH data, the HRB data has strengths and weaknesses. The

relatively larger sample allows us to more precisely estimate branch-specific effects of combat.

In addition, because the HRB survey is a representative sample of the active-duty military

personnel, the estimates obtained from the sample are more generalizable to all active duty

service members, including those older and younger than surveyed in the NLSAAH. On the

other hand, if previous combat exposure influences the likelihood of remaining in the military,

estimates using only those who are currently on active duty may suffer from sample selection

bias. An additional limitation of the HRB data is the lack of information on religious

denomination affiliation either before or after deployment; thus, we cannot conduct

heterogeneity analysis by religious sect. Finally, due to confidentiality requirements, the HRB




attendance, including ever attending services or attending services more than weekly, produced a qualitatively
similar pattern of results.

                                                        17
survey lacks data on some important military observables (such as primary military occupation),

though it does include other reasonable proxies, which we discuss below. 26



                                              4. Identification

4.1 Natural Experiment

        An extensive body of literature estimating the impact of military service on labor market

outcomes (Angrist 1990; 1998; Angrist et al. 2011; Angrist and Chen 2011) or other measures of

socioeconomic wellbeing (Angrist et al. 2010; Angrist and Johnson 2000; Price et al. 2004;

McFall et al. 1992a,b; Rohlfs 2010; Lindo and Stoecker 2014) has relied on the draft lottery as a

natural experiment to identify the causal impact of war. The absence of conscription in the U.S.

following the abolition of the draft in 1973 makes such an identification strategy impossible for

service during GWOT. Instead, we rely on an alternate natural experiment that identifies a very

different local average treatment effect. We explot the administrative procedures by which U.S.

Armed Forces Human Resources Command (HRC) assigns active-duty servicemen to

deployment duties to generate variation in combat assignment that is plausibly exogenous to

religiosity.

        First, senior commanders rarely issue deployment orders to individual servicemembers

independent of the branch-specific units in which they serve (Lyle 2006; Engel et al. 2010).

Senior commanders assign individuals servicemen to their units (i.e., battalion) and then issue

deployment orders to these units. For the purposes of these assignments, HRC treats branch-


26
   These covariates include the branch of service, rank, the timing of service, detailed measures of educational
attainment, and installation level Major Command (MAJCOM), a subdivision for a particular military installation
responsible for a specific combat/support mission. MAJCOMs include U.S. Army Training and Doctrine
Command, U.S. Army Europe, U.S. Army Pacific, 8th Army, U.S. Fleet Forces Command, Commander Pacific
Forces, Naval Medical Command, Commander Naval Installations Command, Marine Corps Installations East,
Marine Corps Installations West, Air Combat Command, Air Education and Training Command, Air Force Materiel
Command, Air Force Space Command, Air Mobility Command, Pacific Air Forces, and U.S. Air Forces Europe.

                                                      18
specific servicemen of identical military rank and primary military occupation specialty as

perfect substitutes. 27 As a rule, senior commanders do not consider personal preferences,

religious practices, or family background in assigning servicemen to units or deploying units

overseas (Engel et al. 2010). We know of no evidence that senior commanders issue deployment

orders to military units based on non-military characteristics of its members (Carter and

Skimmyhorn 2017; Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019).

        Senior commanders decide when, where, and for how long to deploy units based largely

on exogenous factors, such as (i) the state of operational environment, which is dictated by world

events, and (ii) the readiness and availability of suitable units, determined by equipment

availability, timing of training completion, and the occupational composition of unit members

(Army Regulation 220-1; Lyle 2006; Engel et al. 2010). Thus, the administrative procedures of

senior commanders mimic conditional random assignment of active-duty deployed servicemen to

overseas deployment duties. That is, conditional on military rank, year of enlistment, and

occupation (within service branch), deployment assignments among active-duty personnel are

exogenous to veteran religiosity. 28

        The main threats to identification in this conditional random assignment framework are

(i) stay-back selection, whereby some members of a unit may be non-randomly selected to

remain at the stateside military base, and (ii) non-deployability of some servicemembers due to

health conditions. With regard to stay-back selection, Sabia and Skimmyhorn (2019) note that

less than 5 percent of active-duty soldiers stay back. Moreover, in studies of the health and



27
   Lyle (2006) and Engel et al. (2010) test for so-called “stayback selection" bias by using unit-level deployment
orders as an instrumental variable (IV) for individual deployment. A comparison of IV and ordinary least squares
(OLS) estimates suggest that potential stay-back selection is an unimportant source of bias.
28
   While a servicemember can affect the likelihood he is assigned a combat deployment by his choice of occupation
specialty, year of enlistment, and tenure in the military (rank), conditional on these military characteristics,
deployment assignments are orthogonal to other determinants of veteran religiosity.

                                                        19
socioeconomic effects of post-September 11 combat service, instrumental variables (IV)

estimates that rely on unit-level deployment orders as an instrument for individual deployment

produce estimates that are very similar to OLS estimates that treat individual deployment as

conditionally randomly assigned (Lyle 2006; Sabia and Skimmyborn 2019). Conditional random

assignment of active-duty personnel to overseas deployments has been exploited by previous

scholars examining the impacts of deployments on servicemembers’ children (Lyle 2006; Engel

et al. 2010), servicemen’s risk of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (Cesur et al. 2013), as well as

domestic violence (Cesur and Sabia 2016).

       Data from the NLSAAH are particularly valuable for carrying out this natural experiment

because they include information on the military observables available to HRC when making

deployment decisions. Therefore, we are able to provide descriptive tests of whether, conditional

on these observables, deployment assignment is orthogonal to an extensive set of personal and

family background characteristics, including pre-enlistment religiosity. While the HRB data do

not include information on military occupation, there is prior evidence that these missing data do

not contaminate the natural experiment described above in the presence of controls for the

branch of service, military rank, the timing of service, educational attainment, and installation-

level Major Command (Cesur and Sabia 2016). We explore similar tests below.



4.2 Estimating Equations
       We begin with data on active-duty overseas-deployed servicemen from the NLSAAH and

estimate the following estimating equation to test whether combat assignment is related to pre-

enlistment observables after controlling for military observables available to HRC:

                       Combat Assignmenti = β0 + β1Mi + β2Xi + ei                            (1)




                                                 20
where Combat Assignmenti measures whether serviceman i was deployed to a combat or non-

combat zone, Mi is a vector of military controls for serviceman i, including military rank, branch

of service, timing of service, and occupation, and Xi is set of covariates capturing pre-enlistment

(Wave I) individual- and family-level characteristics: age, race, cognitive ability, height, weight,

parental income, parental marital status, parental religiosity, as well as the respondent’s own pre-

enlistment religiosity. Also included in the vector Xi are controls for the respondent's maternal

educational attainment and own educational attainment. If, conditional on Mi, combat

assignment should be orthogonal to individual and family background characteristics, we

hypothesize that the estimate of β2 should be 0.

       Next, we estimate the impact of combat assignment on religiosity in equation (2):

               Ri = γ0 + γ1Combat Assignmenti + γ2Mi + εi                                    (2)

where Ri measures the religiosity of serviceman i. In alternate specifications, we add Enemy

Engagementi as an additional right-hand-side variable to isolate the effects of combat exposure

and combat zone assignment without exposure. If the assumptions underlying the natural

experiment described above hold, then γ1 will be an unbiased estimate of the impact of combat

zone assignment on religiosity. As another descriptive test of this assumption, we add the vector

Xi to the right-hand side of equation (2):

               Ri = γ0 + γ1Combat Assignmenti + γ2Mi + γ3Xi + εi                             (3)

If the estimate of γ1 remains unchanged in equations (2) and (3), this is evidence consistent with

the hypothesis that Combat Assignment is orthogonal to religiosity.

       A similar estimating equation is used for the HRB survey:

               Ri = θ0 + θ1Enemy Engagementi + θ2Mi + θ3Xi + µi                              (4)




                                                   21
where Enemy Engagement indicates if respondent i was deployed to a combat zone with an

enemy firefight, Mi includes a set of military variables available in the HRB survey, including

military rank, the branch of service, Major Command (MAJCOM), and frequency of

deployments. Additionally, the vector Xi includes controls for age, race, marital status, and

educational attainment, which are present in all models. While we do not have specific controls

for military occupation in the HRB survey, the set of controls available in the DOD data appear

to be sufficient to not contaminate the natural experiment described above. 29 Finally, we note

that the effects of war obtained from equation (4) may be biased downward to the extent that

some who are not exposed to enemy engagement, but are assigned to combat zones may have

their religiosity affected by their deployment assignment.



                                                   5. Results

5.1 NLSAAH Results

        Descriptive statistics for the NLSAAH in Table 1 show that 15.4 percent of active-duty

deployed servicemen attend religious services weekly. Approximately three-quarters (75.1

percent) report praying outside of their house of worship and just over half (51.1 percent) report

that religion is an important aspect of their lives. Concerning deployment assignments, two-

thirds (76 percent) of servicemen were assigned to combat zones, and 37 percent reported

engaging the enemy in a firefight.




29
   To descriptively test the validity of this assumption, we estimated the effect of combat on our outcomes in the
NLSAAH sample (where the natural experiment is “clean”) by only controlling for the covariates that are available
in the DOD data. As shown in Appendix Table 2, results obtained from this exercise are very similar to the clean
natural experiment from the NLSAAH sample. These findings lend support to the hypothesis that estimates from the
DOD data are unbiased.

                                                       22
         In Table 2, we present estimates from equation (1) to test if predetermined covariates in

the vector Xi predict combat assignment. 30 Specifically, we examine whether deployment

assignment is related to own pre-deployment religiosity, height and weight, age and race,

educational attainment, cognitive ability, and parental household income, marital status,

educational attainment, and religiousness. 31 Our results show little evidence that these

characteristics predict whether servicemen are deployed to combat zones as compared to non-

combat zones (column 1), to combat zones with enemy firefight as compared to combat zones

without enemy firefight (column 2), or to combat zones with enemy firefight versus non-combat

zones (column 3). Out of 78 coefficients estimated, only three are statistically distinguishable

from zero at conventional levels, and no single category of related variables (e.g., income) is

jointly statistically different from zero. This descriptive balancing test supports the assumption

that deployment assignment is orthogonal to religiosity.

         Table 3 shows estimates of γ1 from equation (2). In Panel I, we find that servicemen

assigned to combat zones are 7.9 percentage-points more likely to attend weekly religious

services in the past year than their counterparts deployed to non-combat zones (Panel I, column

1). Those assigned to combat are also 8.6 percentage-points more likely to engage in private

prayer (Panel I, column 2), and 4.5 percentage-points more likely to report religion is important

to them (Panel I, column 3), though this latter estimate is not statistically different from zero at

conventional levels. These estimates, which are economically substantial (relative to their




30
   While we estimate equations (1) through (4) via linear probability models, marginal effects obtained from probit
specifications are very similar to the results presented below.
31
   Each (set of) coefficient(s) is(are) obtained from a separate regression; p-values pertain to the joint significance of
mutually exclusive categories providing information on pre-existing characteristics, such as race, income, and
maternal schooling. We also estimate regression models, including all of these right-hand side variables in a single
model. The results from this specification are similar to those presented in Table 2. For example, in column (1), a
test of the joint significance of the variables in the vector X yields an F-statistic of 0.97 and a p-value of 0.52.

                                                           23
means), are consistent with the hypothesis that life-and-death shocks induce increases in both

public religious expression as well as private religious practices.

        In Panels II and III of Table 3, we explore whether the effects differ by whether the

combat serviceman had separated from the military at the time of the Wave IV survey. We find

that the impact of combat assignment on religious attendance and private prayer is statistically

equivalent for those whose active-duty service was ongoing at the time of the Wave IV survey

(Panel II) and those who had separated from the military (Panel III). This could suggest that the

impact of combat on religious practices persists over time. Interestingly, however, the impact of

combat on self-reported religious salience (column 3) is much larger for those whose service is

current as compared to veterans who had previously separated from the U.S. Armed Forces. This

finding could suggest that combat generates transitory increases in the importance of religion in

one’s life but that this salience dissipates as faith serves its purpose in helping servicemen to

cope with immediate trauma. However, these findings could be explained by heterogeneity in

soldier characteristics or the nature of combat across periods. 32

        In the final two panels of Table 3, we examine whether religiosity effects of combat

differ across pre-enlistment religious affiliation. In Panel IV, we restrict the sample to those who

reported a Christian affiliation (e.g., Catholics, Protestants, and Other Christians) at the time of




32
   For example, those serving in the armed forces at the time of the Wave IV survey are younger than those who had
separated from the military. Younger individuals may have fewer alternative means to cope with life-threatening
stress, be more susceptible to proselytizing, or be more likely to be impacted by peers. Moreover, the observed
differential impact could represent a cohort effect, whereby current active-duty servicemen may have been involved
in more recent intense combat during the time of the so-called surge in Iraq in 2007 during which more than 20,000
additional servicemembers were deployed to Baghdad and Al Anbar Province. However, it is important to note that
whatever the source of the differential impact of combat assignment on the importance with which servicemen place
on religion, this difference does not translate into religious behavior differences. Combat veterans who have
separated are also more likely to attend religious services regularly and pray than their non-combat veteran
counterparts. We also explore whether the religious effects differ by the prior religiosity of servicemen, which we
have documented is orthogonal to deployment assignment. The results show that combat has the largest impact on
weekly religious service attendance for those who reported some degree of religiosity prior to deployment.

                                                        24
the Wave I interview, while Panel V examines all other affiliations or a non-affiliation. We find

that our results in Panel II are driven by the effect of combat on those with a Christian affiliation

before deployment. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that those with Christian

affiliations had accumulated greater religious capital investments at the time enlistment, and

hence were more likely to draw on this religious capital as a coping mechanism in response to

traumatic health shocks. 33 Alternatively, this result is also consistent with the majority of

military chaplains being drawn from Christian denominations (Dao 2011). 34

        Next, in Table 4, we explore whether combat exposure, measured by engaging the enemy

in a firefight, has an independent effect on religiosity. We find that servicemen deployed to

combat zones where they engaged the enemy in a firefight were significantly more likely to

attend religious services and engage in private prayer than those deployed to non-combat zones.

However, the magnitude of this effect was not significantly different from the estimated effect of

combat deployments without such exposure. This result could suggest that fear of combat

exposure, and whether or not enemy engagement materializes, may have significant effects on

religiosity. This result is also consistent with a supply-side mechanism such as combat zone-

specific, unit-level peer effects in religiosity or increased presence of military chaplains in

combat zones. In the HRB data below, we empirically explore channels that might be at work.

        Finally, in Table 5, we examine the sensitivity of estimates to the addition of controls for

individual and personal background characteristics (columns 2, 5, 8), and pre-deployment

religiosity (columns 3, 6, 9), following equation (3). The stability of estimates of γ1 are




33
   Consistent with this view, our unreported cross tabulations show that Christian service members exhibited a
higher degree of religious participation prior to enlistment.
34
   See, for example: https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/27/us/27atheists.html

                                                        25
consistent with findings of Table 2 and suggest that deployment assignment is conditionally

exogenous to religiosity.



5.2 HRB Results

       Given the above-discussed limitations with the NLSAAH survey, we next turn to the

HRB sample. Descriptive statistics, shown in Table 6A, reflect that 18.9 percent of active-duty

members of the armed forces in our sample reported frequent religious attendance in the prior

year, 22.0 percent reported that they turned to prayer in stressful situations, and approximately

two-thirds (69.5 percent) indicated that religion was important to them.

       In Table 6B, we show descriptive tests of the exogeneity of deployment assignment in the

HRB sample. Given that the HRB data do not include information on occupation specialty, as is

available in the NLSAAH, we first ensure that there is common support on the detailed military

characteristics that are provided (i.e., branch of service, rank, timing of service, enlisted versus

officer, and Major Command), as well as sociodemographic characteristics. We find no

evidence that the likelihood of an overseas combat deployment is related to sociodemographic

characteristics available in the HRB survey, including age, race/ethnicity, marital status, and

educational attainment.

       Table 7 presents the results from equation (4). In Panel I, we find that engaging the

enemy in firefight is associated with a 1.9 percentage-point increase in the probability of

frequent religious attendance (column 1), a 1.4 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of

prayer at times of stress or depression (column 2), and a 1.9 percentage-point increase in the

probability that a serviceman reports that religion is important (column 3). The magnitudes of

these estimates are smaller than those obtained from the NLSAAH, which may be explained, in



                                                  26
part, by an increase in religiosity for those deployed to combat zones who are not exposed to

enemy firefight (see Table 4). 35

        In Panel II, we explore the sensitivity of OLS estimates in Panel I (which do not include

occupation controls) to requiring common support on the military characteristics available in the

DOD data, including Major Command, a measure not available in the NLSAAH. Using a

nearest neighbor matching estimator, we produce estimates that are quite similar to those shown

in Panel I, albeit less precisely estimated. 36 This adds to our confidence that the religion effects

of combat are unbiased.

        In Panels III through VI, we examine heterogeneous impacts of combat exposure by

branch of service. In the main, we find that the effect of combat on religiosity is generally larger

for soldiers, marines, and sailors as compared to airmen. This finding is consistent with evidence

that the psychological costs of combat are largest for those in the Army and Marines, for whom

the nature of combat is quite different as compared to the Air Force (Cesur et al. 2013).

However, we do find that combat exposure is associated with a 2.4 percentage-point increase in

the probability that airmen turn to prayer in stressful situations.

        Next, we attempt to disentangle the effects of combat exposure from the effects of time

spent deployed. In Table 8, we use data from the HRB survey on the number of post-9/11

combat deployments and average deployment length and add constructed measures of these

variables to the right-hand side of equation (4). The results in Table 8 suggest that length of

deployments and number of deployments are negatively related to weekly religious attendance



35
   Recall that those deployed to non-combat zones without enemy engagement are included in the 0s when Enemy
Engagement is defined in the HRB survey.
36
   We employ a nearest neighbor matching with non-replacement. In the common support sample, the estimated
propensity scores between enemy engagement and non-enemy engagement samples must be within 0.001 to
generate a match.


                                                      27
(Panel I), which may be due to reduced opportunities to attend religious services while deployed

overseas. However, in our fully specified model (column 4), we confirm that, conditional on

number and length of combat deployments, combat exposure leads to substantial increases in

religiosity, suggesting that life-and-death trauma rather than simply length of possible exposure

to such trauma is important. This pattern of results on the impact of combat exposure persists for

private religious prayer (Panel II) and religious salience (Panel III).



5.3 Heterogeneous Impacts of Combat

       Next, we examine whether the effects of combat differ across enlisted servicemen and

officers. Our results in the first two panels of Table 9 show that religious effects are

concentrated among enlisted servicemen. We find that for enlisted servicemen (Panel I), enemy

engagement is associated with a 2 to 3 percentage-point increase in public and private

expressions of religiosity. However, for officers (Panel II) there is no such impact. This result is

consistent with prior evidence showing that the adverse psychological impacts of war, including

effects on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, are larger for enlisted servicemen as compared to

officers (Lyle 2006; Engel et al. 2010; Cesur and Sabia 2016). This finding may also be due to

differences across enlisted servicemen and officers in social support networks, socioeconomic

well-being, and occupation role.

       In Panels III through V of Table 9, we explore heterogeneity in the effects of war by age.

Again, consistent with prior work on the adverse psychological effects of war (Cesur and Sabia

2016), we find that the largest religiosity effects of combat are observed for young servicemen

under the age of 25. Estimated religiosity effects of combat for younger servicemen are around 6

percentage-points, while estimates are smaller for those ages 25 to 34, a comparably aged sample



                                                  28
as that examined in the NLSAAH, and smaller still for those ages 35 to 55. Thus, junior enlisted

servicemen are differentially impacted relative to junior or senior NCOs. However, an alternative

explanation for the variation in age-specific estimates may be due to survivor bias. As such, if

those who are more resilient to combat are more likely to remain in active service and vice versa,

estimates of the impact of combat on a variety of outcomes as well as religiosity may be lower

among older servicemembers.

        Next, in Panel VI of Table 9, we explore whether religious effects of combat extend to

women. At the time of the 2008 HRB Survey, women were prevented from serving in many

front-line combat roles, a regulation changed by the Department of Defense in 2013 (Burelli

2013; Kamarck 2015). However, during this period, women could still be exposed to combat via

enemy fire on military bases overseas, the ambush of their units, and witnessing war casualties

experienced by their comrades. The results in Panel VI show that combat has comparably sized

religiosity effects for women, though these effects are imprecisely estimated.

        In the final two panels of Table 9 (Panels VII and VIII), we examine the impact of

particular combat experiences: whether the serviceman was wounded in combat (Panel VII) or

witnessed deaths in battle (VIII). Our findings suggest that being wounded in combat has the

largest positive impact on religiosity. Injury in war is associated with a 7.9 percentage-point

increase in weekly religious service attendance, and a 5.4 percentage-point increase in the

probability of turning to prayer in stressful situations, effect sizes that are substantially larger

than the average impact of enemy engagement. We find less evidence, at least in the HRB

survey, that witnessing deaths or injuries of others impacts religiosity. These findings suggest

that personal physical trauma and the consequences that flow from such trauma may be a

particularly important reason why servicemen turn to religiosity.



                                                   29
5.4 Mechanisms and Secular vs Religious Counseling

           The results presented above provide consistent evidence that combat service increases

religiosity, particularly when such combat results in physical injuries. In the remaining tables,

we empirically explore the mechanisms through which this increase in religiosity may occur.

One channel may be coping with psychological trauma (Bentzen 2019). The adverse mental

effects of military deployments have been well-documented (Taneilian and Jaycox 2008; Cesur

et al. 2013). In Appendix Table 4, we also confirm that assignment to combat zones with enemy

firefight is associated with substantial increases in the risk of PTSD (column 1), suicide ideation

(column 2), psychological distress (column 3), and being wounded in combat (column 4).

           In addition to mental and physical health channels, supply-side mechanisms related to

peers and chaplains may also be important. While we are unable to link supply-side shocks to

the number of chaplains stationed in combat zones to the location and timing of deployments, we

are able to measure the extent to which servicemen turned to military chaplains to treat the

mental health effects of combat, though such visits may certainly be due to demand-side reasons.

           In Table 10, we estimate the impact of combat on the probability of seeking counseling

services from secular and religious sources, including military chaplains (Panel I). 37 We find


37
     Respondents to the DOD HRB Survey are asked:

           “In the past 12 months, did you receive counseling or therapy for mental health or substance abuse from
           the following?

           •   Military chaplain
           •   Civilian pastor, rabbi, or other pastoral counselor
           •   Mental health professional at a military facility (e.g., psychologist, psychiatrist, clinical social worker
               or other mental health counselor).
           •   General medical doctor at a military facility
           •   General medical doctor at a civilian facility
           •   Civilian mental health professional (e.g., psychologist, psychiatrist, clinical social worker or other
               mental health counselor)”


                                                            30
that combat exposure is associated with a 7.2 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of

receipt of some type of counseling services (column 1), including from secular sources (e.g.,

medical or psychological professionals) (column 2), civilian clergy (column 3), and military

chaplains (column 4). We fail to detect evidence that combat service increases use of military

chaplains to a greater degree than secular sources.

        Finally, in Panel II of Table 10, we find some evidence that, among those who seek out

any type of counseling, servicemen are more likely to turn to civilian clergy than secular

counseling, consistent with the hypothesis that there may be less social stigma associated with

religious-based counseling. 38 However, caution should be taken in interpreting these estimates

given that those who select into counseling are a select sample of servicemen.

        Having established that combat generates adverse health effects, as well as increases the

use of psychological counseling services, we descriptively explore the importance of these

channels in explaining the impact of combat on religiosity. In odd-numbered columns on Table

11, we show baseline estimates from equation (4), while in even-numbered columns we add

endogenous measures of psychological well-being, wounding in battle, and (unconditional) use

of chaplain services (unconditionally) to the right-hand side of the estimating equation. Note that

these channels may not be independent of one another. For example, the adverse physical health

effects of war could affect psychological health, which could, in turn, affect the likelihood of

visiting a chaplain. 39 The results of our descriptive mediating exercise show that the physical and

psychological consequences of war, as well as use of chaplain counseling, may explain up to 40

percent of the impact of war on religiosity. These channels appear more important in explaining


38
   Results from a multinomial logit model, shown in Appendix Table 3, show a qualitatively similar pattern of
results. However, given that categories of counseling are not independent, the IIA assumption is unlikely to be met.
39
   Also, because chaplain use is endogenous, it may be that their use is positively related to religiosity due to
religious individuals being more likely to use chaplain services.

                                                        31
religious attendance and prayer than religious salience. Our results also suggest that residual

unmeasured mechanisms such as coping with the fear of death and unit-level peer influence may

be important in understanding the religious effects of war deployments.



                                          6. Conclusions

       Despite a wide body of literature in health economics on the impact of negative health

shocks on health care utilization, very little is known about how traumatic health shocks affect

religiosity. Given that the major religions of the world promote doctrines and practices designed

to help adherents cope with traumatic life shocks — including illness and mortality — this

remains an important gap to be filled, particularly given uncertainty over the relative benefits of

secular and religious counseling.

       This study is the first to estimate the impact of post-9/11 war deployments, which

generated substantial physical and psychological trauma for servicemembers, on veterans’

religiosity. We exploit the administrative procedures by which senior commanders in the U.S.

Armed Forces conditionally randomly assign active-duty servicemen to their deployment duties

to isolate the impact of combat deployments religiosity.

        Across two national datasets, the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult

Health and the Department of Defense Health and Related Behaviors Survey Among Active-

Duty Personnel, we find that post-9/11 combat service is associated with substantial increases in

religious attendance and prayer. The strongest and largest religious effects of combat exposure

are found among younger enlisted servicemen and those who are physically injured in combat.

We find that these effects may not be transitory, appearing to persist following separation from

the military. Our findings are consistent with religion both playing a “social insurance” role (i.e.,



                                                 32
increased frequency of church attendance) as well as serving as an individual-level psychological

coping device (i.e., increased prayer and importance of religion).

        Together, our findings suggest that combat-induced health trauma has important effects

on spiritual capital development. We hypothesize several mechanisms at work, including (i)

servicemen seeking out religious organizations and spiritual doctrines to cope with fear of death,

adverse psychological effects of war, or physical wounding in war, (ii) peer effects forged by

bonds created among religious combat veterans, and/or (iii) the role the U.S. military, wittingly

or unwittingly, plays in nudging servicemen toward religiosity via chaplains or social stigma for

seeking out secular psychological services. Finally, we find only weak evidence that combat

assignment differentially affects the demand for religious as compared to secular psychological

services.

        We concede that an important limitation of our study is that the religious impacts of

combat-related health trauma may not generalize to health trauma experienced by civilians. For

instance, the religious effect of one’s own cancer diagnosis or the sudden accidental death of a

nuclear family member may differ from that of war-related trauma. Still, understanding the

causal effect of health trauma on religiosity, which our military setting allows, has important

value to the literature and key policy relevance. There is a vigorous policy debate about how well

the U.S. Armed Forces has achieved a proper balance in making spiritual services available for

those who demand them, which may be necessary for mission success, while not using publicly

funded resources to proselytize for a particular religion. 40 While our findings suggest that


40
  Some advocates argue that the presence of chaplains in combat has led to unconstitutional proselytizing and
endangered combat veterans’ mental health. In a letter written to Secretary of Defense Robert Gates in 2010, the
Military Religious Freedom Foundation wrote:

        “Perhaps the most alarming…[is]…the widespread practice of ‘battlefield Christian proselytizing.’ When,
        on active duty, our service members sought urgently needed mental health counseling while on the
        battlefield and with the gun smoke practically still in their faces, they were instead sent to evangelizing

                                                        33
combat-induced religiosity is not solely, or even largely, attributable to chaplain-induced

demand, the role of chaplains in providing counseling services — particularly in war theatres

where there is more limited secular competition — remains an important military policy issue

worthy of continued research.

        In fact, we know relatively little about (i) the marginal rate of technical substitution of

secular to religious counseling in the production of mental health capital among veterans, and (ii)

whether presence of military chaplains enhances the effectiveness of secular psychological

counseling has not been thoroughly studied. What is clearer is that some veterans turn to

chaplains not because they necessarily perceive their health services are relatively more

effective, but because religious counseling carries less military career risk and is accompanied by

far less social stigma (Morgan et al. 2016). Research examining military policies and

institutional cultural norms that reinforce this stigma, as well as work uncovering the relative

mental health benefits of secular as compared to religious counseling, including how these

effects may differ across servicemembers, will be important for designing military chaplain

policies that maximize the welfare of veterans.




        chaplains, who are apparently being used with increasing frequency to provide mental health care due to
        the acute shortage of mental health professionals.” (Astore 2010)

On the other hand, columnists at National Review have defended chaplains as indispensable not only to
servicemembers’ emotional well-being, but also to the success of military operations:

        "The more dangerous the mission, the more vital chaplains are to its success. The nearly 1,400 chaplains in
        the U.S. armed forces…must be on-the-spot counselors to men and women living through a kind of trauma
        that few civilians will ever experience. They prepare soldiers to kill and to die without losing their souls.
        They help soldiers reintegrate into the lives of their families. Chaplains ministering stateside help military
        families left behind get through months of emotional and sometimes financial hardship.” (Dreher, National
        Review, 2003)

                                                         34
References
Angrist, Joshua D. "Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery: evidence from social
       security administrative records." American Economic Review (1990): 313-336.
Angrist, Joshua D. "Estimating the Labor Market Impact of Voluntary Military Service Using
       Social Security Data on Military Applicants." Econometrica 66, no. 2 (1998): 249-288.
Angrist, Joshua D., and John H. Johnson IV. "Effects of work-related absences on families:
       Evidence from the Gulf War." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54, no. 1 (2000):
       41-58.
Angrist, Joshua D., Stacey H. Chen, and Brigham R. Frandsen. "Did Vietnam veterans get sicker
       in the 1990s? The complicated effects of military service on self-reported
       health." Journal of Public Economics 94, no. 11-12 (2010): 824-837.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Stacey H. Chen. "Schooling and the Vietnam-era GI Bill: Evidence from
       the draft lottery." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, no. 2 (2011): 96-
       118.
Angrist, Joshua D., Stacey H. Chen, and Jae Song. "Long-term consequences of Vietnam-era
       conscription: New estimates using social security data." American Economic Review 101,
       no. 3 (2011): 334-38.
Army Regulation 220-1, 2010. Army Unit Status Reporting and Force Registration—
      Consolidated Policies. Headquarters of the Department of the Army, Washington DC,
      http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/r220 1.pdf
Astore, William. 2010. "In Place Of Mental Health Care, Are Some Troops Being Evangelized?"
        Huffington Post. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/william-astore/in-place-of-mental-
        health_b_677602.html.
Autor, David H., Mark G. Duggan, Kyle Greenberg, and David S. Lyle. “The Impact of
       Disability Benefits on Labor Supply: Evidence from the VA’s Disability Compensation
       Program.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8, no. 3 (2016): 31-68.
Baiocchi, Dave, Measuring Army Deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, Rand Corporation,
      2013.
Bateson, Regina. "Crime victimization and political participation." American Political Science
       Review 106, no. 3 (2012): 570-587.
Becker, Sascha O., Markus Nagler, and Ludger Woessmann. "Education and religious
       participation: city-level evidence from Germany’s secularization period 1890–
       1930." Journal of Economic Growth 22, no. 3 (2017): 273-311.
Bentzen, Jeanet Sinding. "Acts of God? Religiosity and natural disasters across subnational
      world districts." The Economic Journal 129, no. 622 (2019): 2295-2321.
Berman, Eli. "Sect, subsidy, and sacrifice: an economist's view of ultra-orthodox Jews." The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 3 (2000): 905-953.
Berry, Devon. "Methodological pitfalls in the study of religiosity and spirituality." Western
       Journal of Nursing Research 27, no. 5 (2005): 628-647.


                                                35
Besterman-Dahan, Karen, Susanne W. Gibbons, Scott D. Barnett, and Edward J. Hickling. "The
       role of military chaplains in mental health care of the deployed service member." Military
       Medicine 177, no. 9 (2012): 1028-1033.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. "“Beyond the melting pot”: cultural transmission, marriage,
        and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits." The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 115, no. 3 (2000): 955-988.
Bjarnason, Dana. "Concept analysis of religiosity." Home Health Care Management &
       Practice 19, no. 5 (2007): 350-355.
Bjorck, Jeffrey P., and John W. Thurman. "Negative life events, patterns of positive and negative
       religious coping, and psychological functioning." Journal for the Scientific Study of
       Religion 46, no. 2 (2007): 159-167.
Bousso, Regina Szylit, Taís de Souza Serafim, and Maira Deguer Misko. "The relationship
      between religion, illness and death in life histories of family members of children with
      life-threatening diseases." Revista latino-americana de enfermagem 18, no. 2 (2010):
      156-162.
Burdette, Amy M., Victor Wang, Glen H. Elder, Terrence D. Hill, and Janel Benson. "Serving
       God and Country? Religious involvement and military service among young adult
       men." Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 48, no. 4 (2009): 794-804.
Buser, Thomas. "The effect of income on religiousness." American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics 7, no. 3 (2015): 178-95.
Carrell, Scott E., Richard L. Fullerton, and James E. West. "Does your cohort matter? Measuring
        peer effects in college achievement." Journal of Labor Economics 27, no. 3 (2009): 439-
        464.
Carrell, Scott E., Mark Hoekstra, and James E. West. "Is poor fitness contagious?: Evidence
        from randomly assigned friends." Journal of Public Economics 95, no. 7-8 (2011): 657-
        663.
Cesur, Resul, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin. "The psychological costs of war: military combat
       and mental health." Journal of Health Economics 32, no. 1 (2013): 51-65.
Cesur, Resul, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin. "Combat exposure and migraine headache:
       evidence from exogenous deployment assignment." Economics & Human Biology 16
       (2015): 81-99.
Cesur, Resul, and Joseph J. Sabia. "When war comes home: The effect of combat service on
       domestic violence." Review of Economics and Statistics 98, no. 2 (2016): 209-225.
Cesur, Resul, Alexander Chesney, and Joseph J. Sabia. "Combat Exposure, Cigarette
       Consumption, and Substance Use." Economic Inquiry 54, no. 3 (2016): 1705-1726.
Cesur, Resul, and Sadullah Yildirim. “Demand for Cooperation and Religion” University of
       Connecticut Working Paper (2020)
Cesur, Resul, and Naci Mocan. "Education, religion, and voter preference in a Muslim
       country." Journal of Population Economics 31, no. 1 (2018): 1-44.



                                               36
Cesur, Resul, Joseph J. Sabia, and W. David Bradford. “Did the war on terror ignite an opioid
       epidemic?” No. w26264. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
Chen, Yung Y., and Harold G. Koenig. "Traumatic stress and religion: Is there a relationship? A
       review of empirical findings." Journal of Religion and Health 45, no. 3 (2006): 371-381.
Chen, Daniel L. "Club goods and group identity: Evidence from Islamic resurgence during the
       Indonesian financial crisis." Journal of Political Economy 118, no. 2 (2010): 300-354.
Cohen-Zada, Danny, and William Sander. "Religious participation versus shopping: What makes
      people happier?." The Journal of Law and Economics 54, no. 4 (2011): 889-906.
Daniels, Joseph P., and Marc Von Der Ruhr. "Trust in others: Does religion matter?." Review of
       Social Economy 68, no. 2 (2010): 163-186.
Dao, James. "Atheists seek chaplain role in the military." The New York Times (2011).
       https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/27/us/27atheists.html
Deaton, Angus S. Aging, religion, and health. No. w15271. National Bureau of Economic
      Research, 2009.
De Castella, Rosemary, and Janette Graetz Simmonds. “There's a deeper level of meaning as to
      what suffering's all about”: experiences of religious and spiritual growth following
      trauma." Mental Health, Religion & Culture 16, no. 5 (2013): 536-556.
Department of Veterans Affairs. "Analysis of VA health care utilization among operation
      enduring freedom (OEF), Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), and Operation New Dawn
      (OND) veterans." Washington, DC: Department of Veterans Affairs (2012).
Department of Defense. Defense Casualty Analysis System. Defense Manpower Data Centers.
   Washington D.C.: US Department of Defense,
   https://www.dmdc.osd.mil/dcas/pages/report_by_year_manner.xhtml (2016).
Doyle, Joseph J. "Health insurance, treatment and outcomes: using auto accidents as health
       shocks." Review of Economics and Statistics 87, no. 2 (2005): 256-270.
Doyle, Joseph J. "Returns to local-area health care spending: evidence from health shocks to
       patients far from home." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, no. 3
       (2011): 221-43.
Dreher, Rod. "Ministers Of War". National Review.
       http://www.nationalreview.com/article/210615/ministers-war-rod-dreher (2003).
Drescher, K.D., Foy, D.W., Kelly, C., Leshner, A., Schutz, K. and Litz, B., 2011. An exploration
      of the viability and usefulness of the construct of moral injury in war
      veterans. Traumatology, 17(1), p.8.
Egbert, Nichole, Jacqueline Mickley, and Harriet Coeling. "A review and application of social
       scientific measures of religiosity and spirituality: Assessing a missing component in
       health communication research." Health Communication 16, no. 1 (2004): 7-27.
Epstein, Susan B., and Lynn M. Williams. Overseas Contingency Operations Funding:
       Background and Status. Congressional Research Service Washington United States,
       2016.



                                               37
Engel, Rozlyn C., Luke B. Gallagher, and David S. Lyle. "Military deployments and children's
       academic achievement: Evidence from Department of Defense Education Activity
       Schools." Economics of Education Review 29, no. 1 (2010): 73-82.
Falsetti, Sherry A., Patricia A. Resick, and Joanne L. Davis. "Changes in religious beliefs
        following trauma." Journal of Traumatic Stress 16, no. 4 (2003): 391-398.
Feldstein, Martin S. "The welfare loss of excess health insurance." Journal of Political
       Economy 81, no. 2, Part 1 (1973): 251-280.
Fontana, Alan, and Robert Rosenheck. "Trauma, change in strength of religious faith, and mental
       health service use among veterans treated for PTSD." The Journal of Nervous and Mental
       Disease 192, no. 9 (2004): 579-584.
Fox, Melanie, Joanne Cacciatore, and Jeffrey R. Lacasse. "Child death in the United States:
      productivity and the economic burden of parental grief." Death Studies 38, no. 9 (2014):
      597-602.
Fruehwirth, Cooley, Jane, Sriya Iyer, and Anwen Zhang. Religion and Depression in
      Adolescence. No. 9652. IZA Discussion Papers, 2016.
Gonzalez‐Mulé, Erik, and Bethany Cockburn. "Worked to death: The relationships of job
      demands and job control with mortality." Personnel Psychology 70, no. 1 (2017): 73-112.
Glock, Charles Y. "On the study of religious commitment." (1962): 98-110.
Glock, Charles Young, and Rodney Stark. Religion and society in tension. Chicago: Rand
       McNally, 1965.
Grossman, Michael. "On the concept of health capital and the demand for health." Journal of
      Political Economy 80, no. 2 (1972): 223-255.
Gruber, Jonathan H. "Religious market structure, religious participation, and outcomes: Is
       religion good for you?" The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 5, no. 1 (2005).
Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman. "The church versus the mall: What happens when
       religion faces increased secular competition?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123,
       no. 2 (2008): 831-862.
Gubkin, Rut. "An Exploration of Spirituality and the Traumatizing Experiences of
      Combat." Journal of Humanistic Psychology 56, no. 4 (2016): 311-330.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. "People's opium? Religion and economic
       attitudes." Journal of Monetary Economics 50, no. 1 (2003): 225-282.
Hadley, Jack, and James D. Reschovsky. "Medicare spending, mortality rates, and quality of
      care." International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 12, no. 1 (2012): 87-
      105.
Harris, J. Irene, Christopher R. Erbes, Brian E. Engdahl, Paul Thuras, Nichole Murray‐Swank,
        Dixie Grace, Henry Ogden et al. "The effectiveness of a trauma focused spiritually
        integrated intervention for veterans exposed to trauma." Journal of Clinical
        Psychology 67, no. 4 (2011): 425-438.



                                                38
Harris, J. Irene, Gary K. Leak, Rachel Dubke, and Cory Voecks. "Religious strain and
        postconventional religiousness in trauma survivors." Psychology of Religion and
        Spirituality 7, no. 2 (2015): 173.
Hasanović, Mevludin, and Izet Pajević. "Religious moral beliefs inversely related to trauma
      experiences severity and presented posttraumatic stress disorder among Bosnia and
      Herzegovina war veterans." Journal of Religion and Health 54, no. 4 (2015): 1403-1415.
Henrich, Joseph, Michal Bauer, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilová, and Benjamin Grant
       Purzycki. "War increases religiosity." Nature human behaviour 3, no. 2 (2019): 129.
Hungerman, Daniel M. "Are church and state substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 welfare
      reform." Journal of Public Economics 89, no. 11 (2005): 2245-2267.
Hungerman, Daniel M. "The effect of education on religion: Evidence from compulsory
      schooling laws." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 104 (2014): 52-63.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. "Sacrifice and stigma: reducing free-riding in cults, communes, and
       other collectives." Journal of Political Economy 100, no. 2 (1992): 271-291.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. "Religious Markets and the Economics of Religion." Social
       Compass 39, no. 1 (1992): 123-131.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. and Eli Berman. “Economics of Religion” In The New Palgrave
       Dictionary of Economics, edited by Stephen Durlauf and Lawrence Blume. Baisingsoke
       and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. (2008)
Iyer, Sriya. "The New Economics of Religion." Journal of Economic Literature 54, no. 2 (June
        2016): 395-441.
Jindal, Congressman Bobby. 2006. Report on Chaplaincy. Obtained on September 28, 2006.
Johns, Jay (Executive Director, Armed Forces Chaplains Board), interviewed by Travis
        Freidman, September 2017.
Johnson, D. D., and Reeve, Z. (2013). ‘The virtues of intolerance: Is religion an adaptation for
      war? (pp. 67-87). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kamarck, Kristy N. "Women in Combat: Issues for Congress." Congressional Research Service:
      Report (August 18, 2015): 1.
Koenig, Harold, George R. Parkerson Jr, and Keith G. Meador. "Religion index for psychiatric
      research." (1997).
Koenig, Harold G., Michael E. McCullough, and David B. Larson. Handbook of religion and
      health. n.p.: Oxford ; New York : Oxford University Press, 2001.
Koenig, Harold G. "Research on religion, spirituality, and mental health: a review." Canadian
      Journal of Psychiatry. 54, no. 5 (2009): 283-291.
Kopacz, Marek S., Cathleen P. Kane, Wilfred R. Pigeon, and Jason A. Nieuwsma. "Chaplaincy
      encounters following a suicide attempt." Journal of Health Care Chaplaincy 23, no. 4
      (2017): 167-173.




                                                39
Kurzban, R., Christner, J. (2011). Are supernatural beliefs commitment devices for intergroup
      conflict. In J.P. Forgas, A. Kruglanski, & K.D. Willimas (Eds.), The psychology of social
      conflict and aggression (The Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology, vol. 13).
Lindo, Jason M., and Charles Stoecker. "Drawn into violence: Evidence on “what makes a
       criminal” from the Vietnam draft lotteries." Economic Inquiry 52, no. 1 (2014): 239-258.
Ling, Geoffrey SF, and James M. Ecklund. "Traumatic Brain Injury in Modern War." Current
       Opinion in Anesthesiology 24, no. 2 (2011): 124-130.
Litz, Brett T., Nathan Stein, Eileen Delaney, Leslie Lebowitz, William P. Nash, Caroline Silva,
        and Shira Maguen. "Moral injury and moral repair in war veterans: A preliminary model
        and intervention strategy." Clinical Psychology Review 29, no. 8 (2009): 695-706.
Litz, Brett T., and William E. Schlenger. "PTSD in service members and new veterans of the
        Iraq and Afghanistan wars: A bibliography and critique." PTSD Research Quarterly 20,
        no. 1 (2009): 1-7.
Liu, Kai. "Insuring against health shocks: Health insurance and household choices." Journal of
       Health Economics 46 (2016): 16-32.
Lyle, David S. "Using military deployments and job assignments to estimate the effect of
       parental absences and household relocations on children’s academic
       achievement." Journal of Labor Economics 24, no. 2 (2006): 319-350.
Lyle, David S. "Estimating and interpreting peer and role model effects from randomly assigned
       social groups at West Point." The Review of Economics and Statistics 89, no. 2 (2007):
       289-299.
Lyons, J A. "Self-mutilation by a man with posttraumatic stress disorder." The Journal of
       Nervous and Mental Disease 179, no. 8 (1991): 505-507.
Malani, Anup, and Sonia P. Jaffe. The Welfare Implications of Health Insurance. No. w24851.
       National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
Marx, Brian P. "Posttraumatic stress disorder and Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi
       Freedom: Progress in a time of controversy." (2009): 671-673.
McGuire, Thomas G. "Demand for health insurance." In Handbook of health economics, vol. 2,
      pp. 317-396. Elsevier, 2011.
McFarlane, Alexander C. "The long‐term costs of traumatic stress: intertwined physical and
      psychological consequences." World Psychiatry 9, no. 1 (2010): 3-10.
McFall, Miles E., Priscilla W. Mackay, and Dennis M. Donovan. "Combat-related posttraumatic
      stress disorder and severity of substance abuse in Vietnam veterans." Journal of Studies
      on Alcohol 53, no. 4 (1992): 357-363.
McFall, Miles E., Richard C. Veith, and M. Michele Murburg. "Basal sympathoadrenal function
      in posttraumatic distress disorder." Biological Psychiatry 31, no. 10 (1992): 1050-1056.
McKee, Ann C., and Meghan E. Robinson. "Military‐related traumatic brain injury and
     neurodegeneration." Alzheimer's & Dementia 10 (2014): S242-S253.



                                               40
McLaughlin, Barbara R. "Devastated Spirituality: The Impact of Clergy Sexual Abuse on the
     Survivor's Relationship with God and the Church." Sexual Addiction & Compulsivity 1,
     no. 2 (1994): 145.
MacNeill, A. D. (2004). The capacity for religious experience is an evolutionary adaptation to
     warfare. David Livingstone Smith.
Mays, Glen P., and Sharla A. Smith. "Evidence links increases in public health spending to
      declines in preventable deaths." Health Affairs 30, no. 8 (2011): 1585-1593.
Mellor, Jennifer M., and Beth A. Freeborn. "Religious participation and risky health behaviors
       among adolescents." Health Economics 20, no. 10 (2011): 1226-1240.
Military Leadership Diversity Commission. "Religious diversity in the US Military." Military
       Leadership Diversity Commission (2010).
Miller, Sarah, Sean Altekruse, Norman Johnson, and Laura R. Wherry. Medicaid and mortality:
        new evidence from linked survey and administrative data. No. w26081. National Bureau
        of Economic Research, 2019.
Mock, Charles N., Stephen Gloyd, Samuel Adjei, Frederick Acheampong, and Oscar Gish.
      "Economic consequences of injury and resulting family coping strategies in
      Ghana." Accident Analysis & Prevention 35, no. 1 (2003): 81-90.
Morgan, Jessica Kelley, Laurel Hourani, Marian E. Lane, and Stephen Tueller. "Help-seeking
      behaviors among active-duty military personnel: Utilization of chaplains and other
      mental health service providers." Journal of Health Care Chaplaincy 22, no. 3 (2016):
      102-117.
Negrusa, Sebastian, Brighita Negrusa, and James Hosek. "Gone to war: have deployments
      increased divorces?" Journal of Population Economics 27, no. 2 (2014): 473-496.
Nunziata, Luca. "Immigration and crime: evidence from victimization data." Journal of
      Population Economics 28, no. 3 (2015): 697-736.
Ogden, Henry, J. Irene Harris, Christopher R. Erbes, Brian E. Engdahl, Raymond HA Olson,
      Ann Marie Winskowski, and Joelle McMahill. "Religious functioning and trauma
      outcomes among combat veterans." Counselling and Spirituality (2011): 71-89.
Okie, Susan. "Traumatic brain injury in the war zone." New England Journal of Medicine 352,
       no. 20 (2005): 2043-2047.
Orsini, Chiara. "The mortality effects of changing public funding for home health care: An
        empirical analysis of Medicare home health care in the United States." Health
        Economics 28, no. 7 (2019): 921-936.
Overcash, Wendy S., Lawrence G. Calhoun, Arnie Cann, and Richard G. Tedeschi. "Coping with
      crises: An examination of the impact of traumatic events on religious beliefs." The
      Journal of Genetic Psychology 157, no. 4 (1996): 455-464.
Park, Crystal L., Joseph M. Currier, J. Irene Harris, and Jeanne M. Slattery. "The intersection of
       religion/spirituality and trauma." (2017).
Pargament, Kenneth I., and Curtis R. Brant. "Religion and coping." In Handbook of Religion and
      Mental Health, (1998): 111-128.

                                                41
Pargament, Kenneth I., Julie J. Exline, and James W. Jones. APA handbook of psychology,
      religion, and spirituality (Vol 1): Context, theory, and research. American Psychological
      Association, 2013.
Paul, Pamela, and C. Kelly. "With God as my shrink." Psychology Today 38, no. 3 (2005): 62-
       68.
Peres, Julio FP, Alexander Moreira-Almeida, Antonia Gladys Nasello, and Harold G. Koenig.
        "Spirituality and Resilience in Trauma Victims." Journal of Religion and Health 46, no. 3
        (2007): 343-350.
Polimanti, Renato, Chia-Yen Chen, Robert J. Ursano, Steven G. Heeringa, Sonia Jain, Ronald C.
      Kessler, Matthew K. Nock et al. “Cross-Phenotype Polygenic Risk Score Analysis of
      Persistent Post-Concussive Symptoms in U.S. Army Soldiers with Deployment-Acquired
      Traumatic Brain Injury.” Journal of Neurotrauma 34, no. 4 (2017): 781-789.
Post, Brian C., and Nathaniel G. Wade. "Religion and spirituality in psychotherapy: A practice‐
       friendly review of research." Journal of Clinical Psychology 65, no. 2 (2009): 131-146.
Price, Rumi Kato, Nathan K. Risk, Ashley H. Haden, Collins E. Lewis, and Edward L.
        Spitznagel. "Post-traumatic stress disorder, drug dependence, and suicidality among male
        Vietnam veterans with a history of heavy drug use." Drug & Alcohol Dependence 76
        (2004): S31-S43.
Rohlfs, Chris. "Does combat exposure make you a more violent or criminal person? Evidence
       from the Vietnam draft." Journal of Human Resources 45, no. 2 (2010): 271-300.
Sabia, Joseph J. and William Skimmyhorn. “Beyond the Draft: Modern Warfare, Veterans’
        Benefits, and Labor Market Outcomes, Working Paper, Center for Health Economics &
        Policy Studies, San Diego State University (2019).
Schieman, Scott. "Socioeconomic status and beliefs about God's influence in everyday
      life." Sociology of Religion 71, no. 1 (2010): 25-51.
Shaw, Annick, Stephen Joseph, and P. Alex Linley. "Religion, spirituality, and posttraumatic
      growth: A systematic review." Mental Health, Religion & Culture 8, no. 1 (2005): 1-11.
Shen, Yu-Chu, Jeremy Arkes, and John Pilgrim. "The effects of deployment intensity on post-
       traumatic stress disorder: 2002–2006." Military medicine 174, no. 3 (2009): 217-223.
Sitaraman, Ganesh. "Counterinsurgency, the War on Terror, and the Laws of War." Virginia Law
       Review (2009): 1745-1839.
Slater, C. L., J. Bordenave, and B. A. Boyer. "Impact of spiritual and religious coping on
        PTSD." Comprehensive guide to Post-traumatic stress disorder (2016): 147-162.
Sloan, Richard P. Blind faith: The unholy alliance of religion and medicine. Macmillan, 2006.
Sloan, Richard P., Emilia Bagiella, Larry VandeCreek, Margot Hover, Carlo Casalone, Trudi
       Jinpu Hirsch, Yusuf Hasan, Ralph Kreger, and Peter Poulos. "Should physicians
       prescribe religious activities?." New England Journal of Medicine 342, no. 25 (2000):
       1913-1916.
Smidt, Corwin. "Religion and civic engagement: A comparative analysis." The Annals of the
       American Academy of Political and Social Science 565, no. 1 (1999): 176-192.

                                                42
Smith, Tom W, Peter Marsden, Michael Hout, and Jibum Kim. General Social Surveys, 1972-
       2012: Cumulative Codebook / Principal Investigator, Tom W. Smith; Co-Principal
       Investigator, Peter V. Marsden; Co-Principal Investigator, Michael Hout. -- Chicago:
       NORC at the University of Chicago, 2016
Steenkamp, Maria M., Brett T. Litz, Matt J. Gray, Leslie Lebowitz, William Nash, Lauren
       Conoscenti, Amy Amidon, and Ariel Lang. "A Brief Exposure-Based Intervention for
       Service Members with PTSD." Cognitive and Behavioral Practice 18, no. 1 (2011): 98-
       107.
Tanielian, Terri and Lisa H. Jaycox, eds., Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and Cognitive
       Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery. Santa Monica, CA:
       RAND Corporation, 2008.
Ter Kuile, Hagar, and Thomas Ehring. "Predictors of changes in religiosity after trauma:
       Trauma, religiosity, and posttraumatic stress disorder." Psychological Trauma: Theory,
       Research, Practice, and Policy 6, no. 4 (2014): 353.
Tran, Christy T., Eric Kuhn, Robyn D. Walser, and Kent D. Drescher. "The Relationship
       Between Religiosity, PTSD, and depressive symptoms in veterans in PTSD residential
       treatment." Journal of Psychology and Theology 40, no. 4 (2012): 313-322.

United States Congressional Budget Office. “Veterans’ Disability Compensation: Trends and
       Policy Options.” (2014).
       http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45615-VADisability_1.pdf

VanderWeele, Tyler J., John W. Jackson, and Shanshan Li. "Causal inference and longitudinal
      data: a case study of religion and mental health." Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
      Epidemiology 51, no. 11 (2016): 1457-1466.
Waggoner, Ed. "Taking Religion Seriously in the US Military: The Chaplaincy as a National
     Strategic Asset." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 82, no. 3 (2014): 702-
     735.
Worthington Jr, Everett L., and Diane Langberg. "Religious considerations and self-forgiveness
      in treating complex trauma and moral injury in present and former soldiers." Journal of
      Psychology and Theology 40, no. 4 (2012): 274-288.
Zarembo, Alan. "As disability awards grow, so do concerns with veracity of PTSD claims." Los
      Angeles Times (2014).




                                              43
                               Table 1. Descriptive Statistics, NLSAAH

                                                                  Mean                   Standard Deviation
                                                                   (1)                          (2)
 Dependent Variables
  Weekly Religious Attendance                                     0.154                         (0.361)
  Prayer                                                          0.751                         (0.433)
  Religious Importance                                            0.511                         (0.500)
 Combat Measures
  Combat Assignment                                               0.755                         (0.430)
  Enemy Engagement                                                0.367                         (0.483)
  Combat Service without Engagement                               0.388                         (0.488)
 Military Controls
  Army                                                             0.41                         (0.49)
  Marine                                                           0.20                         (0.40)
  Navy                                                             0.25                         (0.43)
  Air Force                                                        0.16                         (0.37)
  Rank E1-E3                                                       0.06                         (0.24)
  Rank E4-E6                                                       0.85                         (0.36)
  Rank E7-E9                                                       0.02                         (0.14)
  Rank W1-W5                                                       0.01                         (0.08)
  Rank O1-O3                                                       0.06                         (0.25)
  Rank 04-O10                                                      0.00                         (0.00)
 Selected Background Characteristics
   Age                                                            28.68                         (1.70)
   Some College                                                    0.66                         (0.47)
   College Education                                               0.16                         (0.37)
   White                                                           0.70                         (0.50)
   Black                                                           0.22                         (0.42)
   Other Race/Ethnicity                                            0.08                         (0.26)
   Hispanic                                                        0.16                         (0.37)
 Observations                                                                      482

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. The means are generated using data for males drawn from wave IV of the
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Branch of service is not mutually exclusive. The sample is
composed of male servicemembers only. The indicators for rank are further disaggregated in the regression analysis
(Rank E1–E2, Rank E3, Rank E4, Rank E5, Rank E6, Rank E7–E8, Rank O1–O2, Rank O3, Rank W1–W2).




                                                       44
         Table 2. Non-Military Characteristics and Conditional Deployment Assignment, NLSAAH

                                           Combat Assignment Enemy Engagement Enemy Engagement
                                                   vs                vs               vs
                                              No Combat          No Enemy        No Combat
                                              Assignment        Engagement       Assignment
                                                  (1)               (2)              (3)

Weekly Religious Attendance                       0.047             0.026              0.046
                                                 (0.041)           (0.050)            (0.060)
Prayer                                            -0.057            0.037              -0.014
                                                 (0.043)           (0.058)            (0.067)
Religious Importance                              0.060             0.012              0.099
                                                 (0.041)           (0.052)            (0.065)

F-test (p-value)                              1.279 (0.285)     0.406 (0.749)      1.313 (0.274)

Wave 1 Mother Religion is Very Important          0.012             -0.007             0.036
                                                 (0.048)           (0.052)            (0.061)
Wave 1 Mother Attended Service                    0.005             -0.041             -0.012
                                                 (0.045)           (0.044)            (0.054)
Wave 1 Weight                                     -0.001            -0.000             -0.001
                                                 (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)
Wave 1 Height                                     -0.003            0.003              0.000
                                                 (0.005)           (0.006)            (0.007)

Wave 1 Protestant                                 -0.009            0.009              -0.013
                                                 (0.067)           (0.087)            (0.097)
Wave 1 Catholic                                   0.065             0.012              0.016
                                                 (0.072)           (0.087)            (0.104)
Wave 1 Other Religion                             0.036             -0.004             0.085
                                                 (0.125)           (0.151)            (0.206)

F-test (p-value)                              0.888 (0.450)     0.0134 (0.998)     0.169 (0.917)

Age in Years                                      0.173             0.111              0.302
                                                 (0.403)           (0.398)            (0.555)
Age in Years Squared                              -0.003            -0.002             -0.006
                                                 (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.010)

F-test (p-value)                              0.354 (0.702)     0.286 (0.752)      0.566 (0.570)

Race: Black                                       -0.010            -0.085             -0.062
                                                 (0.050)           (0.059)            (0.073)
Race: Other                                       0.098             -0.053             0.049
                                                 (0.061)           (0.067)            (0.119)

                                                 45
                                          Combat Assignment Enemy Engagement Enemy Engagement
                                                  vs                vs               vs
                                             No Combat          No Enemy        No Combat
                                             Assignment        Engagement       Assignment
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)

F-test (p-value)                            1.381 (0.255)     1.093 (0.339)    0.543 (0.583)

Ethnicity: Hispanic                             -0.005         -0.158***           -0.080
                                               (0.049)           (0.053)          (0.079)

Some College                                    0.032             -0.000           0.043
                                               (0.053)           (0.055)          (0.069)
College                                         0.106             -0.008           0.068
                                               (0.081)           (0.087)          (0.117)

F-test (p-value)                            0.915 (0.403)    0.00531 (0.995)   0.228 (0.796)

Wave 1 PPVT                                     -0.001            0.000            -0.001
                                               (0.001)           (0.002)          (0.002)

$19K=<Parental Income <$28K                     -0.014            0.016            -0.028
                                               (0.087)           (0.093)          (0.129)
$28K=<Parental Income <$36K                     0.076             0.086            0.098
                                               (0.072)           (0.097)          (0.110)
$36K=<Parental Income <$45K                     0.062             0.036            0.076
                                               (0.081)           (0.083)          (0.120)
$45K=<Parental Income <$56K                     0.087             0.066            0.121
                                               (0.073)           (0.079)          (0.099)
$56K=<Parental Income <$83K                    0.165*             0.106            0.195
                                               (0.089)           (0.104)          (0.120)
$83K=<Parental Income                           0.117             0.184           0.257*
                                               (0.096)           (0.128)          (0.150)

F-test (p-value)                            1.078 (0.380)     0.589 (0.739)    1.335 (0.249)

Parents: Married                                -0.107            0.043            -0.127
                                               (0.070)           (0.129)          (0.132)
Parents: Divorced, Separated or Widowed         -0.138            0.046            -0.172
                                               (0.087)           (0.145)          (0.153)

F-test (p-value)                            1.342 (0.265)    0.0568 (0.945)    0.638 (0.530)

Mothers Education: High School                  0.035             0.020            0.039
                                               (0.093)           (0.071)          (0.109)
Mothers Education: Above High School            0.033             0.057            0.090

                                               46
                                                        Combat Assignment Enemy Engagement Enemy Engagement
                                                                vs                vs               vs
                                                           No Combat          No Enemy        No Combat
                                                           Assignment        Engagement       Assignment
                                                               (1)               (2)              (3)
                                                             (0.082)           (0.074)          (0.107)

F-test (p-value)                                           0.0832 (0.920)               0.421 (0.658)              0.581 (0.561)
    Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each model includes
    controls for military-specific variables, including binary indicators for current active-duty military service status, total
    service length, military rank, branch of service, timing of service, and occupation. Each specification also includes
    missing dummy categories for each of the control variables with missing information. Estimates are obtained from a
    separate regression for each independent variable (or mutually exclusive independent variable category). P-values
    represent the joint significance of mutually exclusive categorial variables, e.g., race, income, and maternal schooling.
    The sample is comprised of male servicemembers only.




                                                                 47
                       Table 3. The Effect of Combat on Religiosity, NLSAAH

                                              Weekly Religious                                        Religious
                                                Attendance                    Prayer                 Importance
                                                    (1)                         (2)                      (3)

                                                                           Panel I: All
Combat Assignment                                   0.079**                  0.086*                      0.045
                                                    (0.033)                  (0.050)                    (0.052)
N                                                     482                      481                        481

                                                                Panel II: Current Active Duty
Combat Assignment                                   0.124**                 0.090             0.198**
                                                    (0.051)                (0.090)            (0.088)
N                                                     196                    196                195

                                                                   Panel III: Prior Service
Combat Assignment                                   0.083*                 0.117*                        0.019
                                                    (0.042)                (0.064)                      (0.062)
N                                                     286                    285                          286

                                                   Panel IV: Pre-Enlistment Christian Identification
Combat Assignment                                   0.111**             0.059               0.014
                                                    (0.045)            (0.042)             (0.064)
N                                                     349                348                 348

                                                Panel V: Pre-Enlistment Non-Christian Identification
Combat Assignment                                   -0.048             -0.014             -0.024
                                                   (0.043)            (0.112)            (0.071)
N                                                    133                133                133
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Military controls
include binary variables for current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank, branch of
service, timing of service, and occupation. Each regression also includes missing dummy categories for each of the
control variables with missing information. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                           48
                Table 4. The Effect of Enemy Engagement on Religiosity, NLSAAH

                                                         Weekly Religious                                  Religious
                                                           Attendance                  Prayer             Importance
                                                               (1)                      (2)                   (3)

Enemy Engagement                                               0.079*                  0.075                  0.011
                                                              (0.043)                 (0.051)                (0.059)
Combat Assignment without Engagement                          0.079**                  0.095                  0.075
                                                              (0.034)                 (0.059)                (0.064)
N                                                                482                    481                    481

 Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Military controls
 include binary variables for current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank, branch of
 service, timing of service, and occupation. Each regression also includes missing dummy categories for each of the
 control variables with missing information. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                            49
Table 5. Sensitivity of Estimated Combat Effects to Added Controls for Pre-Deployment Background Characteristics and Pre-
                                             Deployment Religiosity, NLSAAH
                                               Weekly Religious Attendance                         Prayer                       Religious Importance
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)

                                                                                        Panel I: Combat Service
 Combat Assignment                             0.079**      0.088**      0.072*       0.086*     0.086*   0.067              0.045        0.052       0.034
                                               (0.033)      (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.050) (0.051) (0.049)               (0.052)      (0.054)     (0.055)
 N                                               482          482          482          481       481      481                481          481         481

                                                                                 Panel II: Enemy Engagement
 Enemy Engagement                               0.079*       0.085        0.067   0.075     0.088*   0.058  0.011                         0.021       -0.009
                                               (0.043)      (0.053)      (0.052) (0.051) (0.052) (0.050) (0.059)                         (0.057)     (0.057)
 Combat Assignment without                     0.079**      0.092**      0.077*   0.095      0.085   0.075  0.075                         0.082        0.075
 Engagement                                    (0.034)      (0.040)      (0.040) (0.059) (0.060) (0.057) (0.064)                         (0.066)     (0.066)
 N                                               482          482          482     481        481     481    481                           481          481

 Military Variables & Occupation                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 Individual and Family Covariates                No           Yes          Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes
 Pre-Deployment Religiosity                      No           No           Yes          No          No           Yes          No           No          Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Military controls include dichotomous indicators for current
active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank, branch of service, timing of service, and occupation. Each specification also includes
missing dummy categories for each of the control variables with missing information. The sample is comprised of male servicemembers only. Full Controls
include height, weight, religion indicators at Wave 1, age, age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, education dummies, Picture Vocabulary Test Score, parental
income dummies, parental marital status indicators, and maternal education indicators. Pre-deployment religiosity measures include religious attendance weekly,
private prayer, and religious importance.




                                                                              50
                            Table 6A. Descriptive Statistics, HRB Survey

                                                                       Mean              Standard Deviation
                                                                        (1)                     (2)
 Dependent Variables
  Frequent Religious Attendance                                        0.189                    (0.390)
  Prayer                                                               0.220                    (0.414)
  Religious Importance                                                 0.695                    (0.460)

 Combat Measures
  Enemy Engagement                                                     0.515                    (0.500)
  Combat Injury                                                        0.050                    (0.218)
  Witness Death                                                        0.322                    (0.467)

 Selected Military Controls
   Army                                                                0.222                    (0.416)
   Marine                                                              0.217                    (0.412)
   Navy                                                                0.292                    (0.455)
   Air Force                                                           0.268                    (0.443)
   Rank E1-E3                                                          0.074                    (0.262)
   Rank E4-E6                                                          0.526                    (0.499)
   Rank E7-E9                                                          0.167                    (0.373)
   Rank W1-W5                                                          0.040                    (0.195)
   Rank O1-O3                                                          0.098                    (0.297)
   Rank 04-O10                                                         0.096                    (0.294)
   Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                     1.661                    (1.205)

 Selected Background Characteristics
   Age                                                                31.609                    (7.626)
   Some College                                                        0.475                    (0.499)
   College Education                                                   0.268                    (0.442)
   White                                                               0.744                    (0.443)
   Black                                                               0.153                    (0.360)
   Other Race/Ethnicity                                                0.115                    (0.319)
   Hispanic                                                            0.125                    (0.331)

 N                                                                                 11,542
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Summary statistics are generated using data for male servicemembers
from the 2008 Department of Defense Health and Related Behaviors Survey.




                                                       51
       Table 6B: Non-Military Characteristics and Conditional Deployment Assignment,
                                        HRB Survey


                                                                                        Enemy Engagement
                                                                                               vs
                                                                                       No Enemy Engagement

Age                                                                                               0.008
                                                                                                (0.008)
Age Squared                                                                                      -0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Age                                                               0.560 (0.579)
Black                                                                                            -0.011
                                                                                                (0.023)
Race Other                                                                                       -0.002
                                                                                                (0.020)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Race                                                              0.120 (0.883)
Hispanic                                                                                         -0.006
                                                                                                (0.020)

Married                                                                                          0.006
                                                                                                (0.016)
Divorced                                                                                         0.033
                                                                                                (0.022)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Education                                                         1.219 (0.314)

High School                                                                                      -0.019
                                                                                                (0.035)
Some College                                                                                     -0.029
                                                                                                (0.036)
College Education                                                                                -0.036
                                                                                                (0.039)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Education                                                         0.560 (0.645)

Joint F-test (p-value) for all covariates                                                    1.020 (0.459)

Observations                                                                                      8,574

 Notes: Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is
 in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample
 consists of a sample in which each active-duty deployed serviceman is matched on military characteristics available
 in the HRB survey: military rank, branch of service, and branch specific major command. The final sample is that
 which has common support on these characteristics.




                                                          52
              Table 7. The Effect of Combat Exposure on Religiosity, HRB Survey

                                              Frequent Religious                                   Religious
                                                 Attendance                    Prayer             Importance
                                                     (1)                        (2)                   (3)

                                                                      Panel I: All
                                                         (Conditional on Military Observables)
Enemy Engagement                                     0.019**              0.014**           0.019*
                                                     (0.008)              (0.006)           (0.010)
N                                                     11,307               11,340           11,278

                                                                 Panel II: All
                                                     (Common Support on Military Observables)
Enemy Engagement                                      0.014           0.024**           0.025**
                                                     (0.009)          (0.011)           (0.011)
N                                                     8,659            8,574             8,545

                                                                      Panel III: Army
Enemy Engagement                                      0.029                  0.016                    0.039
                                                     (0.021)                (0.021)                  (0.031)
N                                                     2,517                  2,518                    2,513

                                                                    Panel IV: Marines
Enemy Engagement                                     0.039*                 0.005                     0.033
                                                     (0.014)               (0.012)                   (0.024)
N                                                     2,449                 2,460                     2,444

                                                                       Panel V: Navy
Enemy Engagement                                      0.031                  0.013                    0.016
                                                     (0.022)                (0.013)                  (0.013)
N                                                     3,293                  3,313                    3,280

                                                                    Panel VI: Air Force
Enemy Engagement                                      0.002                0.024***                   0.013
                                                     (0.008)                (0.006)                  (0.024)
N                                                     3,048                  3,049                    3,041
Notes: Standard errors in Panels I, III, IV, V and VI clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically
significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Regressions in Panels I, III, IV, V, and VI control for military rank, branch-
specific major command indicators, number of combat deployments since September 11, education indictors, age,
age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The estimates in Panel II are drawn from a matching strategy using nearest
neighbor matching. In Panel II, standard errors are bootstrapped. In the full sample (Panel I and II) we also control
for branch of service. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                         53
    Table 8. The Effect of Deployment Assignment, Number of Deployments, and Deployment
                               Length on Religiosity, HRB Survey

                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                               Panel I: Frequent Religious Attendance
Enemy Engagement                                                                                 0.014*          0.020**
                                                                                                 (0.008)         (0.008)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                   -0.009***                                    -0.010***
                                                                    (0.003)                                      (0.003)
Deployed 3-6 Months in Last Year                                                   0.005          0.003            0.009
                                                                                  (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)
Deployed 7+ Months in Last Year                                                 -0.033***      -0.036***        -0.031**
                                                                                  (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.011)
N                                                                  11,307         11,278         11,278           11,250
                                                                              Panel II: Prayer
Enemy Engagement                                                                             0.015**           0.015**
                                                                                             (0.006)           (0.006)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                     0.002                                       -0.000
                                                                   (0.003)                                     (0.003)
Deployed 3-6 Months in Last Year                                                0.009       0.008                0.007
                                                                               (0.013)     (0.012)             (0.012)
Deployed 7+ Months in Last Year                                                 0.007       0.004                0.004
                                                                               (0.010)     (0.010)             (0.010)
N                                                                  11,340      11,311      11,311               11,282
                                                                    Panel III: Religious Importance
Enemy Engagement                                                                           0.016*               0.018*
                                                                                           (0.009)              (0.010)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                     0.001                                        -0.002
                                                                   (0.003)                                      (0.003)
Deployed 3-6 Months in Last Year                                               0.030*      0.028*               0.029*
                                                                               (0.015)     (0.016)              (0.015)
Deployed 7+ Months in Last Year                                                 0.010       0.007                0.008
                                                                               (0.013)     (0.013)              (0.012)
N                                                                  11,278      11,251      11,251               11,222

    Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
    Regressions control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, number of
    combat deployments since September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The
    sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                             54
      Table 9. Exploring Heterogeneity in Effect of Combat on Religiosity, HRB Survey

                                       Frequent Religious                                        Religious
                                          Attendance                     Prayer                 Importance
                                              (1)                          (2)                      (3)

                                                                  Panel I: Enlisted
Enemy Engagement                              0.033**                  0.018**                    0.033**
                                              (0.012)                  (0.008)                    (0.012)
N                                              8,644                    8,677                      8,615

                                                                  Panel II: Officer
Enemy Engagement                               -0.020                   0.004                      -0.018
                                              (0.016)                  (0.017)                    (0.017)
N                                              2,663                    2,663                       2,663

                                                             Panel III: Ages 18 to 24
Enemy Engagement                              0.057**                  0.010                      0.062**
                                              (0.026)                 (0.024)                     (0.028)
N                                              2,486                   2,500                       2,476

                                                             Panel IV: Ages 25 to 32
Enemy Engagement                               0.025                   0.020                       0.018
                                              (0.015)                (0.013)                      (0.024)
N                                              3,820                   3,825                       3,808

                                                              Panel V: Ages 33 to 50
Enemy Engagement                               -0.002                  0.015                       0.004
                                              (0.013)                 (0.011)                     (0.017)
N                                              5,001                   5,015                       4,994

                                                                Panel VI: Females
Enemy Engagement                              0.035*                   0.016                       0.025
                                              (0.019)                 (0.020)                     (0.019)
N                                              3,137                   3,132                       3,123

                                                               Panel VII: Wounding
Combat Injury                                 0.073**                 0.054***                     0.033
                                              (0.029)                  (0.018)                    (0.020)
N                                              11,182                  11,212                     11,152

                                                          Panel VIII: Witnessing Death
Combat Witness Death                           -0.007                  -0.000                      0.004
                                              (0.010)                 (0.008)                     (0.007)
N                                             11,213                  11,245                      11,185
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
Regressions control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, number of
combat deployments since September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. Panels
I to V includes male servicemembers, who are enlisted, officers, ages 18 to 24, ages 25 to 32, and ages 33 to 50,
respectively. Panel VI is comprised of female servicemembers.

                                                        55
Table 10. The Effect of Combat on Religious and Secular Counseling Receipt, HRB Survey

                                                       (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                    Any      Secular               Civilian           Military
                                                 Counseling Counseling             Clergy             Chaplain
                                                                                  Counseling         Counseling

                                                                      Panel I: Full Sample
Enemy Engagement                                   0.072***        0.069***     0.034***               0.040***
                                                    (0.011)         (0.011)      (0.006)                (0.008)

Observations                                        11,361          11,361           11,361             11,361

                                                          Panel II: Sample Receiving Counseling
Enemy Engagement                                       --        0.038**     0.056**         0.025
                                                                 (0.016)     (0.026)       (0.031)

                                                                     1,952            1,952              1,952
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
Models control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, number of combat
deployments since September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. In Panels I to
IV, the sample is comprised of male servicemembers only. In Panel V, the sample includes male servicemembers
who received at least one form of secular and/or religious counseling.




                                                         56
       Table 11. Descriptive Analysis of Mechanisms to Explain Effect of Combat on Religiosity

                                         (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)
                                        Frequent Religious
                                                                               Prayer                     Religious
                                           Attendance
                                                                                                         Importance

Enemy Engagement                      0.019**           0.012         0.014**        0.008         0.019*          0.017*
                                      (0.008)          (0.008)        (0.006)      (0.006)         (0.010)         (0.010)
PTSD                                                    0.010                        0.004                          -0.010
                                                       (0.021)                     (0.017)                         (0.022)
Suicide                                                 -0.006                      -0.027                          -0.034
                                                       (0.020)                     (0.021)                         (0.021)
Psychological Distress                                  0.005                      0.028*                           -0.022
                                                       (0.014)                     (0.014)                         (0.016)
Wounding                                               0.057**                     0.039*                           0.027
                                                       (0.025)                     (0.019)                         (0.022)
Military Chaplain                                     0.060***                    0.060***                        0.052***
                                                       (0.016)                     (0.015)                         (0.015)

N                                      11,307           11,307         11,340       11,340         11,278           11,278

     Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
     Models control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, number of combat
     deployments since September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. In Panels I to
     IV, the sample is comprised of male servicemembers only. In Panel V, the sample includes male servicemembers
     who received at least one form of secular and/or religious counseling. Models also control for missing observations
     indicators for PTSD, Suicide, Psychological Distress, Wounding, and Military Chaplain.




                                                             57
            Appendix Table 1. The Effect of Combat on Any Religious Service Attendance

                                 (1)            (2)                   (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)
                                   NLSAAH                                             HRB Survey
                                 All      All                         All          Army Marines Navy                  Air Force
Combat Assignment              0.094*
                               (0.052)
Enemy Engagement                         0.076                    0.028**          0.045       0.051        0.037        0.010
                                        (0.063)                   (0.011)         (0.034)     (0.032)      (0.023)      (0.010)
Combat Assignment                       0.109*
without Engagement                      (0.058)

N                                482            482                 11,307         2,517       2,449        3,293        3,048
    Notes for columns (1) and (2): Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses. Statistically significant at
    *10%, **5%, ***1%. Models control for military rank, branch-specific major command indicators, number of
    combat deployments since September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. In the
    full sample (Panel A) we also control for branch of service. The sample includes male servicemembers only.

    Notes for columns (3)-(7): Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at,
    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Number of observations in brackets. Military controls include dichotomous
    indicators for current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank, branch of service, timing
    of service, and occupation. Regressions also includes missing dummy categories for each of the control variables
    with missing information. The sample includes male servicemembers only. Full controls include height, weight,
    religion indicators at Wave 1, age, age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, education dummies, Picture Vocabulary
    Test score, parental income dummies, parental marital status indicators, and maternal education indicators. Pre-
    deployment religiosity measures include religious attendance weekly, private prayer, and religious importance.




                                                               58
     Appendix Table 2. Estimating the Impact of Combat on Religiosity in the NLSAAH,
                  Using the Available Control Variables in HRB Survey

                                                         Weekly Religious                                  Religious
                                                           Attendance                  Prayer             Importance
                                                               (1)                      (2)                   (3)

                                                                     Panel I: Combat Assignment
Combat Assignment                                             0.093**           0.084*           0.046
                                                              (0.037)           (0.050)         (0.050)
                                                                482               481             481

                                                                    Panel II: Enemy Engagement
Enemy Engagement                                              0.101**            0.080         0.019
                                                              (0.044)           (0.053)      (0.058)
Combat Assignment without Engagement                          0.085**            0.088         0.070
                                                              (0.040)           (0.056)      (0.059)
N                                                               482               481           481

                                                                             Panel III: Wounding
Combat Injury                                                  0.127*               0.165**                   0.053
                                                              (0.073)               (0.076)                  (0.084)
Combat Assignment without Injury                              0.088**                0.074                    0.045
                                                              (0.037)               (0.051)                  (0.051)
N                                                                482                  481                      481

                                                                      Panel IV: Witnessing Death
Witness Death                                                 0.101**           0.095*            0.023
                                                              (0.045)           (0.055)          (0.054)
Combat Assignment without Witness Death                        0.074*            0.060            0.080
                                                              (0.038)           (0.054)          (0.064)
N                                                                480              479              479

 Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All models
 control for age, age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, education indicators, military rank, timing of military service,
 and branch of service. Each regression also includes missing dummy categories for each of the control variables
 with missing information. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                            59
   Appendix Table 3. Marginal Effects from Multinomial Logit Estimates of the Effect of
                      Enemy Engagement on Types of Counseling

            (1)                            (2)                         (3)                          (4)
          Military                      Civilian                     Secular                 Counseling from
          Chaplain                      Religious                  Counseling                Multiple Sources
         Counseling                    Counseling                  (Civilian or                 (Secular
           Only                           Only                      Military)                 and Religious)

                                       Panel I: Enemy Engagement
           -0.0005                       -0.0001           0.0276***                            0.0473***
          (0.0022)                      (0.0012)            (0.0066)                             (0.0063)
          [11,381]                      [11,381]            [11,381]                             [11,381]

                                            Panel II: Wounding
         (0.0057)                        -0.0010            0.0553***                           0.0850***
         (-0.0020)                      (0.0033)             (0 .0085)                            (.0082)
         [11,252]                       [11,252]             [11,252]                            [11,252]

                                        Panel III: Witnessing Death
           0.0021                        0.0023*             0.0309***                          0.0431***
           0.0027                        0.00139               0.0050                             0.0057
          [11,286]                      [11,286]              [11,286]                           [11,286]
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets.
Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Regressions control for military rank, branch of service, branch-
specific major command indicators, number of combat deployments since September 11, education indictors, age,
age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample includes male servicemembers only. The comparison group
includes those with no reported counseling.




                                                        60
Appendix Table 4. The Effect of Combat Exposure on Selected Mechanisms through which
                      Combat May Impact Religion, HRB Survey

                               (1)           (2)             (3)                 (4)                   (5)
                              PTSD         Suicide      Psychological          Wounding             Military
                                                          Distress                                  Chaplain
                                                                                                   Counseling

  Combat Exposure           0.065***       0.013**         0.040***            0.078***            0.039***
                             (0.009)       (0.005)          (0.008)             (0.012)             (0.008)

  Observations               11,366        10,796            11,370              11,338              11,380
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
Models control for military rank, branch-specific major command indicators, number of combat deployments since
September 11, education indictors, age, age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. In the full sample (Panel A) we
also control for branch of service. The sample includes male servicemembers only.




                                                        61
