                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS:
                            A MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH

                                           Akina Ikudo
                                            Julia Lane
                                          Joseph Staudt
                                         Bruce Weinberg

                                       Working Paper 24951
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24951


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. This research
was supported by the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. NSF SciSIP Awards
1064220 and 1262447; NSF Education and Human Resources DGE Awards 1348691, 1547507,
1348701, 1535399, 1535370; NSF NCSES award 1423706; NIHP01AG039347; and the Ewing
Marion Kaufman and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations. Lane was supported through an
Intergovernment Personnel Act assignment to the US Census Bureau. The research agenda draws
on work with many coauthors, but particularly Jason Owen Smith.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24951.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Akina Ikudo, Julia Lane, Joseph Staudt, and Bruce Weinberg. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Occupational Classifications: A Machine Learning Approach
Akina Ikudo, Julia Lane, Joseph Staudt, and Bruce Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 24951
August 2018
JEL No. C8,J01,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

Characterizing the work that people do on their jobs is a longstanding and core issue in labor
economics. Traditionally, classification has been done manually. If it were possible to combine
new computational tools and administrative wage records to generate an automated crosswalk
between job titles and occupations, millions of dollars could be saved in labor costs, data
processing could be sped up, data could become more consistent, and it might be possible to
generate, without a lag, current information about the changing occupational composition of the
labor market. This paper examines the potential to assign occupations to job titles contained in
administrative data using automated, machine-learning approaches. We use a new extraordinarily
rich and detailed set of data on transactional HR records of large firms (universities) in a
relatively narrowly defined industry (public institutions of higher education) to identify the
potential for machine-learning approaches to classify occupations.

Akina Ikudo                                                Joseph Staudt
University of California, Los Angeles                      U.S. Census Bureau
Institute for Digital Research and Education               Silver Hill Road
5323 Math Sciences                                         Suitland, MD
Los Angeles, CA 90095                                      joseph.staudt@census.gov
ikudo@ucla.edu
                                                           Bruce Weinberg
Julia Lane                                                 Department of Economics
Wagner School of Public Service and CUSP                   Ohio State University
New York University                                        410 Arps Hall
295 Lafayette Street                                       1945 North High Street
New York, NY 10012-9604                                    Columbus, OH 43210
julia.lane@nyu.edu                                         and NBER
                                                           weinberg.27@osu.edu
                                                                                               2




  I.   Introduction
Characterizing the work that people do on their jobs is a long-standing and core issue in
labor economics. Traditionally, classification has been done manually, but there is a long
literature on the associated challenges, well summarized by an influential paper by
Mellow and Sider (1). Many organizations, including the Census Bureau and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, are beginning to investigate the potential of using new computational
tools, such as text analysis and machine learning, to automatically classify workers’
occupations (2). At the same time, there has been a surge of interest in using
administrative wage records to directly capture occupations to inform training(3), to
permit deeper longitudinal analysis on career outcomes, the effects of training, and
changes in inequality. The problem is that standardized occupations do not exist on wage
records, since they are drawn from human resource files which include firm specific job
titles. If it were possible to combine new computational tools and administrative wage
records to generate an automated crosswalk between job titles and occupations, millions
of dollars could be saved in labor costs, data processing could be sped up, data could
become more consistent, and it might be possible to generate, without a lag, current
information about the changing occupational composition of the labor market.

This paper examines the potential to assign occupations to job titles contained in
administrative data using automated, machine-learning approaches. Although there has
been little research that directly ties firm-level human resource (HR) data on job titles to
occupational classifications, there are intellectual foundations for occupational coding
that are largely grounded in the survey world. The first foundation is conceptual: to
define each occupation. The second is operational: to translate concepts to standardized
protocols. The third is statistical: to infer occupations from the information at hand. The
fourth pertains to resources: the implementation of such classifications at massive scale
given the limited resources available. More generally, we contribute to a much larger set
of classification problems, which are increasing in salience with the availability of more
transaction data. It is important to understand which tools and approaches enable the
                                                                                                3


new, rich, but unstructured data to be used, while minimizing the need for expensive and
slow manual classification.

We use a new extraordinarily rich and detailed set of data on transactional HR records of
large firms (universities) in a relatively narrowly defined industry (public institutions of
higher education) to identify the potential for machine-learning approaches to classify
occupations. This is, to our knowledge, the first large-scale dataset that draws from such
HR records across multiple institutions. These data have several advantages. First, the
institutions are relatively large and complex, and they use HR systems that are similar to
other large and complex organizations in the rest of the economy. Second, the focus on
one industry limits the number of possible occupational categories, permitting a targeted
analysis. Third, the focus on public universities is attractive because the HR descriptions
associated with job titles are available online, and can be used to provide additional
information for classification purposes. Finally, the industry is interesting in its own
right. Indeed, the production of research often involves the use of intangible assets,
particularly, labor inputs. Moreover, the training that students and postdocs receive is
economically valuable (Zolas et al. 2015).

We build a training dataset from the HR records using human curation and additional rich
data sources. First, university staff and trained students manually assign occupations to
job titles. That manual curation is then enhanced with additional information from online
job descriptions as well as Census Bureau micro-level information on demographic
characteristics and earnings. The data are then used to train machine learning models to
predict occupations from job titles. Finally, the results are evaluated.

While our results suggest that occupations can be assigned from job titles, they also point
to real challenges. In particular, our analysis suggests that there are substantial limits to
using machine learning to create discrete occupational categories, even with rich data
sources. There are two core problems. The first is that occupational classifications are
inherently noisy, so it is difficult to identify ground truth, particularly in a dynamic and
changing economy. The second is that job titles have insufficient consistency or detail
across institutions necessary for robust supervised machine learning. We do find that a
large number of relatively sparsely populated job titles – a quarter of titles have only one
                                                                                                             4


employee and over half have fewer than ten employees – could be assigned
algorithmically, greatly reducing cost with little impact on accuracy. However, our
experience suggests that, rather than trying to generate occupational categories, it might
be more sensible to directly generate information about the tasks performed on jobs and
the skills and experience required by each job, especially given the increased emphasis on
tasks in the literature in labor economics (5).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background. Section III
describes data and our framework. Section IV and V provide detailed description of the
first two principles, conceptual and operational, followed by statistical and
implementation described in Section VI. Section VII concludes.

    II.   Background
One reason for developing occupational classifications is deeply rooted in sociology (6),
as intrinsic to the measurement of the sources of inequality, social stratification and class
mobility. Occupational classification is also essential in economic analyses, describing
structural changes caused by technological advancement, automation, globalization, and
change in immigration laws (7). Another reason for developing occupational
classification is to provide an easy-to-measure pathway from generally understood job
activities to skill needs in the economy (8).

In practice, occupational categories were developed at scale in the 1930’s and codified in
the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (9). Occupational analysts would “interview and
observe workers, and then write job descriptions and make ratings of the characteristics
of the occupation. To illustrate the magnitude of these efforts, over 75,000 on-site job
analyses were conducted by analysts in the US Employment Services field centers
throughout the country between the mid 1960’s and 1970’s alone” (Peterson et al. 2001,
p. 453). Since then, the Department of Labor developed O*NET, which provides
detailed occupational taxonomies and a detailed occupation-to-skills crosswalk (9). 2



2
   The framework for developing occupational categories is based on (i) delineating the content domain of
the occupations, (ii) developing common descriptors for assessment and (iii) developing rules for creating
categories (25). It is worth noting that of the key principles adopted for developing taxonomies, the
                                                                                                              5


The current approach to occupational classifications is thorough and thoughtful, but quite
costly. The Office of Management and Budget has established a Standard Occupational
Classification Policy Committee which is charged with both developing a uniform
classification system and updating it on a regular basis (10). The process is extensive and
time consuming. For example, the 2010 updating exercise involved establishing six
working groups, and publishing a Federal Register request in 2006 and asking the public
to comment on the classification principles used for the 2000 Standard Occupational
Classification (SOC) system as well as corrections to the 2000 SOC manual, and
suggestions for new categories (11, 12). The 2018 updating exercise began in early
2012, a Federal Register notice was published in 2014, responses were provided in 2016
and the results were published at the end of 2017. 3

In addition to cost, the measurement challenges with categorizing worker occupations on
surveys are well known: they are notoriously noisy (13). In probably the best known
analysis, Mellow and Sider find that only 83.3% of CPS respondents’ major (1 digit)
occupations match their employer’s reports and that share falls to 59.7% for detailed (3
digit) occupations (and these rates are considerably lower than those for industry of
employment, at 93.1% and 85.4% for major and detailed industry) (1). Bound et al. find
similar errors in their overview of measurement errors (14), as do Abraham and Spletzer
(15). Fisher and Houseworth find that there is systematic inflation of occupations for
lower-skilled individuals (16).

Despite these measurement issues, there have been repeated calls to require firms to
report occupational data as part of their federal reporting requirements. Indeed, a recent
Department of Labor study group rated this need highest of all possible reporting
activities (17). The cost of doing so manually might well be prohibitive – the state of
Texas surveyed businesses and estimated “that the initial cost to employers could range
from $478 million to $1.2 billion, with annual recurring costs of $342 million to $715



principles of exclusivity and exhaustivity means that the classification system is based on tasks, or work,
performed, rather than skills or credentials. The reasoning is that since most occupations require multiple
skills, it would be impossible to exclusively classify occupations if they were skill based (11, 12).

3
    https://www.bls.gov/soc/2018/home.htm
                                                                                                          6


million. Costs to the Texas Work Commission were estimated at $3.1 million in the first
year, and a total five-year cost of $7.9 million to collect this data”. (Texas Workforce
Commission 2016, p. 17).

There have been some attempts to incorporate machine-learning methods into
occupational classifications from open-ended survey questions (19, 20). This approach is
very different from ours, since we use administrative information on job titles, rather than
survey responses. That work found that automated coding was feasible if there is
sufficient training data. It emphasized the importance of data preprocessing, algorithmic
quality – extending naïve Bayesian approaches to random forests – and thoughtful use of
distance metrics in improving occupational prediction. It also suggested that machine
learning might also have value by providing responders with candidate occupations as
part of a learned cluster, rather than as part of a constructed and hierarchical decision
tree.




III.    Data and Framework
The administrative data we use are derived from the UMETRICS project, which builds
on and extends the federal STAR METRICS effort (21). These data are maintained by
the Institute for Research on Innovation and Science (IRIS) at the University of Michigan
and currently contain record-level information on all wage payments made to individuals
through research grants at 26 participating research universities (21, 22). 62 university
campuses have committed to join IRIS, accounting for just under half of federal
university R&D expenditures and the projected membership in the next three years will
include 90% of university research funding. In the interest of homogeneity, for our
analysis, we chose large public research universities in the Big 10. 4

Although multiple files are provided by the universities, we focus on the employee file,
which for each federally funded project, contains all payroll charges for all pay periods




4
 The universities are Indiana, Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Penn State, Rutgers and Ohio State
University.
                                                                                                7


(period start date to period end date) with links to both the federal award ID (unique
award number) and the internal university ID number (recipient account number). Also
available from the payroll records are the employee’s internal de-identified employee
number, the job title, their FTE status and the proportion of earnings allocated to the
award. In addition, the UMETRICS program has incorporated additional fields (notably,
the name and date of birth of those supported on federally funded projects) to enable data
linkage, and has enhanced the core data with additional information on grants derived
from public sources.

We view these data as a valuable laboratory for quantifying the prospects for a machine-
learning approach to occupation classification. In some ways these universities are well-
suited to a machine-learning approach – they are large, generally similar, and highly
structured. Thus, we can identify many different categories of workers and assess our
ability to identify similar workers at other institutions. On the other hand, the uniformity
of these institutions makes our task somewhat more challenging in that we need to make
relatively fine distinctions (e.g. a dataset that is comprised of longshoremen and financial
analysts would have more variability than our data). University research projects are an
important application because they train the highly-skilled workforce that is valued by
high-tech, high-growth firms (Zolas et al. 2015). In this sense, our work sets the stage for
quantifying important forms of intangible (human) capital, which have proven
challenging to measure (24).

In determining occupational classifications, we drew heavily on the principles enunciated
by the federal agencies. We were particularly interested in building a classification
system that described the way in which people are used in the production of research. Our
classification system benefited from extensive consultation with universities, which
identified five core characteristics that distinguish personnel employed on research
projects: (i) Permanence in their position (ii) Research Role, (iii) Professorial Track, (iv)
Scientific Training and (v) Clinical Association. These core characteristics are similar to
ones used in Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system: classification principle
#2 reads “Occupations are classified based on work performed and, in some cases, on the
skills, education, and/or training needed to perform the work at a competent level.”
                                                                                                           8


Based on this input, we iteratively developed a hierarchical occupation classification
system. In the end, we identified a two-level classification system. The first level is based
on a person’s relationship to the university – faculty, undergraduate, graduate student,
postdoc, or staff/other. In the second level, we subdivide staff/other based on function.
Figure 1 lays out our classification system and Appendix I provides illustrative job titles
for the occupations.

As we discuss in detail in the following sections, we manually assigned an occupation
from our classification system to job titles from the eight universities. Then, we used this
manually curated data linking job titles to occupations as a training dataset for a
supervised machine learning approach that algorithmically assigns occupations to job
titles. 5




Figure 1. Classification System.




5
  Our sample consists of individuals appearing in the employee file between 2012 and 2014. Universities
that are missing records in any year between 2012 and 2014 were dropped. Universities that had less than
100 employees in any occupational class were also dropped because the accuracy of classification
algorithms may not be reliably calculated. There were eight universities that satisfied these sample
restrictions.
                                                                                                          9



                             Faculty


                             Postdoc                           Clinical Staff

                                                            Instructional Staff
                           Graduate
                                                        Research Facilitation Staff

                                                              Research Staff
                         Undergraduate
                                                            Technical Support
                          Staff / Other
                                                               Other Staff




IV.     Creating a Training Dataset from HR Records
The first step was to manually classify occupations based on job titles, which points to
the scale of the problem and hence the value of an automated approach. First, the total
number of job titles varied from the low hundreds to low thousands across universities –
it is likely that similar variation occurs in firms in other sectors of the economy.

The composition of the research personnel by occupation is shown in Table 1. 6 Also
shown in Table 1 is the average number of person-years by occupation for the four
largest and four smallest universities (i.e., those universities whose total number of
person-year counts is above or below the median). Big universities have, on average,
twice as many research personnel paid by research grants and the share of graduate and
undergraduate students is somewhat larger for the big universities.


            Table 1. Number of employees paid by research grant by occupation.


6
  The occupational Staff and Others were combined into a single category because the distinction between
the two classes are somewhat ambiguous and less important. The unit of observation is a person-year.
That is, an individual can be counted up to three times, once per calendar year. Because career transitions
can happen within a calendar year (e.g., an individual changing his or her occupation from graduate student
to postdoctoral researcher over the summer), only individuals who appeared in the employee table under
the same job title both before July 1 and after September 30 were included in our sample.
                                                                                               10



                    All universities     Big universities    Small universities
  Occupation
                         Total              Average              Average
  Faculty                      16,000               2,600                1,500
  Graduate                     17,000               3,100                1,200
  Staff / Other                29,000               4,700                2,600
  Postdoc                       6,900               1,100                   650
  Undergrad                     9,700               2,000                   450
  Total                        79,000              13,000                6,400
Note. The table shows the number of employees paid by research grants at all
universities in our data and those with more than and fewer than the median number of
person-year pairs. Numbers are rounded for disclosure protection reasons.
It is also worth noting that there is substantial variation in the number of people with each
job title, as reflected in the average number of people per job title and the fractions of job
titles that contain different numbers of people. We divide universities into two groups –
the four with the “coarsest” and the four with the most “detailed” job titles. As shown in
Table 2, for the universities that use more detailed job titles, as much as 30% of job titles
had only one employee. For the universities that use coarse job titles, the proportion
occupied by the job titles with more than 100 employees is nontrivial, and job titles with
more than 1000 employees were not uncommon. This has important implications for our
work – the handling of some job titles has much more effect on accuracy of the entire
occupation classification than others.




        Table 2. Variation in the volume and size of job titles across universities.

                                       All         Universities with     Universities with
                                   universities    coarse job titles     detailed job titles
  Total number of job titles
  (across universities)                   3,200                 1,100                   2,200
  Total number of employees
  (across universities)                  79,000               48,000                   31,000
  Average # employees per
  title (at each university)               24.4                  44.4                    14.5
  1 employee                               25%                   16%                     30%
  2-10 employees                           54%                   52%                     55%
  11-100 employees                         17%                   26%                     13%
  >100 employees                            4%                    7%                      2%
                                                                                              11


Note. The table shows the distribution of the number of employees per title at all
universities in our data and the 4 universities with the smallest and the 4 universities with
the largest numbers of employees per job title.



Even using the relatively straightforward categorization depicted in Figure 1, we
identified three separate measurement challenges that will almost surely be manifested in
other firms across the economy. Each results in issues that affect the quality of the
training data.

First, when different employees with the same job title perform different tasks, the same
job title can map to two distinct occupations. For instance, consider employees with the
job title of “program coordinators”. In some cases, these employees may be managing the
business operations of a scientific research program at a university center, and should
thus be assigned the occupation “Research Facilitation Staff”. In other cases, these
employees may be involved in educational or student experiences, and should thus be
assigned the occupation “Instructional Staff”. In this case, different people with the same
job title perform different tasks and should thus be assigned to different occupations. This
implies that a full classification must operate at the level of individuals rather than job
titles.

Second, some job titles are at the margins of categories. For instance, consider employees
with the job title “laboratory supervisors”. In many cases, these employees appeared to
perform some tasks that would suggest assigning them the occupation “Research
Facilitation Staff” and other tasks that would suggest assigning them the occupation of
“Research Staff”. For instance, some laboratory supervisors serve as an administrator for
a university research lab and also conduct research within the lab. Because such
employees’ work encompasses the responsibilities of two occupations, it can be argued
that they fall at the margin of the occupational categories, which points to the value of a
task / skill-based classification versus a categorical classification. This measurement
challenge is conceptually distinct from the first insofar as a single individual performs
                                                                                                              12


functions that cross categories, rather than two separate people with the same job title
performing different functions. 7

The third measurement challenge is ambiguity: vague titles limited our ability to
confidently assign occupations to job titles. “Administrative support”, “coordinator”, and
“professional aide” are all examples of unclear job titles. Some employees with these
titles work in human resources, undergraduate admissions, or a wide range of offices
supporting general university functions, while other employees with those titles may be
directly involved in supporting or conducting scientific research. To a large extent, this
ambiguity reflects a fundamental noisiness in occupational classifications in their own
right. 8 When dealing with ambiguous titles, researchers should be aware that it could
influence the learning process of machine-learning algorithms if manually classified
occupations were subsequently used for training. For example, a job title “student help”
can belong to either a student who provides help or a staff member who helps students. If
we assign this title to a student occupation, we implicitly reinforce the association
between the word “student” in the job title and the title belonging to a student occupation,



7
    Although jobs at the margins of categories are not limited to managerial jobs (and our categories are
carefully chosen to minimize such uncertainty), managerial jobs often lie at the margins of categories
because they require expertise in different kinds of skillsets. One way to address this issue is to create
management occupations as in SOC. For our data, the number of job titles at the margins of categories is
relatively small, and therefore, we proceeded without creating managerial occupations, but this will likely
pose a substantial problem outside the research industry.
8
    We benefited tremendously from input from member universities who provided extensive input on our
classification approach up front; provided a wealth of data; and who have, in many cases, provided
extensive feedback on our classification of their employees, especially to address the issues above. One
issue that arose in our consultation process is that different universities classify the same workers
differently and sometimes in idiosyncratic ways. For example, a few institutions classify all librarians or
lecturers as faculty. In implementing this system, we have opted to impose a uniform classification system
(e.g. classify librarians and lecturers as staff across campuses) to maximize comparability. This points to
the limits of relying on institutions to classify their own data.
                                                                                               13


potentially increasing the chance of misclassification for job titles such as “student
learning center coordinator”. Another example of this type is “fellowship”, which may be
intended to mean “fellow”, usually a graduate student, or a staff who handles
administrative work involving fellowship. Addressing title ambiguity is conceptually
straightforward, but it requires a great degree of cooperation from data-submitting
organizations.

It is worth noting that the same person can have multiple relationships to a university. For
instance, a student may hold a staff position or a staff can become a student to take
advantage of a discount on tuition. In this case, the person would be both a staff member
and a student. Such multiple relationships pose a challenge, but also present an
opportunity for obtaining unique data on career paths. The ideal handling of such cases
depends on the intended use of the data. If one wants to measure the inputs to a
production function, then the preferred approach would likely be to assign the person to
the staff title (i.e. to the role that they are playing on the sponsored project in question). If
the goal is to identify people who have studied at the university, the preferred approach
would be to assign them to the appropriate student occupation. Our data tend to favor the
first approach because the primary classification is based on the job title.

Another issue that generates a challenge, but also has the potential to enrich the data
greatly, is that people’s relationship to a university may change over time. An
undergraduate may graduate and enter a graduate program at the same school or take a
job as a staff member. A graduate student may take a staff, faculty or postdoc position
upon completion of their degree. Obviously, some such pathways are more likely than
others. These transitions potentially provide additional leverage on the classification of
specific job titles and also provide rich data on career paths.




Incorporating additional external information

We use several different sources of external information, including online job
descriptions, publicly available electronic salary databases, university and professional
networking websites, and historical administrative earnings and employment data.
                                                                                                                  14


Many firms will have HR descriptions that map directly on to job titles. This
information could, in principle, provide substantial external information that can be
leveraged for occupational classification. In our case, the eight universities had
searchable databases for employment and job postings on university HR websites. These
typically provided detailed descriptions of specific job titles to confirm the nature of an
employee’s work. When these descriptions failed to provide the necessary information to
correctly classify a position, electronic salary databases for public universities proved to
be particularly helpful sources of information on employee names. Using name and job
titles enabled us to examine individual profiles on university and professional networking
websites, both of which offered detailed explanations of employees’ work. Specific
information on actual employees rather than just their titles enabled a more careful
classification of similarly related positions in some cases.

Placement and earnings are obtained by linking UMETRICS data to data at the U.S.
Census Bureau. Given large differences in age and earnings between various occupations
in our data, information on and individual’s job placement and earnings can provide
valuable information about that individual’s occupation. Employees in the UMETRICS
data are linked to Census data using a Protected Identification Key (PIK), Census’s
internal anonymized individual identifier. 9 Specifically, we use PIKs to link UMETRICS




9
    In order for a Protected Identification Key (PIK), Census’s internal individual identifier, to be assigned,
the data on the employing university, the employee last name, first name, and (in some cases) date of birth
have been provided to the Census Bureau. The Census Bureau’s Person Identification Validation System
(PVS) is used to assign an anonymous, unique person identifier to university employees (26). UMETRICS
employee name, address, and date of birth, when available, are parsed, standardized and geocoded during
the input process for the PVS. Next, a probabilistic match is performed between the UMETRICS data and
PVS reference files that are based on the Social Security Administration’s Numerical Identification File
(Numident). When possible, PVS assigns the person PIK. Because PVS is a probabilistic match, it is
possible for a UMETRICS employee to receive multiple PIK values. UMETRICS employee data is historic
and spans multiple years. Thus, a custom PVS process with many years of associated reference files for
each university is used. For detailed information about reference files in PVS or the matching algorithm,
see Wagner and Layne 2014)
                                                                                                                 15


employees to W2 and LEHD (Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics) data, from
which we obtain earnings and the EIN (employer ID number) of the firm at which they
are employed. We are then able to use the PIK-EIN to link UMTRICS employees to the
Business Register (BR), the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), and the Integrated
Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD). This enables us to track the job market
outcomes of the researchers paid by federal grants and the location, characteristics, and
performance of the firms they work for. 10




 V.      Measurement and Standardization
The development of clear standardized protocols for interviewers is critical for consistent
measurement across individuals. Similarly, good measurement is critically dependent on
developing consistent protocols for preprocessing the data so that measures can be
standardized across businesses. This is particularly important since each business will
have different shorthand to classify job titles. In this section, we will illustrate the
challenges of standardizing data collected across multiple organizations with different
conventions. We will focus on the abbreviated nature of job titles, but we expect similar




Not all universities provide employee date of birth, resulting in higher rates of multiple PIKs than when
date of birth is present.   A filter is applied to all university employee PIKs in order to select the correct
PIK from the multiple values when possible as well as to screen false one-to-one matches. W-2 data used
for the filter is limited to records for the years over which the university employee data spans, the EIN(s)
associated with the university, and addresses within a 200-mile radius of the university campus address. For
each university, PIK values associated with the UMETRICS data are looked up in the W-2 data to create a
linkage between UMETRICS data and W-2 data. A match to the W-2 data must occur for that employee to
be retained in the sample. For multiple PIK values, only the PIK that appears in the W-2 data is retained
for the employee. Filtered data are output to the employee crosswalk data file.

         10
            About 20% of the doctoral recipients in our data are not matched to LEHD dataset. This can be
for several reasons: (i) the recipient does not have a job in the US – either for family reasons or because
they go back to their home country, (ii) they start up a business rather than choose employment or (iii) it is
not possible to uniquely match them to a PIK.
                                                                                            16


challenges will arise in processing texts describing job responsibilities, salary grade,
retirement benefits, and other information that may be available.


To automate the classification process, we first need to convert job titles to numeric
values because most machine-learning algorithms accept only numerical inputs. For short
texts like job titles, the most common way of converting texts to numeric features
(equivalent of regressors in regression analysis) is to record the presence/absence of
keywords. For example, if we have job titles “research analyst” and “research support”,
the array of feature names is [“research”, “analyst”, “support”] and the text-to-feature
conversion would return the vector [1, 1, 0] for “research analyst” and [1, 0, 1] for
“research support”. These vectors will then be used as inputs for machine-learning
algorithms trying to predict occupations.


One problem with this approach is different abbreviations/synonyms in the job titles that
represent the same feature. For example, it is clear to humans that “assistant” and “asstnt”
both represent “assistant”, but machines treat them as different features. To avoid
creating separate features for different abbreviations of the same word, job titles need to
be normalized before being converted to numeric vectors.


Because creating a normalization mapping is labor intensive, one may be tempted to use
edit distance to determine if a string of letters is an abbreviation of a word. However,
generic edit distance fails to address challenges that are specific to abbreviations: for
instance, both “busin” and “buses” are formed by deleting three letters from “business”
and therefore have the same edit distance; however, the former is more likely to be an
abbreviation for “business” than the latter. Developing a set of rules for determining the
validity of abbreviation is not a trivial task. Though the disabbreviation algorithm we
developed is imperfect, we employed the algorithm for the subsequent analyses to reduce
noise in the data (see appendix for details).

VI.    Machine Learning
We first conducted a preliminary analysis comparing the performance of Multinomial
Naïve Bayes, Bernoulli Naïve Bayes, Random Forests, and Extra Trees and found that
                                                                                                          17


 random forests best fit our purpose. Random forests construct a multitude of decision
 trees from training data and assign the mode class (occupation) to a new observation (job
 title). Random forests mitigate decision trees’ tendency to overfit by adding randomness
 in both the sample observations used (bagging) and the set of features considered at each
 node split.


 Figure 2 shows part of a decision tree that classifies employees into the main five classes
 from Figure 1 (faculty, postgraduate students, graduate students, undergraduate students,
 and staff / other) based on their job titles. Each box contains (i) branching rule; (ii) Gini
 impurity; (iii) number of observations contained in the node; (iv) composition of
 observations; and (v) majority class.



                                        graduage <= 0.5
                                           gini = 0.75
                                       samples = 78600
                           value = [16000, 6900, 17000, 9700, 29000]
                                         class = Other


                           True                                     False



                   professor <= 0.5                                      post <= 0.5
                       gini = 0.73                                       gini = 0.09
                   samples = 70200                                    samples = 8400
       value = [16000, 6500, 9000, 9700, 29000]                  value = [0, 400, 8000, 0, 0]
                     class = Other                                    class = Graduate

True
                   False                                True                      False



                                         fellow <= 0.5                                gini = 0
                                          gini = 0.02                             samples = 300
                                       samples = 8100                         value = [0, 300, 0, 0, 0]
                                  value = [0, 100, 8000, 0, 0]                 class = Postgraduate
                                       class = Graduate




 Figure 2. Example of a decision tree. Each node has a keyword indicated at the top of the
 box. All observations that have the keyword in their job titles follow the right branch
 while observations without the keyword follow the left branch. When an observation
 reaches a terminal node like the one on the right bottom, the class of the node becomes
 the predicted class for the observation.
                                                                                               18


Branching rules specify the feature name and the cutoff value. For example, at the top
node, job titles that contain the word “graduate” less than or equal to 0.5 times follow the
left branch, while those that contain the word “graduate” more than 0.5 times follow the
right branch. Because feature values are integers, it is equivalent to the following: job
titles without the word “graduate” follow the left branch and those with the word
“graduate” follow the right branch. This tree is intuitive. If “graduate” is not present, it
next tests for “professor” and if “graduate” is present, it tests for “post” (as in
postgraduate). Note that the node at the bottom right does not have the branching rule
because it is a terminal node.


“Samples” represents the number of observations in each node. For example, the top
node contains 78,600 observations. Of the 78,600 observations, 70,200 observations
follow the left branch and 8,400 observations follow the right branch. “Value” shows the
composition of the observations: the top node consists of 16,000 faculty, 6,900
postgraduate students, 17,000 graduate students, 9,700 undergraduate students, and
29,000 staff / other. For this node, the majority is “staff / other”, and therefore, the
“class” for the node is “staff / other”.


Finally, “gini” reports Gini impurity. Notice that Gini impurity decreases as one goes
down the tree and attains 0 when a node consists of one class (bottom right node). It is
calculated as follows:
                                             5

                                      𝐺𝐺 = � 𝑝𝑝𝑐𝑐 (1 − 𝑝𝑝𝑐𝑐 ),
                                           𝑐𝑐=1

where pc is the proportion of class c observations at the node. For example, for the first
node, the proportion of faculty, postgraduate, graduate, undergraduate, and staff / other
are 0.204, 0.088, 0.216, 0.123, and 0.369, respectively, and the corresponding Gini
impurity is
 𝐺𝐺 = 0.204(1 − 0.204) + 0.088(1 − 0.088) + 0.216(1 − 0.216) + 0.123(1 − 0.123)
                 + 0.369(1 − 0.369) = 0.753.
In our analysis, we will use the predictive accuracy as a measure of performance.
Formally, the accuracy is define as
                                                                                                     19


                                         #(𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 == 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
                    𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 =                                                           .
                                                  # 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜


Throughout our analysis we always hold out data from one university, one at a time, for
testing and use data from the remaining seven universities for training. Thus, for a given
set of tuning parameters (discussed below), we grow eight separate random forests, each
using data from one university for testing the accuracy of the forest and using data from
the other seven universities for training the random forest. Thus, for each job title, we
have eight occupation predictions, which we aggregate using the mode, into a single
occupation for that job title.


Random forests have three main tuning parameters: 1) the total number of features
supplied to the random forest, 2) the number of features to be considered at each node of
the tree, and 3) the number of trees grown in the forest (i.e. the number of samples
randomly selected to build a decision tree). The tradeoff in including more features
overall is between having more features to improve prediction and overfitting because of
idiosyncratic relationships that may be present in the data. We filter out noise in sample
by pre-selecting the features to avoid overfitting idiosyncratic relationships that may be
present in the sample too much. The total number of features used in the random forest
controls the amount of noise to avoid overfitting. The number of features that the random
forest can choose between at each stage controls the variability of the trees: the smaller
the set of features to be considered, the more variable the trees become because there is
more randomness in the selection of the feature. In the extreme case where only one
feature is considered at each split, the selection of feature is totally random (i.e. whatever
feature is selected becomes the one used).


To determine the total number of features supplied to the random forest, we fit a decision
tree, for each training set, using all 1-grams and 2-grams that appeared in the job titles.
                                                                                                            20


Then, the feature importance score was calculated 11, and the features with the highest
importance scores were selected, varying the score cutoff. The total number of features 12
that were fed into the model varied depending on which university was reserved for
testing, but was roughly 50, 100, 200, 500, and 7000, where 7000 is the total number of
1-grams and 2-grams appearing in the job titles in the training set and 500 is the number
of features that had a strictly positive importance score. We also varied the the number of
features considered at each split (default is the square root of the total number of features
supplied to the random forest). Finally, we varied the number of trees grown in the forest,
in increments of 100, between 100 and 1,000.


In determining the optimal parameter setting, we considered both unweighted and
weighted accuracy. The unweighted accuracy was computed treating each job title as one
observation; no matter how many employees have that job title, the title receives a weight
of 1. The weighted accuracy was computed treating each individual as one observation;
equivalently, job titles were assigned a weight equal to the number of employees that
have that job title. The most important tuning parameter for determining classification
accuracy was the total number of features provided to the random forest (which is
implicitly determined by the importance score cutoff). The fraction of features to be
considered at each node and the number of trees grown had a minimal effect on the
accuracy. Based on the overall weighted and unweighted accuracy, the optimal parameter
setting limits the number of features supplied to the random forest to about 200 and uses
the default setting of the square root of the total number of features to be considered at
each node.




         11
              We used the DecitionTreeClassifier in the SciKit Learn package.

12
  There were total of 7000 features. It is common to pre-select important features. In one specification
(cutoff = 0), all the features were fed to the random forest. In the most selective case, only 50 features were
fed to the random forest.
                                                                                                         21




        Figure 3: Classification Accuracy relative to Predicted Probability. The figure
shows the probability that an occupation was correctly coded as a function of the
probability that the algorithm predicts it was correctly coded. The unweighted series
treats job titles as the unit of observation. The weighted series treats individuals as the
unit of observation.

Figure 3 shows the accuracy (proportion of correct prediction) for each level of predicted
probability (the probability share of the predicted occupation indicated by the posterior
distribution returned by the algorithm). The overall accuracy varied from 60% to nearly
100% regardless of whether the data are weighted by number of job titles or
individuals 13. Although random forests can potentially increase the efficiency of
occupational classification, an average accuracy of about 80% may not be high enough to
justify a total replacement of manual classification by automated machine-learning
algorithms. These results reinforce our belief that the predicted probability the number of




13
 Unweighted accuracy is the proportion of job titles whose predicted class matched the true class. For
weighted accuracy, the number of employees for the job title is used as a weight.
                                                                                             22


individuals that hold a job title should be used to jointly identify job titles for manual
review.


We see two (potentially complementary) roles for machine learning in occupation coding
and other similar bucketing tasks. One approach is to use an algorithmic approach to
classify uncommon job titles. Such cases are (by construction) plentiful and have a
relatively small effect on the overall accuracy of the classification. The second role is to
accept only predictions with concentrated probability mass at one class. In other words,
we will adopt the prediction only when the random forest classifier is “confident”.
Obviously, these two approaches could be combined – defining “isoquants” over the size
and accuracy to trigger manual review. In this approach only relatively large, uncertain
job titles would be reviewed manually.


Robustness
We have explored a wide range of modifications of our basic approach to try to obtain
performance improvements. We outline the analyses we performed here and their main
results. Appendix II provides details on both the analyses and their results.


For the eight universities used in the above analyses, the number of employees ranged
roughly from 5,000 to 20,000. When we train the random forest classifier on seven
universities, it is possible that the shape of a tree is heavily influenced by a few
universities in the training set with a large number of employees. To investigate this
possibility, the training set was modified so that universities in the training set have
roughly equal numbers of employees. The modifications have been made in two ways:
inflating and deflating. As Section A in Appendix II shows, there was no significant
change in the accuracy with these modifications.


The number of employees per job title ranged from 1 to nearly 10,000 for the eight
universities, with the average being 24.4 employees per title. Concerned that the titles in
the training set are “too noisy”, we investigated the effect of dropping thin titles (varying
the threshold at which a title is flagged as “thin” from 5 to 50 employees) from the
                                                                                                         23


training set. We recorded the average predictive accuracy for titles with different
numbers of employees. Again, there was no significant change in the accuracy with these
modifications. These results are discussed in Section B of Appendix II.
We observed that some titles that could be easily classified manually like “Graduate
Assistant” are not always correctly classified by our random forest. This appears to be
caused by the existence of “extraneous” information in some job titles. In Section C, we
applied partially unsupervised learning. In particular, titles that (after applying the job
cleaning algorithm outlined in the appendix) contain the words “faculty”, “professor”,
“postgraduate”, “graduate” or “undergraduate” were classified first and then the random
forest classifier was applied to the remaining titles (both the training set and the test set
consist of titles that do not contain any of the words listed above). The effect of this
partially unsupervised learning on the predictive accuracy is small, with our classification
for some universities improving and others degrading.


Census Bureau links permitted us to examine whether having information on individuals’
age and earnings increased the quality of prediction. These variables would appear to be
valuable predictors, especially in this context because of the large differences in ages and
earning across occupations. As shown in Table A4, there is some gain, but it is not
extraordinarily high across the board. The largest gains, by far, are for undergraduates
when occupations are weighted by the number of people in them. 14


As indicated in the previous sections, people can hold multiple titles at a point in time (or
in close succession) and can transition between titles. As some transitions are more
common than others (i.e., transitions from undergraduate to graduate and/or from
graduate to postgraduate and/or from postgraduate to faculty are more common than the
reverse transitions), it is possible to use transitions between titles and concurrent titles
(more precisely, occupational classes that are associated with these titles) as predictors in




14
   Because there are considerably more staff than undergraduates overall, there is a tendency for the random
forest to misclassify undergraduates as staff.
                                                                                              24


the random forest classifier to improve predictive accuracy. Transitional and concurrent
titles can also be used to identify unlikely transitions in the “ground-truth” data,
providing an opportunity for a revision. Beyond improving the accuracy of the data,
exploring concurrent positions and transitions can add to the richness of our data by
providing information on career paths. Section D provides details of this analysis.


Using concurrent job titles and the transitions between job titles involves some form of
iterative procedure. Appendix II details a number of issues related to using transitions and
concurrent titles. As a first step toward incorporating transitional and concurrent classes
in the random forest classifiers, we included the manually classified transitional and
concurrent classes in our training data in the model rather than predicted occupations.
The resulting predictive accuracy is expected to provide an upper bound for the accuracy
obtained from the iterated procedure described above. Overall, the use of concurrent
titles and transitions across titles has little effect on overall accuracy. In our analysis, no
university exhibited a clear pattern on the effect of including transitional/concurrent class
as predictors.


Limitation of Machine-Learning Algorithms
Laying aside the issue of developing a classification system, we have discussed four
challenges to manual classification. Beyond these issues associated with manually
classifying occupations, comparing the predictions made by the random forest and the
true class pointed to two possible causes of misclassification. One is unavoidable
misclassification, which results from variation in the training data. The other is avoidable
misclassification, which results from the inherent limitations of the random forest
classifier.

The first type of misclassification is unavoidable because it arises from the limits to
manual classification already discussed. Listed below are examples of job titles that have
multiple classifications over universities.
        •     Director, dean: faculty or staff
        •     Instructor, lecturer: faculty, graduate, or staff
        •     Grader, tutor: graduate or undergraduate
                                                                                             25


       •   Scientist: faculty or staff / other
       •   Research assistant: graduate, undergraduate, or staff / other
       •   Research associate: postgraduate or staff / other
       •   Fellow: postgraduate, graduate, or staff / other
       •   Intern: postgraduate, undergraduate, or staff / other


This type of inaccuracy cannot be overcome by any classifier: resolution of
misclassification requires familiarity with job titling convention at each university. It
should also be noted that modifiers can change the classification of a job title within a
university. For example, “director” and “associate director” may not belong to the same
category within a university.


The second type of misclassification is avoidable. Avoidable misclassifications are due to
the limitations of the random forest classifier. Below are examples of misclassified job
titles along with the prediction made by the random forest, followed by true class in
parentheses.
       •   Undergraduate fellow  graduate (undergraduate)
       •   Temporary visiting faculty  staff / other (faculty)
       •   Teaching assistant  staff / other (graduate)
       •   Summer term ra (w/o tuit ben)  staff / other (graduate)
       •   GR AST ½  staff / other (graduate)


The first two examples illustrate the tendency of the random forest classifier to rely too
much on certain words. The word “fellow” is strongly associated with graduate student.
Thus, if “fellow” is selected as a branching rule before “undergraduate”, the job title
“undergraduate fellow” will be buried in a node that is predominantly graduate students.
Similarly, the word “temporary” is often associated with a staff member and almost never
used for faculty. The partially supervised machine learning algorithm described in the
previous section is intended to address these issues.


The third example illustrates failure to utilize very informative words or phrases. The
presence of the phrase “teaching assistant” in a job title is a good indicator of the
employee being a graduate student. However, the absence of the phrase “teaching
                                                                                              26


assistant” in the job title is not a good indicator of the employee not being a graduate
student (i.e., there are many graduate students who are not teaching assistants). Thus,
when the phrase “teaching assistant” is used for branching, the resulting decrease in
impurity of the succeeding node is negligible. Since the random forest classifier selects
the feature that minimizes the weighted average of impurities at succeeding nodes, the
phrase “teaching assistant” is unlikely to be selected.


The last two examples illustrate inability of the random forest classifier to use outside
knowledge. A human classifier can infer “w/o tuit ben” means “without tuition benefit”
and conclude that the job title is associated with a student. Similarly, “1/2” suggest that
the person has a half-time appointment, and therefore likely be a student. Thus, one may
infer that “gr ast” means “graduate assistant”. As seen in the previous example, these
phrases are extremely informative; however, because of their rare occurrence and
applicability to only a small fraction of employees, these pieces of information tend to be
overlooked by the random forest classifier.


In theory, misclassifications described above might be reduced by providing more
training data, adjusting parameters, appealing to other machine-learning algorithms, or
reverting to manual classification.

VII.   Conclusions
This paper used a rich dataset – to our knowledge, the first dataset with detailed job titles
drawn from HR systems from multiple organizations, combined with job descriptions and
information about the characteristics of workers – to examine the potential to use
machine-learning techniques for occupational classification. We followed the same
conceptual framework as that applied by survey methodologists: to define each
occupation, to translate concepts to standardized protocols and to build an approach that
would infer occupations from the information at hand. Even though the data were drawn
from very similar organizations, with very similar production functions, we found that
machine-learning approaches were not substantially better than manual classifications.
                                                                                             27


However, we do see the analysis as showing real promise for identifying occupations
from job titles combined with a machine-learning approach. The most promising use of
the machine learning is that it is an inexpensive way of assigning occupations for job
titles that have relatively few people in them and/or for which the algorithm imputes a
high degree of accuracy. Because many job titles have only a few people in them, this
approach could yield substantial cost savings (almost 80% of job titles have 10 or fewer
people). At the same time, an entirely algorithmic approach would be unwarranted in our
case.

We also believe that a deeper text analysis of the job descriptions associated with job
titles might prove to be a promising approach. Job descriptions typically include
information about necessary experience, skills and education which are not only of
interest in their own right but could be very useful features for classification purposes.

We note that the focus on universities as a subject of analysis has weaknesses and
strengths. Major research universities are very large and complicated institutions. There
may be other industries in which it might be easier to apply machine learning to job titles.
At the same time, the institutions in our sample all come from one narrow sector of the
economy are relatively homogeneous and the data are based on a very specific set of
activities (research). We speculate that any classification system for the broader economy
would have to be specific to an individual sector or set of sectors.
                                                                                         28


VIII.   References

 1.     W. Mellow, H. Sider, Accuracy of response in labor market surveys: Evidence and
        implications. J. Labor Econ., 331–344 (1983).
 2.     E. Groshen, Innovating for the Future (2017), (available at
        https://blogs.bls.gov/blog/tag/bls-products-and-services/).
 3.     Workforce Information Council Administrative Wage Record Enhancement Study
        Group, “Enhancing Unemployment Insurance Wage Records Potential Benefits,
        Barriers, and Opportunities” (Washington DC., 2015), (available at
        https://www.bls.gov/advisory/bloc/enhancing-unemployment-insurance-wage-
        records.pdf).
 4.     N. Zolas et al., Wrapping it up in a person: Examining employment and earnings
        outcomes for Ph.D. recipients. Science (80-. ). 350 (2015),
        doi:10.1126/science.aac5949.
 5.     D. Autor, F. Levy, R. MURNANE, The Skill Content of Recent Technological
        Change: An Empirical Exploration. Q. J. Econ. 118, 4 (2003).
 6.     K. A. Weeden, D. B. Grusky, The Case for a New Class Map 1. Am. J. Sociol. 111,
        141–212 (2005).
 7.     O. Alonso‐Villar, C. Del Rio, C. Gradín, The extent of occupational segregation in
        the United States: Differences by race, ethnicity, and gender. Ind. relations a J.
        Econ. Soc. 51, 179–212 (2012).
 8.     D. Acemoglu, U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, W. R. Kerr, “Innovation, reallocation and
        growth” (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013).
 9.     N. G. Peterson et al., Understanding work using the Occupational Information
        Network (O* NET): Implications for practice and research. Pers. Psychol. 54,
        451–492 (2001).
 10.    C. Levine, L. Salmon, D. H. Weinberg, Revising the standard occupational
        classification system. Mon. Lab. Rev. 122, 36 (1999).
 11.    A. Emmel, T. Cosca, The 2010 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC): A
        Classification System Gets an Update. Occup. Outlook Q. 54, 13–19 (2010).
 12.    T. Cosca, A. Emmel, Revising the standard occupational classification system for
        2010. Mon. Labor Rev. 133, 32–41 (2010).
 13.    N. A. Mathiowetz, Errors in reports of occupation. Public Opin. Q., 352–355
        (1992).
 14.    J. Bound, C. Brown, N. Mathiowetz, in Handbook of Econometrics (2001;
        http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1573441201050127), vol. 5, pp.
        3705–3843.
 15.    K. G. Abraham, J. R. Spletzer, New evidence on the returns to job skills. Am.
        Econ. Rev. 99, 52–57 (2009).
 16.    J. D. Fisher, C. Houseworth, Occupation Inflation in the Current Population
        Survey. US Census Bur. Cent. Econ. Stud. Pap. No. CES-WP-12-26 (2012).
                                                                                         29


17.   Workforce Information Council Administrative Wage Record Enhancement Study
      Group, “Enhancing Unemployment Insurance Wage Records Potential Benefits,
      Barriers, and Opportunities” (2014).
18.   Texas Workforce Commission, “Report to the Sunset Advisory Commission Study
      on the Collection of Occupational Data” (Austin, Texas, 2016).
19.   A. Bethmann, M. Schierholz, K. Wenzig, M. Zielonka, Automatic Coding of
      Occupations (2014).
20.   K. G. Tijdens, Reviewing the measurement and comparison of occupations across
      Europe. AIAS Work. Pap. (2014).
21.   J. Lane, J. Owen-Smith, R. Rosen, B. Weinberg, “New linked data on science
      investments, the scientific workforce and the economic and scientific results of
      science” (2014).
22.   B. A. Weinberg et al., Science Funding and Short-Term Economic Activity.
      Science (80-. ). 344, 41–43 (2014).
23.   N. Zolas et al., Wrapping it up in a person: Examining employment and earnings
      outcomes for PhD recipients. Science (80-. ). 360, 1367–1371 (2015).
24.   C. Corrado, J. Haskel, C. Jona‐Lasinio, Knowledge spillovers, ICT and
      productivity growth. Oxf. Bull. Econ. Stat. (2017).
25.   E. A. Fleishman, M. D. Mumford, Evaluating classifications of job behavior: A
      construct validation of the ability requirement scales. Pers. Psychol. 44, 523–575
      (1991).
26.   D. Wagner, M. Layne, “The Person Identification Validation System (PVS):
      Applying the Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications’
      (CARRA) Record Linkage Software” (2014), (available at
      https://www.census.gov/srd/carra/CARRA_PVS_Record_Linkage.pdf).
                                                                                             30


Appendix I

   1. Detailed Description of Occupations
This section lays out the occupation categories that we use; their conceptual definition;
and some illustrative job titles. The aggregate occupations are listed first. Staff are
subdivided into additional categories, which are laid out below.


   1. Faculty
All advanced academic employees who are directly involved in scientific research and/or
scientific instruction. These included: Deans, Provosts, Tenure/tenure track, Clinical,
Research, Visiting Professors, Academic specialists, Center directors


   2. Post Graduate Research
All individuals holding terminal degrees (PhD, MD) who are in temporary training status.
These included: Postdoctoral, Medical residents/interns/fellows, Clinical fellowships,
Research Associate (depends on the university)


   3. Graduate Student
Students earning advanced degrees: Graduate students (part time, full time),
Medical/dental/nursing/students, Research Assistant


   4. Undergraduate
Students earning baccalaureate/other degrees including fulltime, part time, summer
research assistants, work study; includes high school students who would likely be acting
in a similar capacity. These included: Undergraduate students, High school students,
Intern/student worker, Nursing students in BA programs


   5. Staff / Other (Not Elsewhere Classified)
Positions that support general university functions such as undergraduate education and
student activities. Employees whose titles cannot be attributed to the scientific research
enterprise. These included at the aggregate level: Staff Instructional, Research, Research
                                                                                                31


Facilitation, Technician, Clinical, Other Staff. The disaggregated staff categories include
the following


5.1 Clinical Staff: All non-faculty health care professionals, Nurses (non-faculty),
   Dieticians (non-faculty), Nutritionists, Social workers, Physical therapists, Clinical
   psychologists, Dental hygienists, Genetics counselor
5.2 Instructional Academic Specialists: Lecturers, Instructors, Adjunct Professors
5.3 Research Facilitation: Non-faculty, high level administrators – asst. dean/asst.
   provost, associate or assistant center director, Operations managers/managing
   directors, Administrative/clerical staff – any kind, Finance staff, Regulatory staff,
   Clinical or clinical research support staff, Laboratory aide, Data
   collection/interviewer, Media jobs: Graphics/writer/editor/communications, Grants
   management & administration, Individuals who serve as managers/
   coordinators/facilitators for laboratory studies/clinical trials/large facilities/research
   programs; They direct and influence scientific research activity from the level of the
   laboratory up to the level of the university/research center, Research
   dean/provost/administrator, Facility director/administrator, Clinical research
   administrator, Study coordinators, IACUC coordinators, Clinical trials/research
   coordinator, Project/Program manager/coordinator, Lab coordinator (not lab
   manager), Facility/repository manager/coordinator.
5.4 Research Staff: Work likely focuses on scientific aspects of research All advanced
   degree qualified, non-faculty scientists and engineers; Research specialist/engineer:
   Work likely focuses on advanced research analysis; Research professional/specialist;
   Statistician, bioinformaticist; Research associate (depends on the university); Skilled
   and specialized employees who have been specifically trained in some area of science
   & technology; Science Technicians: All technical staff including animal technicians,
   machinists, mechanics (the category usually includes some reference to a research
   facility along with the title ‘technician’); Lab manager ; Medical or clinical
   technician; Research data technician; Regulatory officer (environmental, chemical
   safety, industrial hygienist); Technical engineer
                                                                                          32


5.5 Technician: Administrative and technical employees who are not specifically
   employed for scientific research purposes but perform job tasks that support the
   research enterprise; Information technology managers & staff; Software engineer;
   Data entry/data analyst; Network and systems support
5.6 Staff Other All other research staff that do not clearly fall into another category



   2. Normalization
We developed a rule-based job title cleaning algorithm. In particular, we created a
mapping from abbreviation to normalized word. For example, “grad” is mapped to
“graduate” and “mngr” is mapped to “manager”. The list of abbreviations and possible
normalized words were obtained from job titles from eight universities in the
UMETRICS dataset, and mappings were created manually.


Abbreviations with multiple possible normalizations were noted (e.g., “res” can be an
abbreviation for “research” or “respiratory”; “ast” can be an abbreviation for “assistant”
or “astronomy”). Then context-specific normalization (i.e., normalization of phrases) was
attempted. For example, both “res” and “ast” are ambiguous abbreviations; however,
when they are combined, one can infer “res ast” is an abbreviation for “research
assistant”. Normalizing rules for phrases were manually generalized using regular
expressions.


When an abbreviation could represent either a person or a field (or an object) that are
closely related, we chose the field in general. For example, “scien”, “enginee”, and
“crimnl” were normalized to science, engineering, and criminology, instead of scientist,
engineer, and criminal, respectively. The reason is that it seems more harmful to label
non-engineers in engineering departments an “engineer” than to label an engineer
“engineering”. When an abbreviation is strongly associated with an occupation, however,
we normalized it to represent a person. For example, “lect” and “consul” were
normalized to lecturer and consultant instead of lecture and consulting, respectively.
These are somewhat ad-hoc rules, but these abbreviations are small in number, and we
expect they have a negligible effect on the performance of machine learning algorithms.
                                                                                         33


When creating the normalization mapping, we preserved common acronyms such as
“CSE” for Computer Science and Engineering and “MRI” for magnetic resonance
imaging. We expect normalizing these terms has a minimal impact on the predictive
accuracy because they identify the fields employees work in, but contain little
information on tasks they perform.


At the same time the mapping was created, omissions of spaces were noted and a
decomposition mapping was created. For example, we encountered job titles such as
“rsrchanalyst”, which was added to the decomposition mapping along with the correction
“rsrch analyst”. Common stems in compounds, such as bio in biochemistry and neuro in
neurosurgery, were not decomposed and compounds were treated like words.


Finally, on the normalization list, we had some abbreviations that are only 2-letters long.
For example, we left “IT” as it is assuming that it represents Information Technology.
However, these could be an abbreviation of some other words or phrases. In our data, we
did not find any instances where there was a more suitable normalization, but researchers
should be aware that too much guessing when standardizing could introduce more noise
than it eliminates.


Aside from working out the details, the major problem with the above described
normalization algorithm is that the mapping is not comprehensive. For example,
“research” may be mapped from “resear”, “rsrch”, and “resch”, but if there is no mapping
from “resech” to “research”, “resech” will remain abbreviated. By comparing manually
normalized job titles and normalization returned by the algorithm, we identified
normalizations that were not captured by the normalization mapping, and iteratively
revised our normalization mapping. We also wrote regular expressions to normalize
words that frequently appear in our data such as “research”, “postdoctoral”, and
“administrator”.
                                                                                               34


   3. Coding decisions
There are also some methodological issues of interest. First, we designed our
classification to increase certainty: grouping workers whose job was sufficiently similar
that it would be hard to separate them based on job titles (and for whom the value of
distinguishing occupations has the least value). Second, we employed a two-level system,
where the first-level occupation can frequently be assigned with a high degree of
certainty and much of the uncertainty appears at the second level. Third, we assigned up
to two occupations to each job title to allow researchers to probe the sensitivity of results.
Fourth, we rate job titles based on the degree of certainty that they were correctly
classified on a scale of 1-5. Our coding system was:

       (5) The job title serves as an immediate identifier into this classification category
or, through research, it is almost certain that it belongs in this category: e.g. PostDoctoral
Fellow; Computer Technician

       (4) The job title probably belongs in the category indicated, as supplemented by
research on university website.

       (3) The job title belongs in the category (either aggregate or disaggregate) with
moderate certainty (either very indicative job title or research result, but not both)

       (2) The job title is vague and/or ambiguous but there is some indication that the
position belongs in this category.

       (1) The job title may belong in this category, but there is little certainty, and the
classification cannot be verified with research.

 After manual classification, universities were given the opportunity to review and
comment on the classification, with their attention drawn to the largest and most
ambiguous titles.

Appendix II
   A. Different Numbers of Employees
For the eight universities used in the above analyses, the number of employees ranged
roughly from 5,000 to 20,000. When we train the random forest classifier on seven
                                                                                            35


universities, it is possible that the shape of a tree is heavily influenced by a few
universities in the training set with a large number of employees. To investigate this
possibility, the training set was modified so that universities in the training set have
roughly equal numbers of employees. The modifications have been made in two ways:
inflating and deflating.


(1) Inflating
Let
       Nu,t = number of employees at university u for job title t, and
       Nu = number of employees at university u.
Then the modified number of employees is
                                                        max{𝑁𝑁𝑣𝑣 }
                                  �𝑢𝑢,𝑡𝑡 = 𝑁𝑁𝑢𝑢,𝑡𝑡 ×
                                  𝑁𝑁                     𝑣𝑣
                                                                     ,
                                                              𝑁𝑁𝑢𝑢
rounded to the nearest integer. For example, if university X has a total of 16,000
employees and if the largest university in the training set has a total of 20,000 employees,
the number of employees for each title at university X is multiplied by 1.25 and rounded
to the nearest integer. If a title has 3 employees, the inflated number of employees is
1.25 × 3 = 3.75, so it will be rounded to 4.


(2) Deflating
Instead of scaling up the number of employees to the level of the largest university in the
training set, deflating scales down the number of employees to the level of the smallest
university:
                                                        min{𝑁𝑁𝑣𝑣 }
                                   �𝑢𝑢,𝑡𝑡 = 𝑁𝑁𝑢𝑢,𝑡𝑡 ×
                                   𝑁𝑁                    𝑣𝑣
                                                                     .
                                                              𝑁𝑁𝑢𝑢
For example, if university X has a total of 20,000 employees and if the smallest
university in the training set has a total of 5,000 employees, the number of employees for
each title at university X is multiplied by 0.25 and rounded to the nearest integer. If a title
has 10 employees, the deflated number of employees is 10 × 0.25 = 2.5, so it will be
rounded to 3. If a title has 1 employee, the deflated number of employees is
                                                                                               36


1 × 0.25 = 0.25, so it will be rounded to 0. In other words, the title will be dropped from
the training set.


Result
As evident in Table A1, inflating and deflating the number of employees in the training
set has no effect on the unweighted accuracy. There is a little improvement in the
weighted accuracy for big universities when the number of employees in the training set
is deflated. One possible explanation is that deflating reduces the noise in the training
data because uncommon job titles are dropped from the training set due to rounding if the
deflated number of employees is less than 0.5.


Table A1. Accuracy when total weight is balanced across universities
  Size of university                 Weight   Benchmark          Inflating     Deflating
  All universities                 unweighted      0.83                0.83          0.82
  Big universities                 unweighted      0.87                0.86          0.86
  Small universities               unweighted      0.80                0.80          0.79
  All universities                 weighted        0.84                0.82          0.85
  Big universities                 weighted        0.83                0.82          0.86
  Small universities               weighted        0.84                0.82          0.82

    B. Discarding Thin Titles

The number of employees per job title ranged from 1 to nearly 10,000 for the eight
universities, with the average being 24.4 employees per title. Concerned that the sparsely
populated titles in the training set are particularly “noisy”, we investigated the effect of
dropping thin titles from the training set. The question we try to answer is “Do thin titles
negatively affect the learning and consequently degrade the performance of predicting for
heavily populated titles?”


For each university, we used the remaining seven universities for training and discarded
the titles with less than a certain number of employees in them from the training set. We
used the threshold of 5, 25, and 50 employees per title. Then we recorded the average
predictive accuracy for titles grouped by the number of employees per title: 1–4
employees, 5–24 employees, 25–49 employees, 50–99 employees, 100–499 employees,
                                                                                              37


500–999 employees, and 1000+ employees. The idea is that dropping titles that have
fewer than a certain number of employees from the training set may have different effect
on the prediction accuracy for thin titles and that for heavily populated titles.


Result
The resulting prediction accuracies are shown in Table A2. Cutoff = 0 corresponds to the
benchmark, where all job titles are included in the training set. As the cutoff value
increases, more and more job titles are excluded from the training data. There is a small
decrease in accuracy caused by discarding uncommon titles for job titles that are
relatively small. In contrast, the accuracy improves as the cutoff increases for job titles
with 1000 or more employees. This is expected because highly populated job titles tend
to have simple, straightforward descriptions and therefore do not benefit from
infrequently used features brought to the training set by uncommon job titles. Indeed,
excluding uncommon job titles from the training set makes the training set less noisy,
allowing the random forest classifier to construct better decision trees with a high
predictive accuracy.


Table A2. Accuracy when thin titles are discarded from the training set
  Size of                                                    Cutoff =      Cutoff =
  Title         Weight         Cutoff = 0     Cutoff = 5       25            50
  <5            unweighted           0.81           0.81          0.82          0.80
  5-24          unweighted           0.84           0.84          0.84          0.82
  25-49         unweighted           0.91           0.91          0.91          0.89
  50-99         unweighted           0.88           0.87          0.86          0.84
  100-499       unweighted           0.82           0.82          0.85          0.82
  500-999       unweighted           0.88           0.88          0.88          0.88
  >=1000        unweighted           0.75           0.83          0.92          0.92
  <5            weighted             0.82           0.82          0.83          0.81
  5-24          weighted             0.83           0.83          0.83          0.81
  25-49         weighted             0.92           0.91          0.92          0.89
  50-99         weighted             0.88           0.87          0.86          0.84
  100-499       weighted             0.80           0.79          0.82          0.80
  500-999       weighted             0.90           0.90          0.90          0.90
  >=1000        weighted             0.79           0.85          0.93          0.93
                                                                                              38


    C. Partially Unsupervised Learning

After observing that titles like “Graduate Assistant” are not always correctly classified,
we applied partially unsupervised learning. This appears to be because of “extraneous”
information in some job titles. In particular, titles that contain the word (after applying
the job cleaning algorithm) “faculty”, “professor”, “postgraduate”, “postdoctoral”,
“graduate” or “undergraduate” were classified first and then the random forest was
applied to the remaining titles (both the training set and the test set consist of titles that do
not contain any of the words listed above).


The resulting accuracies are shown in Table A3. There is no difference in the unweighted
accuracy between the supervised learning benchmark and partially unsupervised learning.
Contrary to our expectation, the weighted accuracy deteriorated for the universities with
granular job titles while it improved for the universities with coarse job titles. This
suggests a possibility of overfitting; in the absence of very important features such as
“faculty” and “undergraduate”, less important features appear to be more important than
they actually are. One possible solution is to recalibrate the parameters to filter out
marginally informative features.




        Table A3. Accuracy using Partially Supervised Learning
  University                                weight   benchmark          partially unsupervised
  all universities                        unweighted      0.83                            0.83
  universities with coarse job titles     unweighted      0.90                            0.91
  universities with granular job titles   unweighted      0.79                            0.79
  all universities                        weighted        0.83                            0.84
  universities with coarse job titles     weighted        0.82                            0.86
  universities with granular job titles   weighted        0.84                            0.81

    D. Using Age and Wage Data

Census Bureau links permitted us to examine whether or not having information on
individuals’ age and earnings increased the quality of prediction. These variables would
appear to be valuable predictors, especially in this context because of the large
differences in ages and earning across occupations. As shown in Table A4, there is some
                                                                                            39


gain, but it is not extraordinarily high across the board. The largest gains, by far, are for
undergraduates when occupations are weighted by the number of people in them. The
benchmark analysis shows the predictive accuracy for all individuals whose true
occupation falls in the occupation indicated in the row heading. The column headed “age
and wage” shows the predictive accuracy for individuals for whom we have age and
wage information (i.e., subset of the benchmark population). For this subset of
population, the “age” column shows the accuracy when age is used along with job title
for prediction; the “wage” column shows the accuracy when wage is used along with job
title for prediction; and the “age and wage” column shows the accuracy when both age
and wage are used along with job titles for prediction.

One interesting observation is that the predictive accuracy increases drastically for
graduate students with age and wage information. This may be because common jobs
titles like teaching assistant are associated with more standardized hiring procedures that
increase the chance of students’ information being stored in a more organized way on the
university system. This effect, however, disappears when the job titles are not weighted
by the number of employees associated with that job title (the bottom half of the table).
This could be due to idiosyncratic job titles and associated non-standardized hiring
process.

The table also shows that correctly classifying undergraduate students is particularly
difficult even with the information on age and wage. This is probably due to
heterogeneity within the undergraduate researcher body: there are traditional students
straight out of high school as well as adult students whose study is financed by the
company they work for.

Table A4. Accuracy using age and wage data

Fraction of individuals whose predicted class matches the true class by true class
Actual         Benchmark Sample with Using Age              Using Wage          Using Age and
Occupation                  Age & Wage Data                 Data                Wage Data
                            Data
Faculty               0.81          0.87             0.88                0.88               0.89
Graduate              0.09          0.73             0.73                0.73               0.73
Staff / Other         0.97          0.96             0.96                0.94               0.94
                                                                                               40


Postdoc                 0.87         0.57              0.63              0.70                       0.63
Undergrad               0.23         0.17              0.36              0.39                       0.37
Overall                 0.65         0.82              0.84              0.84                       0.84
Fraction of job titles whose mode of predicted classes matches the true class by true class
Faculty                 0.81         0.90              0.90              0.92                       0.92
Graduate                0.09         0.13              0.12              0.12                       0.12
Staff / Other           0.97         0.95              0.97              0.95                       0.96
Postdoc                 0.87         0.85              0.87              0.86                       0.86
Undergrad               0.23         0.10              0.08              0.10                       0.09
Overall                 0.65         0.78              0.79              0.79                       0.79


    E. Transitional and Concurrent Titles

As indicated, people can hold multiple titles at a point in time (or in close succession) and
can transition between titles. As some transitions are more common than others (i.e., a
transition from undergraduate to graduate to postgraduate to faculty is more common
than the reverse set of transitions), it is possible to use transitions between titles and
concurrent titles (more precisely, occupational classes that are associated with these
titles) as predictors in the random forest classifier to improve predictive accuracy.
Transitional and concurrent titles can also be used to identify unlikely transitions in the
“ground-truth” data, providing an opportunity for a revision. Beyond improving the
accuracy of the data, exploring concurrent positions and transitions can add to the
richness of our data by providing information on career paths.


Using concurrent job titles and the transitions between job titles requires some form of
iterative procedure. Obviously, the complete mapping between the set of job titles to
itself is too high dimensional to be of any practical use. Thus, we use the following
approach. In the first iteration, we predict occupational class using only job titles as
predictors. In the second iteration, the predicted classes of the transitional/concurrent
titles from the first iteration are used as predictors, along with the job titles. In principle,
this process could be iterated until the prediction converges according to some criterion.
The example below, where an individual held three job titles in sequence, illustrates our
approach.
                                                                                              41


Table A6. Illustration of iterative procedure using transitions
First Iteration:
 Job Title             Preceding        Concurrent          Succeeding
                                                                                Prediction
                         Class            Class               Class
 Student Help                                                    -                 Staff
 Research
                            -                                     -           Undergraduate
 Assistant
 Postdoctoral
                            -                                                  Postgraduate
 Fellow

Second Iteration:
 Job Title             Preceding        Concurrent         Succeeding             New
                         Class            Class              Class             Prediction
 Student Help                                             Undergraduate       Undergraduate
 Research
                          Staff                            Postgraduate          Graduate
 Assistant
 Postdoctoral
                    Undergraduate                                              Postgraduate
 Fellow

Third Iteration:
 Job Title             Preceding         Concurrent         Succeeding            New
                         Class             Class              Class            Prediction
 Student Help                                                Graduate         Undergraduate
 Research
                     Undergraduate                          Postgraduate         Graduate
 Assistant
 Postdoctoral
                        Graduate                                               Postgraduate
 Fellow

In this example, “postdoctoral fellow” is pivotal. Because the job title is so informative,
its predicted class during the second iteration is not affected by the wrong prediction for
the preceding title (i.e., it is unlikely to transition directly from undergraduate to
postgraduate, but it is even more unlikely for a non-postgraduate student to have a job
title “postdoctoral fellow”).


Of course, the time gap between the consecutive titles should also be taken into account.
For the above example, if the time gap between “research assistant” and “postdoctoral
fellow” is more than several years, the initial prediction of undergraduate for the job title
“research assistant” may be more appropriate than the revised prediction of graduate.
                                                                                              42


Here, we do not leverage the time gap between job titles in the model, but do include age,
which contains somewhat similar information regarding the timing of job titles.


One issue with the iterated prediction procedure is that the convergence is not guaranteed,
especially when there is no pivotal job title. For example, consider the following
individual who held two job titles simultaneously.


Table A7 – Illustration of iterative procedure to use concurrent titles
First Iteration:
 Job Title           Preceding         Concurrent         Succeeding
                                                                               Prediction
                       Class             Class              Class
 Tutor                                     -                                   Graduate
 Grader                                    -                                 Undergraduate

Second Iteration:
 Job Title           Preceding         Concurrent          Succeeding
                                                                               Prediction
                       Class             Class               Class
 Tutor                                Undergraduate                          Undergraduate
 Grader                                 Graduate                               Graduate

Third Iteration:
 Job Title           Preceding         Concurrent          Succeeding
                                                                               Prediction
                       Class             Class               Class
 Tutor                                  Graduate                               Graduate
 Grader                               Undergraduate                          Undergraduate

Because we cannot say a tutor or a grader is definitely an undergraduate or graduate, it is
possible that, when making a revised prediction, the random forest classifier will simply
adopt the classification for the concurrent title predicted in the previous iteration. As a
result, the prediction will flip-flop and the algorithm will never stop. Of course, the
presence of other people in these occupations mitigates this problem at least to some
extent.


Data Construction
                                                                                               43


As a first step toward incorporating transitional and concurrent classes in the random
forest classifiers, we included the manually classified transitional and concurrent classes
in our training data in the model rather than predicted occupations. The resulting
predictive accuracy is expected to provide an upper bound for the accuracy obtained from
the iterated procedure described above.


To construct our sample, the monthly transaction records were collapsed at the
individual-title-year level. That is, for each individual, for each calendar year, for each
job title held during the year, we kept the individual-title-year record if the individual
appeared in the transaction record both before July 1 and after September 30 with the job
title. This is to avoid potential noise in the data when annual income is merged. Suppose
an undergraduate student held a research assistant position during January through June.
Then he or she graduated and obtained a full-time job. If the individual was included in
our sample, it would appear that the annual income of the individual is too high to be an
undergraduate, and it can potentially mislead the random forest classifier.


The concurrent job titles are defined to be a group of job titles that were held by an
individual within a year. When there were multiple concurrent job titles, we selected the
one for which the individual was paid for the longest. The preceding job title is defined to
be a job title held by an individual in the years preceding the current year. When there
were multiple preceding job titles, we selected the most recent one. The succeeding job
title is defined to be a job title held by an individual in the years succeeding the current
year. When there were multiple succeeding job titles, we selected the one that
immediately followed the current job title. Because we restricted our sample to
individuals appearing in the transaction data between 2012 and 2014, the occurrence of
multiple concurrent or transitional job titles were rare.


Before fitting the random forest classifier, transitional and concurrent classes were
binarized because the random forest classifier cannot process categorical data. Each of
preceding, concurrent, and succeeding class variables was decomposed into five indicator
variables (faculty, postgraduate, graduate, undergraduate, and staff / other).
                                                                                              44




Methodology
To properly measure the effect of including transitional/concurrent classes on the
predictive accuracy, we created the following subsets of observations:
    •   Everyone: Every observation
    •   None: Observation without any transitional or concurrent titles
    •   Prec: Observations with preceding title (may or may not have succeeding or
        concurrent titles)
    •   Succ: Observations with succeeding title (may or may not have preceding or
        concurrent titles)
    •   Conc: Observations with concurrent title (may or may not have preceding or
        succeeding titles)
    •   Any: Observations with at least one of preceding, succeeding, or concurrent title
        (can have multiple)


We expect that inclusion of transitional/concurrent classes have no effect on occupations
where no observations have any transitional/concurrent classes while it will have the
largest effect on occupations with many cases with all of the three classes. Each of the six
subsets listed above served as a test set, and the random forest classifier was fitted with
and without transitional/concurrent classes as predictors.


Regarding the training set, it is unclear whether the set should be restricted in the same
way as the test set. Consider the test set “Prec”. On the one hand, it seems reasonable to
restrict the training set to only observations with preceding titles. This is because if
observations without preceding title were to be included in the training set, the
importance of the preceding class in predicting the current class may be discounted. On
the other hand, requiring observations in the training set to have preceding titles greatly
reduces the number of qualified observations, possibly leading to overfitting. Since the
effect of restricting the training set is unclear, we fitted the random forest classifier with
and without restriction on the training set.


As shown in Table A8, including the concurrent and transitional occupation has minimal
effect on the predictive accuracy. This is most likely due to the limited number of
                                                                                           45


relevant observations in the training set, and therefore, as more universities participate in
the IRIS project and provide data over a longer time period, the concurrent and
transitional occupation may become a useful predictor.
                                                                                                             46




Table A8
          Features                  Training Set           Everyone   None    Prec    Succ    Conc    Any
 Job title                  Unrestricted                       0.83    0.83    0.82    0.84    0.83   0.83
 Job title and occupation   Unrestricted                       0.82    0.82    0.83    0.85    0.82   0.84
 Job title                  Restricted to relevant group       0.83    0.82    0.83    0.82    0.86   0.83
 Job title and occupation   Restricted to relevant group       0.82    0.83    0.83    0.85    0.78   0.83
