NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING BIAS IN CONSUMER LENDING
Will Dobbie
Andres Liberman
Daniel Paravisini
Vikram Pathania
Working Paper 24953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24953

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018

We are extremely grateful to the Lender for providing the data used in this analysis. We also
thank Leah Boustan, Hank Farber, Alex Mas, Crystal Yang, and numerous seminar participants
for helpful comments and suggestions. Emily Battaglia, Nicole Gandre, Jared Grogan, Bailey
Palmer, and James Reeves provided excellent research assistance. All errors and omissions are
ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Will Dobbie, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Bias in Consumer Lending
Will Dobbie, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania
NBER Working Paper No. 24953
August 2018
JEL No. G41,J15,J16
ABSTRACT
This paper tests for bias in consumer lending decisions using administrative data from a high-cost
lender in the United Kingdom. We motivate our analysis using a simple model of bias in lending,
which predicts that profits should be identical for loan applicants from different groups at the
margin if loan examiners are unbiased. We identify the profitability of marginal loan applicants
by exploiting variation from the quasi-random assignment of loan examiners. We find significant
bias against both immigrant and older loan applicants when using the firm's preferred measure of
long-run profits. In contrast, there is no evidence of bias when using a short-run measure used to
evaluate examiner performance, suggesting that the bias in our setting is due to the misalignment
of firm and examiner incentives. We conclude by showing that a decision rule based on machine
learning predictions of long-run profitability can simultaneously increase profits and eliminate
bias.
Will Dobbie
Industrial Relations Section
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NBER
wdobbie@princeton.edu
Andres Liberman
New York University Stern School of Business
KMC 9-53
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY
10012
aliberma@stern.nyu.edu

Daniel Paravisini
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk
Vikram Pathania
Department of Economics
University of Sussex Business School
Jubilee 270, University of Sussex
Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9SL
United Kingdom
V.Pathania@sussex.ac.uk

I. Introduction
There are large disparities in the availability and cost of credit within many developed countries. In
the United States, for example, blacks pay higher interest rates and are more likely to be rejected for
a mortgage compared to observably similar whites, even after accounting for observable diﬀerences
in credit history and earnings (e.g., Charles, and Hurst 2002, Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross 2017).
There are also large disparities in credit usage and interest rates by ethnicity and gender within
many European countries that cannot be explained by observable diﬀerences in creditworthiness
(e.g., Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli 2013, Deku, Kara, and Molyneux 2016).
These disparities have fueled concerns that lenders may be biased against minorities and women
due to prejudice or inaccurate stereotyping, which, in turn, has provided a rationale for a range of
policies aimed at preventing discriminatory lending practices such as the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act in the United States and portions of the Equality Act of 2010 in the United Kingdom. Yet, the
observed disparities in credit availability and pricing could also be driven by omitted variable bias
or statistical discrimination on the part of lenders. For example, lenders may use variables that are
not observed by the econometrician that are correlated with both creditworthiness and ethnicity or
gender when making lending decisions, such as an applicant’s expected future income, leading to
omitted variable bias. Lenders may also be using observable group traits such as ethnicity or gender
to form accurate beliefs about the unobservable characteristics of diﬀerent applicants, commonly
known as statistical discrimination (e.g., Phelps 1972, Arrow 1973).1
To distinguish between bias and these alternative explanations, Becker (1957, 1993) proposed
an “outcome test” that compares the success or failure of decisions across groups at the margin. In
the context of consumer lending, the outcome test is based on the idea that long-run profits to the
lender should be identical for marginal applicants from all groups if loan examiners are unbiased
1

In both the United States and the United Kingdom, it is illegal for lenders to discriminate against minorities
or women, regardless of whether that discrimination is driven by bias or statistical discrimination. Lenders are,
however, allowed to use a wide range of variables that may not be observed by the econometrician when making
lending decisions, so long as these variables have a legitimate business purpose and do not have a disparate impact on
a protected class. In practice, however, statistical discrimination and omitted variable bias may be indistinguishable
from each other unless there is direct evidence that lenders used ethnicity or gender to make lending decisions. The
policy implications of bias and statistical discrimination are also very diﬀerent. For example, bias stemming from
prejudice or inaccurate stereotyping may be best addressed by policies that increase competition or encourage the
employment of minority or female loan examiners (e.g., Becker 1957). In contrast, statistical discrimination is likely
best addressed through the enforcement of existing laws such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act or the Fair Housing
Act in the United States or the Equality Act in the United Kingdom.

1

and the disparities across groups are solely due to omitted variables and statistical discrimination.
In contrast, marginal applicants from a targeted group (e.g., minorities) will yield higher profits
to the lender than marginal applicants from the non-targeted group (e.g., non-minorities) if loan
examiners are biased against the targeted group and these disparities cannot be fully explained by
omitted variables and statistical discrimination.
Estimating the profitability of marginal applicants and implementing the outcome test has been
complicated by three important issues. First, researchers rarely observe long-run profits, and intermediate outcomes such as loan default may not provide an accurate measure of long-term profits
(e.g., Han 2004, Agarwal et al. 2015). Second, characteristics observable to the lender but not
the econometrician may be correlated with loan decisions, resulting in omitted variable bias when
estimating the profitability of marginal applicants from each group. Finally, and most importantly,
standard OLS estimates recover the profitability of the average applicant from each group, not the
marginal applicant as required by the outcome test (e.g., Ayres 2002). As a result, comparisons
based on OLS estimates will not recover the true level of bias in consumer lending decisions unless
one is willing to assume that there is an identical distribution of potential profitability across groups.
In this paper, we implement the Becker outcome test using detailed administrative data on loan
outcomes from a high-cost lender in the United Kingdom (hereafter, “the Lender”). This setting
oﬀers an ideal laboratory to test for bias in consumer credit for at least three reasons. First, we
observe detailed data on cash flows to and from the Lender that allow us to construct individual-level
measures of profitability. Second, the Lender’s loan examiners must make on-the-spot judgments
with only the standard credit information and limited interaction with loan applicants, making their
decisions particularly prone to the kind of inaccurate stereotypes or categorical heuristics that can
lead to bias. Finally, as in most credit markets, the Lender’s loan examiners are evaluated using
a measure based on short-run default, not long-run profits, creating exactly the kind of agency
problems that can unintentionally lead examiners to discriminate against groups where short- and
long-run outcomes systematically diverge.
We identify the diﬀerences in profitability at the margin required for the Becker outcome test
using variation in the approval tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned loan examiners. The Lender
uses a blind rotation system to assign first-time loan applicants to examiners of the same nationality,
eﬀectively randomizing new applicants to examiners within each branch and nationality. Using the
2

assigned loan examiner as an instrumental variable (IV) for loan take-up, we can recover the causal
eﬀect of loan take-up on long-run profits for applicants at the margin of loan take-up. Though IV
estimators are often criticized for the local nature of the estimates, we exploit the fact that the
outcome test relies on the diﬀerence between exactly these kinds of local treatment eﬀects to test
for bias.2
In our empirical analysis, we find significant bias against both immigrant and older loan applicants when using the firm’s preferred measure of long-run profits. Following the initial loan
decision, we find that marginal immigrant applicants yield profits that are £566 larger than nativeborn applicants, or nearly four times larger. Marginal older applicants also yield profits that are
£348 larger than younger applicants, or more than two times larger. Conversely, marginal female
and male applicants yield statistically identical profits, suggesting no bias against (or in favor of)
female applicants. Our estimates are nearly identical if we account for other observable diﬀerences
by group, suggesting that our results cannot be explained by ethnic or age-related diﬀerences in
baseline credit history or other demographic characteristics. We also find similar results using a
marginal treatment eﬀects (MTE) specification that relies on a diﬀerent set of identifying assumptions. In contrast to these IV and MTE results, however, naïve OLS estimates indicate much more
modest levels of bias across all three groups, highlighting the importance of accounting for both
infra-marginality and omitted variables when estimating bias in consumer credit decisions.
The second part of the paper explores which form of bias explains our findings. The first
possibility is that, as originally modeled by Becker (1957, 1993), prejudice leads loan examiners
to discriminate against immigrants and older loan applicants at the margin. However, immigrant
applicants are typically matched to ethnically similar loan examiners, and loan examiners tend to
be older themselves, institutional features that are inconsistent with most models of ethnic or agebased prejudice. A second possibility is that loan examiners form inaccurate stereotypes on the
profitability of lending to immigrant and older loan applicants. Recent work suggests that these
types of inaccurate stereotypes can arise if immigrant and older applicants are over-represented in
2

Our empirical strategy builds on Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming), who test for racial bias in bail
decisions using the quasi-random assignment of bail judges to identify outcomes for marginal white and marginal
black defendants, and Marx (2017), who tests for racial bias in police stops using police oﬃcers of diﬀerent races to
identify bounds on the outcomes for marginal white, Hispanic, and black drivers. Our IV strategy is also related to
research designs used by Liberman, Paravisini, and Pathania (2016) to study the eﬀects of high-cost credit on credit
reputation and future access to credit and Dobbie, and Song (2015) and Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Yang
(2017) to estimate the impact of bankruptcy protection.

3

the left tail of the distribution of potential profits (e.g., Bordalo et al. 2016). However, we find
that immigrant and older applicants are actually under-represented in the left tail of the payoﬀ
distribution, exactly the opposite pattern we would expect if inaccurate stereotypes were driving
our results.
In this paper, we propose a new explanation for bias in consumer lending: the misalignment
of firm and examiner incentives.3 Long-run profits in our setting are largely driven by the number
of loans an individual takes out, not whether or not an individual defaults on the first loan. Yet,
loan examiners are evaluated using a measure based on first-loan defaults, not long-run profits,
due to the perceived infeasibility of waiting for one to two years to measure examiner performance.
As a result, loan examiners in our setting have an incentive to minimize first-loan default, not
maximize long-run profits, potentially leading them to discriminate against applicants where these
outcomes systematically diverge. Consistent with this explanation, we find no evidence of bias
against immigrant and older applicants when using first-loan default as an outcome. We also find
that long-run profits are systematically higher for a given level of default risk for immigrant and
older applicants compared to native-born and younger applicants, respectively, exactly as we would
expect if the bias in our setting is driven by the misalignment of incentives. Finally, we find that
the decisions made by loan examiners are strikingly consistent with a data-based decision rule
minimizing short-term default, but inconsistent with a decision rule maximizing long-term profits.
We conclude by showing that a decision rule based on machine learning (ML) predictions of
long-run profits could simultaneously increase profits and eliminate bias. Following Kleinberg et al.
(2018), we use the quasi-random assignment of loan examiners to identify the implicit rankings of
applicants by loan examiners, which we then compare to the rankings produced by a standard ML
algorithm. Consistent with our earlier results, we find that loan examiners systematically misrank
loan applicants at the margin of loan take-up, particularly immigrant and older applicants. The
Lender would earn approximately 58 percent more per applicant if marginal lending decisions were
3

The misalignment of firm and examiner incentives is likely widespread in credit markets (e.g., Heider, and Inderst
2012). Keys et al. (2010) show, for example, that the securitization of subprime mortgage loans prior to the financial
crisis reduced the incentives of financial intermediaries to carefully screen borrowers. Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2013)
and Agarwal, and Ben-David (Forthcoming) similarly show that volume incentives distort the incentives of loan
examiners, leading to higher default risk, while Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini (2010) show that loan oﬃcers
underreport bad news due to reputational concerns. The Wells Fargo account fraud scandal, where millions of
fraudulent savings and checking accounts were created without customers’ consent, is also widely thought to be the
result of poorly designed sales incentives among branch employees.

4

made using the ML algorithm rather than loan examiners. Including all applicants, not just those
at the margin of loan take-up, the Lender would earn over 30 percent more per applicant if lending
decisions were made using the ML algorithm.
Our results contribute to an important literature testing for bias in consumer credit decisions.
Outcome tests based on standard OLS estimates suggest that black mortgage borrowers in the
United States have, if anything, slightly higher default rates (e.g., Van Order, Lekkas, and Quigley
1993, Berkovec et al. 1994) and similar recovery rates (e.g., Han 2004) compared to observably
similar white mortgage borrowers, suggesting little bias in this market. In contrast, both in-person
and correspondence audit studies (e.g., Ross et al. 2008, Hanson et al. 2016) suggest that loan
oﬃcers treat black and Hispanic mortgage applicants worse than identical white applicants. There
is also evidence that racial disparities in credit outcomes narrow as competition increases (e.g.,
Berkovec et al. 1998, Buchak, and Jørring 2016), a finding that is inconsistent with most models of
statistical discrimination.
Our paper is also related to a large literature documenting disparities in the availability and cost
of credit by ethnicity and gender. There is considerable evidence that minorities have either less
access to credit or are forced to pay more for credit compared to observably similar nonminorities
for mortgage loans (e.g., Charles, and Hurst 2002, Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross 2017), auto loans
(e.g., Charles, Hurst, and Stephens 2008), small business loans (e.g., Cavalluzzo, and Cavalluzzo
1998, Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken 2002, Blanchflower, Levine, and Zimmerman 2003), and
consumer loans (e.g., Cohen-Cole 2011). There is also evidence that women pay more for both
consumer credit (e.g., Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli 2013) and small business loans (e.g., Bellucci,
Borisov, and Zazzaro 2010) than observably similar men, and that blacks are more likely to be
rejected for peer-to-peer loans than observably similar whites (e.g., Pope, and Sydnor 2011).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the theoretical model underlying our analysis and develops our empirical test for bias. Section III describes our institutional
setting, the data used in our analysis, and the construction of our instrument. Section IV presents
the main results. Section V explores potential mechanisms, and Section VI concludes. The Online
Appendix provides additional results and detailed information on the outcomes used in our analysis.

5

II. An Empirical Test of Bias in Consumer Lending
In this section, we motivate and develop our empirical test for bias in consumer lending decisions.
We first show that we can test for bias by comparing treatment eﬀects for the marginal loan
applicants from diﬀerent groups, whether that bias is driven by prejudice, inaccurate stereotypes,
or the misalignment of firm and examiner incentives. We then show that we can identify these
group-specific treatment eﬀects using the quasi-random assignment of loan applications to loan
examiners.
A. Model of Examiner Behavior
This section develops a stylized theoretical framework that allows us to define an outcome-based
test of bias in consumer lending. We begin with a model of taste-based discrimination that closely
follows the theory of discrimination developed by Becker (1957, 1993) and subsequent work applying
this theory to test for bias in consumer lending (e.g., Han 2004). We then present two alternative
models of examiner behavior based on inaccurate stereotypes and misaligned examiner incentives.
Each model suggests that we can test for bias in consumer lending decisions by comparing treatment
eﬀects for the marginal loan applicants from diﬀerent groups.4
Taste-Based Discrimination: Let i denote loan applicants and Vi denote all applicant characteristics
considered by the loan examiner, excluding group identity gi , such as ethnicity or gender. Loan
examiners, indexed by e, form an expectation of the long-run profits of lending to applicant i
conditional on observable characteristics Vi and group gi , E[↵i |Vi , gi ].
The perceived cost of lending to applicant i assigned to examiner e is denoted by teg (Vi ), which is
a function of observable applicant characteristics Vi . The perceived cost of lending teg (Vi ) includes
both the firm’s opportunity cost of making a loan and the personal benefits to examiner e from any
direct utility or disutility from being known as either a lenient or tough loan examiner, respectively.
Importantly, we allow the perceived cost of lending teg (Vi ) to vary by group g 2 T, R to allow for
4

In our analysis, we abstract away from the eﬀects of market competition on bias in consumer credit markets. In a
simple model of taste-based discrimination, market competition indirectly raises the cost of discrimination through the
threat of market share losses to competitive entrants, leading to a lower level of bias in equilibrium (e.g., Becker 1957,
Peterson 1981). Similar arguments extend to models of discrimination based on inaccurate stereotypes or misaligned
examiner incentives. See Berkovec et al. (1998) and Buchak, and Jørring (2016) for empirical work estimating the
eﬀects of competition on lending disparities.

6

examiner preferences to diﬀer for applicants from the target group (e.g., minority applicants) and
the reference group (e.g., non-minority applicants), respectively. We do not, however, allow the
lender’s true opportunity costs of lending to vary by group.
Following Becker (1957, 1993), we define loan examiner e as biased against the target group
if teT (Vi ) > teR (Vi ). Thus, biased loan examiners reject target group applicants that they would
otherwise approve because these examiners perceive a higher cost of lending to applicants from the
target group compared to observably identical applicants from the reference group.
For simplicity, we assume that loan examiners are risk neutral and maximize the perceived net
benefit of approving a loan. We also assume that the loan examiner’s sole task is to decide whether
to approve or reject a loan application given that, in practice, this is the only decision margin in
our setting.
Under these assumptions, the model implies that loan examiner e will lend to applicant i if and
only if the expected profit is weakly greater than the perceived cost of the loan:
E[↵i |Vi , gi = g]

teg (Vi )

(1)

Given this decision rule, the marginal applicant for examiner e and group g is the applicant i for
whom the expected profit is exactly equal to the perceived cost, i.e., E[↵ie |Vi , gi = g] = teg (Vi ). We
simplify our notation moving forward by letting this expected profit for the marginal applicant for
examiner e and group g be denoted by ↵ge .
Based on the above framework, the model yields the standard outcome-based test for bias from
Becker (1957, 1993).
Outcome Test 1: Taste-Based Discrimination. If examiner e is biased against applicants
from the target group, then the expected profitability for the marginal target group applicant is
e.
higher than the expected profitability for the marginal reference group applicant: ↵Te >↵R

Outcome Test 1 predicts that marginal target and marginal reference group loan applicants should
have the same profitability if examiners are unbiased, but marginal target group applicants should
yield higher profits if examiners are biased against applicants from the target group. The correct procedure to test whether loan decisions are biased is therefore to determine whether loans
7

to marginal target group applicants are more profitable than loans to marginal reference group
applicants.
Inaccurate Group Stereotypes: In the taste-based model of discrimination outlined above, we assume
that examiners agree on the (true) expected net present profit of lending to applicant i, E[↵i |Vi , gi ],
but not the perceived cost of lending to the applicant, teg (Vi ). An alternative approach is to assume
that examiners disagree on their (potentially inaccurate) predictions of the expected profit, as would
be the case if examiners systematically underestimate the profitability of target group applicants
relative to reference group applicants in the spirit of Bordalo et al. (2016) and Arnold, Dobbie, and
Yang (Forthcoming). We show that a model motivated by these kinds of biased prediction errors
can generate the same predictions as a model of taste-based discrimination.
Let i again denote applicants and Vi denote all applicant characteristics considered by the loan
examiner, excluding group identity gi . The perceived cost of lending to applicant i assigned to
examiner e is now defined as te (Vi ), where we explicitly assume that te (Vi ) is independent of the
group identity of the applicant.
The perceived profitability of lending to applicant i conditional on observable characteristics Vi ,
Ee [↵i |Vi , gi ], is now allowed to vary across examiners. We can write the perceived profitability as:
Ee [↵i |Vi , gi ] = E[↵i |Vi , gi ] + ⌧ge (Vi )

(2)

where ⌧ge (Vi ) is a prediction error that is allowed to vary by examiner e and group identity gi .
Following Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming), we define examiner e as making biased
prediction errors against target group applicants if ⌧Te (Vi ) < ⌧Re (Vi ). Thus, biased loan examiners reject target group applicants that they would otherwise approve because these examiners
systematically underestimate the true profitability of lending to target group applicants compared
to reference group applicants.
Following the taste-based model, loan examiner e will lend to applicant i if and only if the
perceived expected profit is weakly greater than the cost of the loan:
Ee [↵i |Vi , gi = g] = E[↵i |Vi , gi = g] + ⌧ge (Vi )

8

te (Vi )

(3)

The prediction error model can be made equivalent to the taste-based model of discrimination
outlined above if we relabel te (Vi )

⌧ge (Vi ) = teg (Vi ). As a result, we can generate identical

empirical predictions using the prediction error and taste-based models.
Following this logic, our model of biased prediction errors yields a similar outcome-based test
for bias.
Outcome Test 2: Inaccurate Stereotypes. If examiner e systematically underestimates
the true expected profitability of lending to target group applicants relative to reference group
applicants, then the expected profitability for the marginal target group applicant is higher than
e.
the expected profitability for the marginal reference group applicant: ↵Te >↵R

Parallel to Outcome Test 1, Outcome Test 2 predicts that marginal target group and marginal
reference group applicants should have the same profitability if loan examiners do not systematically
make prediction errors that vary with group identity, but marginal target group applicants should
yield higher profits if examiners systematically underestimate the true expected profitability of
lending to target group applicants relative to reference group applicants. The correct procedure
to test whether loan decisions are biased is therefore, once again, to determine whether loans
to marginal target group applicants are more profitable than loans to marginal reference group
applicants.
Misaligned Examiner Incentives: In both the taste-based and inaccurate stereotypes models of discrimination, we assume that all examiners maximize the perceived long-run profit of lending to
applicant i, E[↵i |Vi , gi ]. A final approach is to assume that loan examiners maximize an intermediate short-run outcome, not long-run profits, as would be the case if the examiner’s compensation
contract was based (at least in part) on that short-run outcome.5 We show that a model motivated
by these kinds of principal-agent problems can also generate the same predictions as the taste-based
model of discrimination.
Let i again denote applicants and Vi again denote all applicant characteristics observed by
examiners, excluding group identity gi . The perceived cost of lending to applicant i assigned to
5

The optimal compensation contract may include intermediate outcomes if, for example, loan examiners are more
impatient than the Lender and the intermediate outcome is correlated with long-run profits. Heider, and Inderst
(2012) show, for example, that it may be optimal for lenders to compensate examiners only for the number of loans
given, not loan performance.

9

examiner e is again defined as te (Vi ), which is assumed to be independent of the group identity of
the applicant as in the inaccurate stereotypes model.
We now assume that examiners maximize their private benefit of lending to applicant i,
SR
e E[↵i |Vi , gi ] + (1

e )E[↵i |Vi , gi ],

which is equal to a weighted average of both expected short-

term profits, E[↵iSR |Vi , gi ], and expected long-run profits, E[↵i |Vi , gi ]. We allow the weight on
short-term profits,

e,

to vary across examiners to capture the idea that examiners may vary in

their risk tolerance, impatience, or liquidity constraints, although this assumption is not critical
to our model. The perceived benefit from lending to individual i from the perspective of the loan
examiner can be rewritten as:
E[↵i |Vi , gi ] +
where

SR
e E[↵i

SR
e E[↵i

↵i |Vi , gi ]

(4)

↵i |Vi , gi ] represents the wedge between examiner e’s perceived benefit of lending to

applicant i in the short run and the lender’s expected profit of lending to applicant i in the long run.
The wedge between the examiner and firm’s objective functions is increasing in the weight placed
on the short-term outcome,

e,

and is larger for applicants where there is a larger gap between

expected short- and long-run profits, E[↵iSR

↵i |Vi , gi ].

We define examiner e as making biased valuations against target group applicants if
↵i |Vi , gi = T ] <

SR
e E[↵i

SR
e E[↵i

↵i |Vi , gi = R]. Thus, biased loan examiners reject target group ap-

plicants that they would be willing to approve if these applicants were from the reference group,
because the utility of biased loan examiners depends on short-term profits and target group applicants have lower short-run profits for a given level of long-run profits. From the lender’s perspective,
biased loan examiners therefore underestimate the true benefit of lending to target group applicants
relative to reference group applicants.
Following the taste-based model, loan examiner e will lend to applicant i if and only if examiner
e’s perceived benefit is weakly greater than the cost of the loan:
E[↵i |Vi , gi ] +

SR
e E[↵i

↵i |Vi , gi ]

te (Vi )

(5)

We can again show that the misaligned incentives model can be reduced to the taste-based model

10

of discrimination outlined above if we relabel te (Vi )

SR
e E[↵i

↵i |Vi , gi = g] = teg (Vi ). As a

result, we can generate identical empirical predictions using the misaligned incentives, inaccurate
stereotypes, and taste-based models. Our model of misaligned incentives therefore yields a similar
outcome-based test for bias.
Outcome Test 3: Misaligned Examiner Incentives. If examiner e systematically undervalues the true expected long-run profitability of lending to target group applicants relative to reference
group applicants, then the expected profitability for the marginal target group applicant is higher
e.
than the expected profitability for the marginal reference group applicant: ↵Te > ↵R

Parallel to Outcome Tests 1 and 2, Outcome Test 3 predicts that marginal target group and marginal
reference group applicants should have the same long-term profitability if examiners’ incentives do
not systematically lead to valuation errors that vary by group, but marginal target group applicants
should have higher long-run profits if examiners systematically undervalue the true expected longrun profitability of lending to target group applicants relative to reference group applicants. The
correct procedure to test whether loan decisions are biased is therefore, once again, to determine
whether loans to marginal target group applicants are more profitable in the long run than loans to
marginal reference group applicants.
The above theoretical framework presents three diﬀerent behavioral models with identical empirical predictions: if there is bias against target group applicants, then long-run profits will be
higher, in expectation, for marginal target group applicants compared to marginal reference group
applicants. In contrast, marginal target and reference group applicants will yield identical long-run
profits if the observed disparities in consumer lending are solely due to statistical discrimination.
The interpretation of our findings, however, depends on the specific model underlying examiner
behavior. We discuss which of the three models is most consistent with our findings in Section V.6

6

In contrast to the three models we consider in this section, models of accurate statistical discrimination suggest
that target group applicants may be treated worse than observably identical reference group applicants if either target
group applicants are, on average, riskier given an identical signal of profitability (e.g., Phelps 1972, Arrow 1973),
or target group applicants have less precise signals of profitability (e.g., Aigner, and Cain 1977). In both of these
cases, however, examiners use group identity to form accurate predictions of profitability, both on average and at
the margin of loan take-up. As a result, neither form of accurate statistical discrimination will lead to diﬀerences in
profitability at the margin.

11

B. Empirical Test of Bias in Consumer Lending
This section explains how we identify the diﬀerences in profitability at the margin required for the
Becker outcome test using variation in the approval tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned loan
examiners, building on work by Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming) in the context of bail
decisions. We begin with a definition of the target parameter and a series of simple graphical
examples that illustrate our approach. We then formally describe the conditions under which our
examiner IV strategy yields consistent estimates of bias in consumer lending decisions and discuss
the interpretation of the estimates.
Overview: Following the theory model, let the average profitability for applicants from group g at
the margin for examiner e, ↵ge , for some weighting scheme, we , across all loan examiners, e = 1...E,
be given by:
↵g⇤,w =
=

E
X
e=1
E
X

we ↵ge

(6)

we teg

e=1

where we are non-negative weights which sum to one that will be discussed in further detail below.
By definition, ↵ge = teg , where teg represents examiner e’s threshold for loan approval for applicants
from group g. In our context, profitability can be identified by the treatment eﬀect of loan take-up
on long-run profits, as applicants who do not take up a loan yield exactly zero profit. Thus, ↵g⇤,w
represents a weighted average of the treatment eﬀects for applicants of group g at the margin of
loan take-up across all examiners.
Following this notation, the average level of bias among loan examiners, B ⇤,w , for the weighting
scheme we is given by:
B ⇤,w =
=

E
X
e=1
E
X

we (teT
we teT

e=1

= ↵T⇤,w

teR )
E
X
e=1

⇤,w
↵R

12

we teR

(7)

Equation (7) generalizes the outcome test to the case where there are many examiners and the
level of bias across examiners may vary. Following Equation (6), we can then express the target
parameter, B ⇤,w , as a weighted average across all examiners of bias in lending decisions, measured
by the diﬀerence in treatment eﬀects for target and reference group applicants at the margin of loan
take-up.
Recall that standard OLS estimates will typically not recover unbiased estimates of the weighted
average of bias, B ⇤,w , for two reasons. The first is that characteristics observable to the loan
examiner but not the econometrician may be correlated with loan approval, resulting in omitted
variable bias when estimating the treatment eﬀects for diﬀerent types of loan applicants. The
second, and more important, reason OLS estimates will not recover unbiased estimates of bias is
that the average treatment eﬀect identified by OLS will not equal the treatment eﬀect at the margin
required by the outcome test unless there is either an identical distribution of potential profits for
loan applicants from diﬀerent groups or constant treatment eﬀects across the entire distribution of
loan applicants — the well-known infra-marginality problem (e.g., Ayres 2002).
Following Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming), we estimate the diﬀerences in profitability
at the margin required for the Becker outcome test, B ⇤,w , using variation in the approval tendencies
of quasi-randomly assigned loan examiners. Our estimator uses the standard IV framework to
identify the diﬀerence in local average treatment eﬀects (LATEs) for reference group and target
group applicants near the margin of loan take-up. Though IV estimators are often criticized for
the local nature of the estimates, we exploit the fact that the outcome test relies on the diﬀerence
between exactly these kinds of local treatment eﬀects to test for bias. This empirical design allows
us to recover a weighted average of the long-run profitability of diﬀerent groups near the margin,
where the weights are equal to the standard IV weights described in further detail below.
Figure 1 provides a series of simple graphical examples to illustrate the intuition of our approach.
In Panel A, we consider the case where there is a single unbiased examiner to illustrate the potential
for infra-marginality bias when using a standard OLS estimator. The examiner perfectly observes
expected profitability and chooses the same approval threshold for all loan applicants, but the
distributions of profitability diﬀer by group identity such that reference group applicants, on average,
yield higher profits than target group applicants. Letting the vertical lines denote the examiner’s
approval threshold, standard OLS estimates of ↵T and ↵R measure the average profitability for
13

target and reference group applicants who take up a loan, respectively. In the case illustrated in
Panel A, the standard OLS estimator indicates that the examiner is biased against reference group
applicants, when, in reality, the examiner is unbiased. Panel B illustrates a similar case where the
standard OLS estimator indicates that the examiner is unbiased, when, in reality, the examiner is
biased against target group applicants.
To illustrate how our IV estimator identifies the profitability of marginal applicants, the last
two panels of Figure 1 consider a case where there are two loan examiners, one that is lenient
and one that is strict. In Panel C, we consider the case where the two examiners are unbiased,
while in panel D we consider the case where the two examiners are both biased against target
group applicants. In both cases, an IV estimator using examiner leniency as an instrument for
loan take-up will measure the average profitability of “compliers,” or applicants who take up a loan
when assigned to the lenient examiner but not when assigned to the strict examiner. In other
words, the IV estimator only measures the profitability of applicants between the two examiner
thresholds, ignoring applicants that are either above or below both examiner thresholds. When
the two examiners in our example are “close enough” in leniency, the IV estimator will therefore
measure the profitability of applicants only at the margin of loan take-up, allowing us to correctly
conclude that the examiners are unbiased in the example illustrated in Panel C and biased against
target group applicants in Panel D.
Consistency of the IV Estimator: We now briefly review the conditions under which our examiner
IV strategy yields consistent estimates of bias in consumer lending decisions. See Arnold, Dobbie,
and Yang (Forthcoming) for formal proofs.
Let Zi be a scalar measure of the assigned examiner’s propensity for loan take-up for applicant
i that takes on values ordered {z0 , ..., zE }, where E + 1 is the total number of examiners. For
example, a value of ze = 0.7 indicates that 70 percent of all applicants assigned to examiner e
take up a loan. We construct Zi using a standard leave-out procedure that captures the approval
tendencies of examiners. We calculate a single Zi for all groups to minimize measurement error in
our instrument, but we show in robustness checks that our results are similar (if less precise) if we
allow the instrument to vary by group.
Following Imbens, and Angrist (1994), an estimator using Zi as an instrumental variable for
14

loan take-up is valid and well-defined under the following three assumptions:
Assumption 1. (Existence) Cov(T akeU pi , Zi ) 6= 0
Assumption 2. (Exclusion) Cov(Zi , vi ) = 0
Assumption 3. (Monotonicity) T akeU pi (ze )

T akeU pi (ze

1)

0

where vi = Ui + "i consists of characteristics unobserved by the econometrician but observed by the
examiner, Ui , and idiosyncratic variation unobserved by both the econometrician and examiner,
"i . Assumption 1 requires the instrument Zi to increase the probability of loan take-up T akeU pi .
Assumption 2 requires the instrument Zi to be as good as randomly assigned and to only influence
profitability through the channel of loan take-up. In other words, Assumption 2 ensures that our
instrument is orthogonal to characteristics unobserved by the econometrician, vi . Assumption 3
requires the instrument Zi to weakly increase the probability of loan take up T akeU pi for all
individuals.
Taking Assumptions 1–3 as given, let the true IV-weighted level of bias, B ⇤,IV be defined as:
B ⇤,IV =
=

E
X

we (teT

e=1
E
X

e

(teT

teR )

(8)

teR )

e=1

where we =

e,

the standard IV weights defined in Imbens, and Angrist (1994).

Let our IV estimator that uses examiner leniency as an instrumental variable for loan take-up
be defined as:
B IV = ↵TIV
=

E
X

IV
↵R
e e,e 1
T ↵T

e=1

where

e
g

(9)
E
X

e e,e 1
R ↵R

e=1

are again the standard IV weights and each pairwise treatment eﬀect ↵ge,e

treatment eﬀects of compliers within each e, e

1 pair, i.e. individuals such that ↵ge,e

1

captures the
1

2 (teg

1 , te ].
g

Our IV estimator B IV provides a consistent estimate of the true level of bias B ⇤,IV if two
conditions hold: (1) the instrument Zi is continuously distributed over some interval [z, z̄], and
15

(2) the weights on the pairwise LATEs

e
g

are identical across groups. The first condition ensures

that the group-specific IV estimates are equal to the true IV-weighted average of treatment eﬀects
for applicants at the margin of loan take-up.7 The second condition for consistency ensures that
any diﬀerence in the group-specific IV estimates is driven by diﬀerences in the true group-specific
treatment eﬀects, not diﬀerences in the IV weights applied to those treatment eﬀects. This equal
weights condition holds if there is a linear first stage across groups, as is true in our data (see
Figure 2). We also find that the distributions of IV weights by nationality, gender, and age are
visually indistinguishable from each other (see Appendix Figure A1) and that the IV weights for
each examiner are highly correlated across groups (see Appendix Figure A2), indicating that the
equal weights condition is unlikely to be violated in our setting.
Interpretation of IV Weights: We conclude this section by discussing the economic interpretation of
our IV-weighted estimate of bias, B IV . Appendix Table A1 presents OLS estimates of IV weights in
each examiner-by-branch cell and observable examiner characteristics. We find that our IV weights
are uncorrelated with the number of applications, examiner experience, examiner leniency, and
examiner gender. We also find that our IV weights are largely uncorrelated with examiner-level
estimates of bias against each group obtained from our MTE specification described below, indicating that our IV-weighted estimates of bias are likely to be very similar to estimates based on other
weighting schemes. In robustness checks, we also report estimates from an MTE specification that
allows us to impose equal weights when calculating the average level of bias across loan examiners
at the cost of additional auxiliary assumptions.

III. Background, Data, and Instrument Construction
This section summarizes the most relevant information regarding our institutional setting and data,
describes the construction of our examiner leniency measure, and provides support for the baseline
assumptions required for our IV estimator. Further details on the cleaning and coding of variables
are contained in Online Appendix B.
7
The maximum estimation bias from using a discrete instrument, as we do in this paper, can be calculated using
the empirical distribution of examiner leniency and the worst-case treatment eﬀect heterogeneity among compliers.
Using the 10th and 90th percentiles of observed profits as the worst-case treatment eﬀect heterogeneity among
compliers, we find that the maximum estimation bias when using a discrete instrument is only £18, indicating that
this issue is unlikely to be a significant problem in our setting.

16

A. Institutional Setting
We test for bias in consumer lending decisions using information from a large subprime lender in
the United Kingdom. The Lender oﬀers short-term, uncollateralized, high-cost loans to subprime
borrowers. Loan maturities are typically less than six months, and can be as short as a few weeks.
Loan amounts range from £200 to £2,000, with an average first-loan amount of just under £300.
All loans require weekly payments starting soon after the loan is disbursed, with interest rates that
average about 600 percent. By comparison, the typical payday loan in the United States is below
$300 with an APR of 400 to 1,000 percent and a seven- to thirty-day maturity (Stegman 2007). The
Lender also allows applicants who remain in good standing after one month the option of “topping
up” their initial loan, or increasing their outstanding balance back to the initially approved loan
amount. In other words, applicants can convert their initial loan to a line of credit up to the
original loan amount after one month. The Lender’s profits are largely driven by the use of these
loan top-ups over the next one to two years, with only about 25 percent of the variation in long-run
profits coming from the repayment of the original loan amount. In contrast, the number of loan
top-ups explains 34 percent of the variation in long-run profits among individuals taking up a loan,
while the number of loans explains 41 percent of the variation in long-run profits in this sample.
The repayment of the original loan amount also explains very little additional variation in long-run
profits once these longer-run measures are included.
The Lender operates 24 branches throughout the United Kingdom to handle all in-person applications, and a virtual branch to handle all online and phone applications. In the physical branches
maintained by the Lender, loan applicants are first greeted by a receptionist, who gathers basic
information such as the applicant’s name, address, phone number, and nationality. Loan applicants
are then randomly assigned to one of the loan examiners working in the branch that day using a
blind rotation system. The blind rotation system randomly assigns native-born applicants to the
full set of loan examiners working in the branch that day, but only randomly assigns foreign-born
and non-English speaking applicants to the set of the loan examiners with the same ethnic background to put these applicants at ease and improve the accuracy of the screening process. Next,
the assigned loan examiner reviews the applicant’s credit history, including the applicant’s credit
score, outstanding debt, and past repayment behavior. Loan examiners are also encouraged to ask

17

about the applicant’s income and employment status, as well as any other relevant information,
during the initial interview. Following the examiner’s approval decision, approved loan applicants
decide whether to take up the loan or not, as well as the total amount to borrow from the maximum
allowable credit line. Loans are then disbursed to approved applicants before leaving the store. The
process is broadly similar for online and phone applications, although applicants are typically not
randomly assigned to loan examiners and, as a result, we do not include these applicants in our
analysis.
The assigned loan examiner has complete discretion to approve or reject first-time loan applicants
whose credit scores exceed a minimum threshold established by the Lender. Loan examiners are
compensated with a combination of a fixed salary plus a bonus that increases with loan volume and
decreases with loan default. Loan examiners are not, however, compensated for long-run profits
due to the perceived diﬃculty of waiting for one to two years to measure examiner performance.
We explore the potential importance of this compensation contract when explaining our results in
Section V.
B. Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics
We use administrative data on all loan applications and loan outcomes at the Lender between May
2012 and February 2015. The loan-level data contain detailed information pulled from a private
credit registry at the time of application, including credit scores and information on outstanding
debts and past repayment behavior. The data also contain information gathered by the examiner
during the interview, including the applicant’s nationality, age, gender, earnings and employment,
marriage status, number of dependents, months at his or her current residence, and the stated reason for the loan. Finally, for individuals who take up at least one loan, the data contain information
on loan disbursal amounts, interest rates, maturities, payments, top-ups, and defaults for all loans
during our sample period. The data are high-quality and complete with one important exception:
earnings and employment information is only collected when examiners believe the application is
likely to be approved, meaning that it is missing for a relatively large part of our sample. We
therefore do not include earnings and employment controls in our baseline results, as the availability of these controls is mechanically correlated with examiner leniency. None of our results are
significantly changed if we include these controls, however.
18

In our main results, long-run profits are defined as the sum of all payments made by the applicant
minus all disbursements from the Lender for both the first loan and all subsequent loans during
our sample period. In robustness checks, we present results using the net present value of long-run
profits for a variety of discount rates. We also control for time-of-application fixed eﬀects throughout
to account for the fact that we observe some applicants for more time than others.
We make five restrictions to the estimation sample. First, we drop repeat applications, as these
applications are not randomly assigned to examiners and have a nearly 100 percent approval rate.
Second, we drop all online and phone applications, as these individuals are also not randomly
assigned to examiners during our sample period. Third, we drop loans assigned to loan examiners
with fewer than 50 applications, and loan applications where there is only a single applicant in a
branch by nationality cell. Fourth, we drop a handful of applications where applicants are younger
than 18 years old, older than 75 years old, or where the credit check information is missing. Finally,
we drop all applications after December 2014 to ensure that we observe loan outcomes over a
reasonable period. The final sample contains 45,687 first-time loan applications assigned to 254
loan examiners between May 2012 and December 2014.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample separately by loan take-up. Forty
percent of first-time applicants are immigrants, 56 percent are female, 73 percent have lived at
least one year at their current residence, and 42 percent are married. The average age of firsttime applicants in our sample is 33.9 years old, with the typical applicant having just under one
dependent. Over 91 percent of first-time applicants have a bank account and 29 percent have other
loan payments. Twenty-six percent of loans are for emergency expenses, 11 percent are for a large
one-time expense, 5 percent are to avoid an overdraft, and 23 percent are for shopping or a holiday.
For the 66 percent of first-time applicants who take out a loan, the average amount is about
£290, with an APR of 663 percent and a maturity of 5.5 months. For these first loans, 35 percent
end in default, 44 percent result in a top-up, with the remainder ending in the full repayment of
the original balance. The average long-run profit for individuals taking out a loan, defined as the
sum of all payments made by the applicant minus all disbursements from the Lender for both the
first loan and all subsequent loans, is equal to £267. By definition, applicants who do not take out
a loan have a 0 percent default rate, 0 percent top-up rate, 0 percent repayment rate, and yield
profits of exactly £0.
19

C. Construction of the Instrumental Variable
We estimate the causal impact of loan take-up for the marginal loan applicant using a leave-out
measure of loan examiner leniency as an instrumental variable for loan take-up. As discussed above,
first-time loan applicants are assigned to loan examiners of the same nationality using a blind
rotation system, eﬀectively randomizing applicants to a subset of examiners within each branch.
For example, Polish loan applicants visiting a particular branch on a particular day are randomly
assigned to one of the Polish-speaking loan examiners working in that branch on that day. In
contrast, native-born loan applicants are randomly assigned to the full set of examiners within each
branch, including the Polish-speaking loan examiners. Importantly, the assigned loan examiner is
given complete discretion to approve or reject these first-time loan applicants, leading to significant
variation in approval rates across examiners.
We measure examiner leniency using a leave-out, residualized measure that accounts for the
assignment process used by the Lender following Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad (2014) and Arnold,
Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming). To construct this residualized examiner leniency measure, we
first regress loan take-up on an exhaustive set of branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects, the
level at which loan applicants are randomly assigned to loan examiners. We then use the residuals
from this regression to calculate the leave-out mean examiner-by-branch take-up rate for each loan
applicant. We calculate our instrument across all applicants assigned to an examiner within a
branch to increase the precision of our leniency measure. In robustness checks, we present results
that use an instrument that is allowed to vary by nationality, age, and gender, and results that use
an instrument based on loan approval, not loan take-up.
Appendix Figure A3 presents the distribution of our residualized examiner leniency measure
for loan take-up separately by nationality, age, and gender. Our sample includes 254 examiners,
with the typical examiner-by-branch cell including 180 first-time loan applications. Controlling for
branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects, our examiner leniency measure ranges from -0.165 to
0.195 with a standard deviation of 0.047. In other words, moving from the least to most lenient loan
examiner increases the probability of loan take-up by 36.0 percentage points, a 55 percent change
from the mean take-up rate of 66.1 percentage points.

20

D. Instrument Validity
Existence of First Stage: The first baseline assumption needed for our IV estimator is that examiner
assignment is associated with loan take-up. To examine the first-stage relationship between examiner
leniency (Zite ) and loan take-up (T akeU pite ), we estimate the following specification for applicant
i assigned to examiner e at time t using a linear probability model:
T akeU pite = Zite + ⇡Xit + vite

(10)

where, as described previously, Zite are leave-out (jackknife) measures of examiner leniency. The
vector Xit includes branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects and the baseline controls in Table 1.
The error term vite is composed of characteristics unobserved by the econometrician but observed by
the examiner, as well as idiosyncratic variation unobserved to both the examiner and econometrician.
Robust standard errors are clustered at examiner level.
Figure 2 provides graphical representations of the first stage relationship between our residualized
measure of examiner leniency and the residualized probability of loan take-up that accounts for our
exhaustive set of branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects, overlaid over the distribution of
examiner leniency. Appendix Figure A3 presents the same results separately by nationality, age,
and gender. Figure 2 and Appendix Figure A3 are a flexible analog to Equation (10), where we plot
a local linear regression of residualized loan take-up against examiner leniency. The individual rate
of residualized loan take-up is monotonically increasing in our leniency measure for all groups. The
first stage relationship between loan take-up and examiner leniency is also linear over nearly the
entire distribution of our examiner leniency measure, consistent with the identifying assumptions
discussed in Section II.
Column 1 of Table 2 presents formal first stage results from Equation (10) for all applicants.
Columns 1-6 of Appendix Table A2 present results separately by nationality, age, and gender. Consistent with the graphical results in Figure 2 and Appendix Figure A3, we find that our residualized
examiner instrument is highly predictive of whether an individual receives a loan in both the full
sample and within each subgroup. Table 2 shows, for example, that an applicant assigned to a loan
examiner that is 10 percentage points more likely to approve a loan is 7.2 percentage points more

21

likely to receive a loan in the full sample. There are also a number of other applicant characteristics
that are highly predictive of loan take-up. For example, women are 2.5 percentage points more
likely to receive a loan compared to male applicants in the full sample, while applicants who are ten
years older are 0.9 percentage points less likely to receive a loan compared to younger applicants.
Loan take-up is also increasing with the credit score.
Exclusion Restriction: The second baseline assumption needed for our IV estimator is that examiner
assignment only impacts applicant outcomes through the probability of receiving a loan. This
assumption would be violated if examiner leniency is correlated with any unobservable determinants
of future outcomes. Column 2 of Table 2 and columns 1-6 of Appendix Table A3 present a series
of randomization checks to partially assess the validity of this exclusion restriction. Following the
first stage results, we control for branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects and cluster standard
errors at the examiner level. We find that examiners with diﬀering leniencies are assigned observably
identical applicants, both in the full sample and within each subgroup. None of the results suggest
that there is systematic non-random assignment of applications to examiners.
The exclusion restriction could also be violated if examiner assignment impacts the profitability
of a loan through channels other than loan take-up. The assumption that examiners only systematically aﬀect loan outcomes through loan take-up is fundamentally untestable, but we argue that the
exclusion restriction assumption is reasonable in our setting. Loan examiners only meet with applicants one time, and are forbidden, by law, to give advice or counsel applicants, leaving relatively
little scope through which the assigned examiner could influence outcomes other than through loan
take-up. Thus, it seems unlikely that loan examiners would significantly impact loan applicants
other than through the loan approval decision.
Monotonicity: The final baseline assumption needed for our IV estimator is that the impact of
examiner assignment on loan take-up is monotonic across loan applicants. In our setting, the
monotonicity assumption requires that applicants who receive a loan when assigned to a strict
examiner would also receive a loan when assigned to a more lenient examiner, and that applicants
not receiving a loan when assigned to a lenient examiner would also not receive a loan when assigned
to a stricter examiner. To partially test the monotonicity assumption, Appendix Figure A4 plots
examiner leniency measures that are calculated separately for each examiner by nationality, age,
22

and gender. Consistent with our monotonicity assumption, examiners exhibit similar tendencies
across observably diﬀerent types of applicants. We also find a strong first-stage relationship across
various applicant types in Appendix Table A2. None of the results suggest that the monotonicity
assumption is invalid in our setting. In robustness checks, we also relax the monotonicity assumption
by letting our leave-out measure of examiner leniency diﬀer across applicant characteristics.

IV. Results
In this section, we present our main results applying our empirical test for bias in consumer lending.
We then show the robustness of our results to alternative specifications, before comparing the results
from our empirical test with standard tests based on OLS specifications.
A. Empirical Test for Bias
We estimate the profitability of marginal loan applicants using the following two-stage least squares
specification for applicant i assigned to examiner e at time t:
Yite = ↵IIV T akeU pite + B IV T akeU pite ⇥ T argetGroupi + Xit + vite

(11)

where Yite is the long-run profitability of the loan, as measured by the diﬀerence between total loan
payments minus total loan disbursals. ↵IIV measures the profitability of the marginal loan to the
reference group. B IV is our measure of bias, or the diﬀerence in profitability between the reference
and target group applicants. The vector Xit includes branch-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects
and the baseline controls listed in Table 1. As described previously, the error term vite = Uite + "ite
consists of characteristics unobserved by the econometrician but observed by the loan examiner,
Uite , and idiosyncratic variation unobserved by both the econometrician and examiner, "ite . We
instrument for loan take-up, T akeU pite , with our measure of examiner leniency, Zite . We similarly
instrument for the interaction of loan take-up and target group status, T akeU pite ⇥ T argetGroupi ,
with the interaction of our examiner leniency measure and group status, Zite ⇥ T argetGroupi .
Robust standard errors are clustered at the examiner level.
Estimates from Equation (11) are presented in Table 3. Column 1 reports results pooling across
all applicants. Columns 2-4 report results with interactions for applicant nationality, age, and gen23

der, respectively. Column 5 reports results with all interactions simultaneously. For completeness,
Appendix Figure A3 provides a graphical representation of our reduced form results separately by
nationality, age, and gender. Following the first stage results, we plot the reduced form relationship
between our examiner leniency measure and the residualized profitability of loan take-up.
We find convincing evidence of bias against immigrants and older applicants using our IV estimator. We find that marginal loan applicants yield a profit of £331 following the initial loan decision
(column 1), 24 percent larger than the mean profit level of £267. Marginal native-born applicants
yield a profit of only £195, however, £566 less than marginal immigrant applicants (column 2),
consistent with bias against immigrant applicants. We similarly find that marginal younger applicants yield a profit of £334, £348 less than marginal older applicants (column 3), consistent with
bias against older applicants as well. These estimates imply that marginal immigrant applicants
are almost four times more profitable than marginal native-born applicants, while marginal older
applicants are more than two times as profitable as marginal younger applicants. In contrast, we
find that marginal female and male applicants yield similar profits, suggesting no bias against (or
in favor of) female applicants.
B. Robustness
Appendix Tables A4-A8 explore the sensitivity of our main results to a number of diﬀerent specifications. Appendix Table A4 presents results where we instrument for loan approval, instead of loan
take-up as in our preferred specification. Appendix Table A5 presents results where we use a net
present value measure of long-run profits for a variety of diﬀerent discount rates. Appendix Table
A6 presents re-weighted estimates with the weights chosen to match the distribution of observable
characteristics for target group loan applicants to explore whether diﬀerences in characteristics such
as credit history or earnings can explain our results.8 Appendix Table A7 presents results from an
MTE estimator that puts equal weight on each examiner in our sample, instead of the IV weights as

8

Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming) show that it is possible to test for bias holding fixed other group
diﬀerences using a re-weighting procedure that weights the distribution of observables of the target group to match
observables of the reference group in the spirit of DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) and Angrist, and FernándezVal (2013). This narrower test for bias relies on the assumption that examiner preferences vary only by observable
characteristics. See Appendix Table A9 for the complier characteristics used to construct the weights and Arnold,
Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming) for additional details.

24

in our preferred specification.9 Finally, Appendix Table A8 presents estimates where the instrument
is calculated separately for each subgroup in the data, relaxing the monotonicity assumption. Results are generally similar to our preferred specification across all alternative specifications, although
some of our estimates lose statistical significance. In particular, our MTE estimates in Appendix
Table A7 are particularly noisy due to the increased weight put on a handful of imprecise examinerlevel estimates compared to our preferred specification. There is also considerably more noise when
using smaller cells to calculate the leave-out examiner leniency measure in Appendix Table A8. The
estimates are not economically or statistically diﬀerent across specifications, however, and none of
the results suggest that our preferred estimates are invalid.10
C. Comparison to OLS Estimates
Appendix Table A11 replicates the outcome tests from the prior literature (e.g., Han 2004) that
rely on standard OLS estimates of Equation (11). In contrast to our IV test for bias, standard
OLS estimates suggest much lower levels of bias against immigrant and older applicants. We find,
for example, that the gap between the average native-born and immigrant applicant is only £102
(column 2), 82 percent lower than our IV estimate for marginal applicants in Table 3. The gap
between the average younger and older applicant is also only £89 (column 3), 74 percent lower
than our IV estimate for marginal applicants. Standard OLS estimates also suggest, incorrectly,
that there is bias against female applicants (column 4). Taken together, these results highlight the
9
While the MTE estimator has the advantage of allowing the researcher to choose any weighting scheme across
examiners, it comes at the cost of additional functional form assumptions to interpolate estimates between observed
values of the instrument. Following Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming), we estimate these MTE results using a
two-step procedure. In the first step, we estimate the entire distribution of MTEs using the derivative of residualized
profits with respect to variation in the propensity score provided by our instrument. To do this, we regress the
residualized profit variable on the residualized examiner leniency measure to calculate the group-specific propensity
score. We then compute the numerical derivative of a local quadratic estimator to estimate group-specific MTEs
(see Appendix Figure A5). In the second step, we use the group-specific MTEs to calculate the level of bias for each
individual examiner, and the simple average of these examiner-specific estimates. We calculate standard errors by
bootstrapping this two-step procedure at the examiner level.
10
Our test for bias assumes that there are no diﬀerences in the true cost of lending to diﬀerent groups. This
assumption would be violated if, for example, there are diﬀerences in the systematic risk of lending to diﬀerent
groups. We explore this concern in Appendix Table A10, where we calculate long-run profits using a 10 percent
discount rate for applicants from the reference group and a variety of higher discount rates for applicants from the
target group. Our test is motivated by a standard CAPM model, where the higher discount rate for target group
applicants captures the additional risk of lending to these applicants. For example, the largest discount rate diﬀerence
we examine – 50 percent – implies that lending to target group applicants is more than seven times riskier than lending
to reference group applicants at a market-risk premium of 5 percent. We continue to find evidence of bias against
immigrants and older applicants in Appendix Table A10 even when we assume that these applicants have a 50 percent
higher discount rate, however, indicating that our results are unlikely to be driven by diﬀerences in the systematic
risk of lending to diﬀerent groups.

25

importance of accounting for both infra-marginality and omitted variables when testing for bias in
consumer lending.

V. Potential Mechanisms
In this section, we attempt to diﬀerentiate between three alternative forms of bias that could explain
our findings: (1) prejudice, (2) inaccurate stereotypes, and (3) misaligned examiner incentives.
A. Prejudice
The first potential explanation for our results is that loan examiners either knowingly or unknowingly
discriminate against immigrant and older applicants at the margin. Loan examiners could, for
example, harbor explicit biases against immigrant and older applicants that leads them to exaggerate
the cost of lending to these individuals (e.g., Becker 1957, 1993). Loan examiners could also harbor
implicit biases against immigrant and older applicants, leading to biased lending decisions despite
the lack of any explicit prejudice (e.g., Greenwald et al. 2009). However, immigrant applicants are
typically matched to loan examiners from the same ethnic background and all loan examiners tend
to be older themselves, institutional features that are inconsistent with most models of ethnic or
age-related prejudice. We also find no bias against female applicants even among male examiners,
another finding that is inconsistent with the simplest models of prejudice, although we note that
these results are very imprecise (see Appendix Table A12).11 These results suggest that either
prejudice is not driving our results or that loan examiners are prejudiced against immigrant and
older applicants despite sharing those same characteristics.
B. Inaccurate Stereotypes
A second potential explanation for our results is that loan examiners are making biased prediction
errors, potentially due to inaccurate stereotypes against immigrant and older applicants. Bordalo
et al. (2016) show, for example, that representativeness heuristics—probability judgments based
on the most distinctive diﬀerences between groups—can exaggerate perceived diﬀerences between
11

We cannot estimate results separately by examiner ethnicity, as immigrant applicants are typically matched to
loan examiners from a similar ethnic background. We also cannot estimate results separately by examiner age, as
our data do not include this variable.

26

groups. In our setting, these kinds of group-based heuristics or inaccurate stereotypes could lead
loan examiners to systematically underestimate the potential profitability of lending to immigrant
and older applicants relative to native-born and younger applicants at the margin.
Following Arnold, Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming), we first explore whether our data are consistent with the formation of negative stereotypes that could lead to these kinds of biased prediction
errors. Extending Bordalo et al. (2016) to our setting, negative stereotypes against immigrant and
older loan applicants should only be present if these applicants are over-represented in the left
tail of the predicted profit distribution compared to native-born and younger loan applicants. Appendix Figure A6 presents the distribution of the predicted long-run profits by nationality, age,
and gender, where the predicted profits are calculated using the ML algorithm described below
and the full set of baseline applicant characteristics in our data. We also present the likelihood ratios, E(x|target)/E(x|ref erence), throughout the risk distribution to illustrate the most distinctive
diﬀerences between each group. Results for each individual characteristic in our predicted risk measure are also presented in Appendix Table A9. In stark contrast to the predictions of the Bordalo
et al. (2016) model, we find that both immigrant and older loan applicants are significantly overrepresented in the right tail of the predicted profit distribution. For example, immigrant applicants
are 2.1 times more likely than native-born applicants to be represented among the top 25 percent of
the predicted profit distribution, while older loan applicants are 2.6 times more likely than younger
applicants to be represented among the top 25 percent.
We can also test for biased prediction errors by examining situations where prediction errors of
any kind are more likely to occur. One such test for biased prediction errors uses a comparison of
experienced and inexperienced loan examiners, as examiners may be less likely to rely on inaccurate
group stereotypes as they acquire greater on-the-job experience, at least in settings with limited
information and contact. To test this idea, Appendix Table A13 presents subsample results for
more and less experienced examiners, where we measure experience using an indicator for being
employed by the Lender when our sample period begins. There are no systematic patterns by
examiner experience and, if anything, the estimates suggest more bias against immigrants among
more experienced loan examiners. Taken together with Appendix Figure A6, these results suggest
that inaccurate stereotypes are also unlikely to be driving our results.

27

C. Misaligned Examiner Incentives
In this paper, we propose a new explanation for bias in consumer lending: the misalignment of firm
and examiner incentives. The model of bias based on misaligned examiner incentives developed in
Section II has two testable implications. The first is that we should find no bias when implementing
the outcome test using default risk, the short-run outcome used to evaluate examiners in our setting.
SR for all applicants, including for immigrants and older applicants.
That is, we should find ↵TSR = ↵R

The second testable implication of our model is that we should only observe bias for groups where the
SR ↵ |V ]
short-run and long-run outcomes diverge. That is, we should find E[↵TSR ↵T |Vi ] > E[↵R
i
R

for immigrant and older applicants, but not female applicants. We test both implications below,
before turning to a more general investigation of the examiners’ decision-making process.
To test whether there is bias when implementing the outcome test using first-loan default, we
estimate the default risk of marginal loan applicants using our IV estimator in Table 4. Consistent
with the misalignment of examiner incentives, there are no statistically significant diﬀerences in the
first-loan default risk of marginal loan applicants by nationality, age, or gender. Marginal first-loan
loan applicants, in general, default on 44.7 percent of loans, 28 percent more than the average default
rate of 35.0 percent. Marginal immigrant applicants, however, are only 2.5 percentage points less
likely to default on the first loan than marginal native-born applicants. Marginal older applicants
are 14.5 percentage points less likely to default on the first loan than marginal younger applicants,
and marginal female applicants are 8.5 percentage points less likely to default than marginal male
applicants, with none of these diﬀerences being statistically significant.
To test whether immigrant and older applicants are both high-profit and high-default, we plot the
distributions of predicted long-run profits and predicted short-run default by nationality, age, and
gender in Figure 3. We calculate predicted profits and predicted default risk using the ML algorithm
described below. Consistent with the misalignment of examiner incentives, both immigrant and older
applicants are visually more likely to default for a given level of long-run profits compared to nativeborn and younger applicants. In contrast, female and male applicants are equally as likely to default
for a given level of long-run profits. To provide a more formal test of this hypothesis, Appendix
Table A14 presents OLS results regressing predicted long-run profits on applicant characteristics and
a quadratic in predicted short-run default. Controlling for predicted default, immigrant applicants

28

have predicted profits that are £36 larger than native applicants (column 1), while older applicants
have predicted profits that are £31 larger than younger applicants. In contrast, male and female
applicants have statistically identical predicted profits for a given level of predicted default.
We conclude this section with a more general investigation of the examiners’ decision-making
process. The model of bias based on misaligned examiner incentives suggests that unbiased examiners rank applicants using long-run profits, ↵i . In contrast, biased examiners rank applicants
using short-run default, ↵iSR . We can therefore test for the misalignment of examiner incentives by
comparing examiners’ decisions with two diﬀerent data-based decision rules, one based on short-run
default and the other based on long-run profits.
To implement this final test for misaligned examiner incentives, we first estimate predicted
short- and long-run outcomes using a ML algorithm that eﬃciently uses all observable applicant
characteristics. In short, we use a randomly-selected subset of the data to train the model using all
individuals who receive a loan. In training the model, we must choose the shrinkage, the number
of trees, and the depth of each tree. Following common practice (e.g., Kleinberg et al. 2018), we
choose the smallest shrinkage parameter (i.e., 0.005) that allows the training process to run in a
reasonable time frame. We use a five-fold cross-validation on the training sample in order to choose
the optimal number of trees for the predictions. The interaction depth is set to four, which allows
each tree to use at most four variables. Using the optimal number of trees from the cross-validation
step, predicted outcomes are then created for the full sample.12,13
One important challenge is that we only observe outcomes for applicants who receive a loan, not
those who do not. This missing data problem makes it hard to evaluate counterfactual decision rules
based on algorithmic predictions or to identify the implicit decision-rule used by loan examiners. To
overcome this missing data problem, we follow Kleinberg et al. (2018) and start with the set of loan
applicants receiving a loan from the most lenient examiners. From this set of applicants, we then
12

Appendix Table A15 presents the correlates of our predicted profitability measure. Predicted profitability is
increasing in the credit score used by the lender. Predicted profitability is also higher for female applicants, older
applicants, and applicants with more dependents.
13
One potential concern is that our measures of predicted profitability may be biased if loan examiners base their
decisions on variables that are not observed by the econometrician (e.g., demeanor during the loan application).
Following Kleinberg et al. (2018), we test for the importance of unobservables in loan decisions by splitting our
sample into a training set to generate the profitability predictions and a test set to test those predictions. We find
that our measure of predicted profitability from the training set is a strong predictor of true profitability in the test
set, indicating that our measure of predicted profitability is not systematically biased by unobservables (see Appendix
Figure A7).

29

choose additional applicants to hypothetically reject according to the predicted outcomes calculated
using our ML algorithm. For each additional hypothetical rejection, this allows us to calculate the
hypothetical change in profitability or default risk for the now smaller set of applicants that would
have received a loan. Importantly, the hypothetical change in profitability and default risk can be
compared to the outcomes produced by the stricter examiners because applicant characteristics are,
on average, similar across examiners due to the quasi-random assignment of applicants to examiners.
Figure 4 presents these results for both long-run profits and short-run default. The solid black
curve calculates the change in profitability or default that would have resulted if additional applicants had been rejected in order of the algorithm’s predicted profitability and default rates. Each of
the points denotes the diﬀerent examiner leniency quintiles. We also plot the change in profitability
and default rates that would have resulted if we used a decision-rule based on a ML algorithm that
does not include nationality, age, and gender; a decision-rule based on the baseline credit scores used
to screen loan applicants; and a decision-rule based on a random number generator. We find that the
decisions made by loan examiners are strikingly consistent with a data-based decision rule minimizing short-run default, but inconsistent with a decision rule maximizing long-run profits. Long-run
profits actually decrease as we move from the most lenient to most strict examiners, worse than
a decision-rule based on a random number generator and far worse than a decision rule based on
our ML algorithm.14 In stark contrast, loan examiners are nearly as eﬀective as our ML algorithm
in decreasing default rates. The second quintile of examiners, for example, reduce the default rate
by 2.3 percentage points relative to the most lenient quintile examiners by increasing the rejection
rate by 8.5 percentage points. Our ML algorithm using all characteristics could have decreased the
default rate by 4.8 percentage points with the same 8.5 percentage point increase in the rejection
rate, or just 2.5 percentage points better than the loan examiners. The ML algorithm using only
allowable characteristics could have similarly decreased the default rate by 4.1 percentage points,
or 1.8 percentage points more than the loan examiners.15
14
For example, the second quintile of examiners reduce profitability by £29 per applicant relative to the most
lenient quintile examiners by increasing the rejection rate by 8.5 percentage points. In contrast, the ML algorithm
using all characteristics could have increased profits by £38 per applicant with the same 8.5 percentage point increase
in the rejection rate. The ML algorithm using only allowable characteristics could have increased profits by £33 per
applicant, just £6 less than the full algorithm, while the credit score could have only increased profits by £9 per
applicant.
15
In contrast, the credit score used by the Lender could have decreased the default rate by only 0.5 percentage
points, 1.8 percentage points less than the loan examiners and only 0.6 percentage points more than a random
decision rule. The poor performance of the credit score variable is likely driven by the fact that the credit score

30

Taken together, our results suggest that loan examiners make biased lending decisions due to the
misalignment of firm and examiner incentives. In contrast, we find limited evidence in support of the
hypothesis that loan examiners are prejudiced or hold inaccurate negative stereotypes. These results
are particularly important given the extensive prior evidence on incentive problems in credit markets
(e.g., Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini 2010, Keys et al. 2010, Berg, Puri, and Rocholl 2013,
Agarwal, and Ben-David Forthcoming). Our results suggest that these kinds of poorly designed
incentives can lead to biased and ineﬃcient lending decisions.

VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we test for bias in consumer lending using the quasi-random assignment of loan
examiners to identify the profitability of marginal loan applicants. We find evidence that there
is substantial bias against immigrant and older loan applicants, ruling out statistical discrimination and omitted variable bias as the sole explanations for the disparities in credit availability for
these groups. Our estimates are nearly identical if we account for observable diﬀerences by group,
indicating that our results cannot be explained by diﬀerences in credit history or earnings.
We find several pieces of evidence consistent with our results being driven by the misalignment
of firm and examiner incentives, as opposed to prejudice or inaccurate group stereotypes. First,
immigrant applicants are typically matched to loan examiners from a similar ethnic background
and loan examiners for all applicants tend to be older themselves, institutional features that are
inconsistent with most models of ethnic or age-related prejudice. Second, we find that immigrant
and older applicants are actually over-represented in the right tail of the payoﬀ distribution, exactly
the opposite pattern we would expect if inaccurate stereotypes were driving our results. Third,
marginally approved immigrant and older loan applicants are just as likely to default as marginally
approved native-born and younger loan applicants. Fourth, immigrant and older applicants are
both more likely to default and more likely to yield higher than usual profits. Finally, we find
that the decisions made by loan examiners are strikingly consistent with a data-based decision rule
minimizing short-run default, but inconsistent with a decision rule maximizing long-run profits.
The findings from this paper have a number of important implications. If the misalignment of
variable purchased by the Lender is calibrated to entire credit market, not the subprime market that the Lender
operates in.

31

firm and lender incentives is an important driver of bias in consumer lending decisions, then a databased decision rule based on long-run profits could simultaneously increase profits and eliminate
bias. In our setting, for example, the Lender would earn approximately £157 more in profit per
applicant if marginal lending decisions were made using the machine learning algorithm rather than
loan examiners, a 58 percent increase from the mean. Including all applicants, not just those at
the margin of loan take-up, the Lender would earn over £53 more per applicant if lending decisions
were made using the machine learning algorithm, a 30 percent increase from the mean.16
We can also test whether a data-based decision rule is biased by comparing the observed and
predicted profitability of applicants from diﬀerent groups.17 Following the logic of our outcome test
developed above, the observed profitability at each level of predicted profitability will be identical
across groups if our algorithm is unbiased. In contrast, if our algorithm is biased against, say, nonnative applicants, the observed profitability of non-natives at a given level of predicted profitability
will be higher than the observed profitability of natives. There is no evidence of bias by nationality,
age, or gender (see Appendix Figure A8).
There are two important caveats to our analysis. First, bias in other consumer lending decisions
such as mortgage or automobile loans may be very diﬀerent than the setting examined here. Second,
the welfare eﬀects of credit, particularly high-cost credit, are largely unknown (e.g., Agarwal, Skiba,
and Tobacman 2009, Melzer 2011, Morgan, Strain, and Seblani 2012, Morse 2011, Gathergood,
Guttman-Kenney, and Hunt 2014, Liberman, Paravisini, and Pathania 2016, Zaki 2016). Given
these concerns, we are unable to estimate the welfare eﬀects of bias in consumer lending decisions
using our data and research design. Developing a framework to assess the precise welfare eﬀects of
bias in consumer credit decisions is an important area of future work.
16

Following Kleinberg et al. (2018), we compute the gains from the machine learning algorithm relative to the
average examiner in our test sample using a three step process. First, we impute long-run profits for applicants
who never took up a loan under the assumption that our algorithm perfectly predicts true long-run profits and that
all selection is on observable characteristics. Second, we re-rank all applicants, both rejected and approved, and
select a hypothetical group to approve using predicted long-run profits. Finally, we compare the predicted long-run
profitability of applicants for both the algorithm and average examiner, both at the margin of loan approval and
aggregating over all loan applicants.
17
There is an emerging literature investigating the eﬀects of algorithmic lending on racial disparities in U.S. credit
markets. Fuster et al. (2017), for example, show that improvements in algorithmic lending may increase racial
disparities in the U.S. mortgage market, even when these improvements increase the overall amount of lending. In
contrast, Bartlett et al. (2018) show that there are significantly smaller racial disparities among FinTech mortgage
lenders, who are more likely to rely on algorithmic lending rules, compared to traditional mortgage lenders, who
are more likely to rely on loan examiners. These articles do not test whether algorithmic lending rules are biased,
however.

32

References
Agarwal, Sumit, and Itzhak Ben-David. Forthcoming. “Loan Prospecting and the Loss of Soft
Information.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Agarwal, Sumit, Paige Marta Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2009. “Payday Loans and
Credit Cards: New Liquidity and Credit Scoring Puzzles?”

American Economic Review,

99(2): 412–417.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Strobel.
2015. “Regulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 130(1): 111–164.
Aigner, Dennis J., and Glen G. Cain. 1977. “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
Markets.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(2): 175–187.
Alesina, Alberto F., Francesca Lotti, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli. 2013. “Do Women Pay
More for Credit? Evidence from Italy.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(1): 45–
66.
Angrist, Joshua, and Ivan Fernández-Val. 2013. “ExtrapoLATE-ing: External Validity and
Overidentification in the LATE Framework.” Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Volume
3, Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, ed. D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel Vol. 51,
401–434. Cambridge University Press.
Arnold, David, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S. Yang. Forthcoming. “Racial Bias in Bail Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1973. “The Theory of Discrimination.” Discrimination in Labor Markets, ed.
Orley Ashenfelter, and Albert Rees, 3–33. Princeton University Press.
Ayres, Ian. 2002. “Outcome Tests of Racial Disparities in Police Practices.” Justice Research and
Policy, 4(1-2): 131–142.
Bartlett, Richard, Adair Morse, Richard Stanton, and Nany Wallace. 2018. “Consumer
Lending Discrimination in the FinTech Era.” Unpublished Working Paper.
33

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. 2017. “What Drives Racial and
Ethnic Diﬀerences in High-Cost Mortgages? The Role of High-Risk Lenders.” The Review of
Financial Studies, 31(1): 175–205.
Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.
Becker, Gary S. 1993. “Nobel Lecture: The Economic Way of Looking at Behavior.” Journal of
Political Economy, 101(3): 385–409.
Bellucci, Andrea, Alexander Borisov, and Alberto Zazzaro. 2010. “Does Gender Matter
in Bank-Firm Relationships? Evidence from Small Business Lending.” Journal of Banking &
Finance, 34(12): 2968–2984.
Berg, Tobias, Manju Puri, and Jorg Rocholl. 2013. “Loan Oﬃcer Incentives and the Limits
of Hard Information.” NBER Working Paper No. 19051.
Berkovec, James A., Glenn B. Canner, Stuart A. Gabriel, and Timothy H. Hannan.
1994. “Race, Redlining, and Residential Mortgage Loan Performance.” The Journal of Real Estate
Finance and Economics, 9(3): 263–294.
Berkovec, James A., Glenn B. Canner, Stuart A. Gabriel, and Timothy H. Hannan.
1998. “Discrimination, Competition, and Loan Performance in FHA Mortgage Lending.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 80(2): 241–250.
Blanchflower, David G., Phillip B. Levine, and David J. Zimmerman. 2003. “Discrimination in the Small-Business Credit Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4): 930–943.
Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coﬀman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2016. “Stereotypes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4): 1753–1794.
Buchak, Greg, and Adam Jørring. 2016. “Does Competition Reduce Racial Discrimination in
Lending?” Unpublished Working Paper.
Cavalluzzo, Ken S., and Linda C. Cavalluzzo. 1998. “Market Structure and Discrimination:
The Case of Small Businesses.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 30(4): 771–792.

34

Cavalluzzo, Ken S., Linda C. Cavalluzzo, and John D. Wolken. 2002. “Competition, Small
Business Financing, and Discrimination: Evidence from a New Survey.” The Journal of Business,
75(4): 641–679.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Erik Hurst. 2002. “The Transition to Home Ownership and the
Black-White Wealth Gap.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2): 281–297.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Melvin Stephens. 2008. “Rates for Vehicle Loans:
Race and Loan Source.” American Economic Review, 98(2): 315–320.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan. 2011. “Credit Card Redlining.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(2): 700–713.
Cornelissen, Thomas, Christian Dustmann, Anna Raute, and Uta Schönberg. 2016.
“From LATE to MTE: Alternative Methods for the Evaluation of Policy Interventions.” Labour
Economics, 41: 47–60.
Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostøl, and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “Family Welfare
Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1711–1752.
Deku, Solomon Y., Alper Kara, and Philip Molyneux. 2016. “Access to Consumer Credit in
the UK.” The European Journal of Finance, 22(10): 941–964.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica,
64(5): 1001–1044.
Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2015. “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Eﬀects
of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection.” American Economic Review, 105(3): 1272–1311.
Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Crystal S. Yang. 2017. “Consumer Bankruptcy
and Financial Health.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5): 853–869.
Fuster, Andreas, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Tarun Ramadorai, and Ansgar Walther.
2017. “Predictably Unequal? The Eﬀects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets.” Unpublished
Working Paper.
35

Gathergood, John, Ben Guttman-Kenney, and Stefan Hunt. 2014. “How Do Payday Loans
Aﬀect Consumers?” Unpublished Working Paper.
Greenwald, Anthony G., T. Andrew Poehlman, Eric Luis Uhlmann, and Mahzarin R.
Banaji. 2009. “Understanding and Using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-Analysis of
Predictive Validity.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1): 17–41.
Hanson, Andrew, Zackary Hawley, Hal Martin, and Bo Liu. 2016. “Discrimination in
Mortgage Lending: Evidence from a Correspondence Experiment.” Journal of Urban Economics,
92: 48–65.
Han, Song. 2004. “Discrimination in Lending: Theory and Evidence.” The Journal of Real Estate
Finance and Economics, 29(1): 5–46.
Heider, Florian, and Roman Inderst. 2012. “Loan Prospecting.” The Review of Financial
Studies, 25(8): 2381–2415.
Hertzberg, Andrew, Jose Maria Liberti, and Daniel Paravisini. 2010. “Information and
Inventives Inside the Firm: Evidence from Loan Oﬃcer Rotation.” Journal of Finance, 65(3): 795–
828.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
Average Treatment Eﬀects.” Econometrica, 62(2): 467–475.
Keys, Benjamin J, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(1): 307–362.
Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2018. “Human Decisions and Machine Predictions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
133(1): 237–293.
Liberman, Andres, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. 2016. “High-Cost Debt and
Borrower Reputation: Evidence from the U.K.” Unpublished Working Paper.
Marx, Philip. 2017. “An Absolute Test of Racial Prejudice.” Unpublished Working Paper.
36

Melzer, Brian T. 2011. “The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday Lending
Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 517–555.
Morgan, Donald P., Michael R. Strain, and Ihab Seblani. 2012. “How Payday Credit Access
Aﬀects Overdrafts and Other Outcomes.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(2-3): 519–
531.
Morse, Adair. 2011. “Payday Lenders: Heroes or Villains?” Journal of Financial Economics,
102(1): 28–44.
Peterson, Richard L. 1981. “An Investigation of Sex Discrimination in Commercial Banks’ Direct
Consumer Lending.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2): 547–561.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism.” American Economic
Review, 62(4): 659–661.
Pope, Devin G., and Justin R. Sydnor. 2011. “What’s in a picture? Evidence of Discrimination
from Prosper.com.” Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 53–92.
Ross, Stephen L., Margery Austin Turner, Erin Godfrey, and Robert R. Smith. 2008.
“Mortgage Lending in Chicago and Los Angeles: A Paired Testing Study of the Pre-Application
Process.” Journal of Urban Economics, 63(3): 902–919.
Stegman, Michael A. 2007. “Payday Lending.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1): 169–190.
Van Order, Robert, Vassilis Lekkas, and John M. Quigley. 1993. “Loan Loss Severity and
Optimal Mortgage Default.” Real Estate Economics, 21(4): 353–371.
Zaki, Mary. 2016. “Access to Short-Term Credit and Consumption Smoothing Within the Paycycle.” Unpublished Working Paper.

37

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Panel A: Applicant Characteristics
Immigrant
Age
Female
One-Plus Years at Residence
Married
Number of Dependents
Credit Score
Has Bank Account
Has Other Loan Payments
Loan Amount Requested (£)
Loan for Emergency
Loan for Large One-Time Expense
Loan for Overdraft Avoidance
Loan for Shopping or Holiday

All
Loans
(1)
0.402
33.880
0.559
0.731
0.415
0.973
538.166
0.912
0.288
409.270
0.266
0.106
0.052
0.230

Loan
Taken-Up
(2)
0.409
33.631
0.570
0.772
0.373
1.054
545.893
0.938
0.349
396.519
0.267
0.109
0.053
0.233

Loan Not
Taken-Up
(3)
0.388
34.365
0.537
0.652
0.496
0.815
522.431
0.862
0.168
434.117
0.265
0.100
0.052
0.226

—
—
—

663.139
5.498
289.897

—
—
—

0.661
0.752
0.231
0.289
176.465
45687

1.000
1.000
0.350
0.438
267.014
30192

0.000
0.269
0.000
0.000
0.000
15495

Panel B: Loan Characteristics
Loan APR (%)
Loan Duration (Months)
Loan Amount Net of Fees (£)
Panel C: Loan Outcomes
Loan Take-up
Loan Approved
Loan Default
Loan Top-Up
Total Profits (£)
Observations

Note: This table reports descriptive statistics. The sample consists of first-time loan applicants assigned to a loan
examiner between 2012 and 2014. We drop online and phone applicants, applicants younger than 18 or older than
75 years old, applicants assigned to examiners with fewer than 50 observations, and applicants that are unique to
a store-by-month-by-nationality cell. Loan uses are self-reported at the time of application. Total profits are the
sum of all payments made from the applicant to the Lender over the course of their entire relationship minus all
disbursements from the Lender to the applicant. Loan default, top-up, and profits are all equal to zero for applicants
not taking out a loan. See the data appendix for additional details on the variable construction.

38

Table 2: First Stage and Balance Tests

Examiner Leniency
Age
Female
One-Plus Years at Residence
Married
Number of Dependents
Credit Score (/1000)
Has Bank Account
Has Other Loan Payments
Loan Amount Requested (£/1000)
Loan for Emergency
Loan for Large One-Time Expense
Loan for Overdraft Avoidance
Loan for Shopping or Holiday
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
p-value on Joint F-test
Clusters

Loan
Take-Up
(1)
0.71923⇤⇤⇤
(0.07353)
0.00089⇤⇤⇤
(0.00024)
0.02448⇤⇤⇤
(0.00486)
0.10167⇤⇤⇤
(0.00865)
0.08323⇤⇤⇤
(0.00692)
0.03306⇤⇤⇤
(0.00255)
1.54585⇤⇤⇤
(0.05029)
0.13765⇤⇤⇤
(0.01201)
0.21579⇤⇤⇤
(0.00870)
0.09883⇤⇤⇤
(0.00624)
0.00366
(0.00553)
0.02028⇤⇤
(0.00871)
0.00130
(0.00865)
0.00671
(0.00571)
0.661
45687
[0.000]
254

Examiner
Leniency
(2)

0.00001
(0.00002)
0.00021
(0.00063)
0.00068
(0.00110)
0.00002
(0.00106)
0.00006
(0.00021)
0.00762⇤
(0.00420)
0.00372⇤⇤
(0.00160)
0.00028
(0.00087)
0.00045
(0.00071)
0.00125
(0.00340)
0.00092
(0.00387)
0.00133
(0.00380)
0.00108
(0.00337)
0.000
45687
[0.420]
254

Note: This table reports first stage results and balance tests. The regressions are estimated on the sample described
in the notes to Table 1. Examiner leniency is estimated using data from other loan applicants assigned to an examiner
following the procedure described in Section III. Column 1 reports estimates from an OLS regression of loan take-up
on the variables listed. Column 2 reports estimates from an OLS regression of examiner leniency on the variables
listed. The p-value reported at the bottom of the columns is for an F-test of the joint significance of the variables
listed in the rows. All specifications control for store-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered
at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

39

Table 3: Loan Take-Up and Long-Run Profits

Loan Take-Up

(1)
331.100⇤⇤⇤
(60.459)

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

(2)
195.215⇤⇤⇤
(63.564)
566.015⇤⇤⇤
(172.909)

Take-Up x Older Applicant

2SLS Estimates
(3)
(4)
334.254⇤⇤⇤ 168.781⇤
(97.115)
(96.553)
347.803⇤⇤
(161.218)

Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

5.399
(125.283)
176.533
45687
254

(5)
45.605
(143.324)
603.237⇤⇤⇤
(187.343)
348.719⇤⇤
(160.881)
118.381
(130.406)
176.533
45687
254

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending decisions using long-run profits as an outcome. Each
column reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of loan take-up on long-run profits using the sample
described in the notes to Table 1. We instrument for loan take-up using the leave-out examiner leniency measure
constructed using the procedure described in Section III, and for the interaction of loan take-up and applicant
characteristics using the interaction of leave-out leniency and the same characteristic. All specifications control for
store-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects and the baseline characteristics listed in Panel A of Table 1. Standard
errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

40

Table 4: IV Estimates for Short-Run Default

Loan Take-Up

(1)
0.447⇤⇤⇤
(0.050)

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant
Take-Up x Older Applicant
Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

0.231
45687
254

2SLS Estimates
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.453⇤⇤⇤
0.497⇤⇤⇤
0.515⇤⇤⇤
(0.057)
(0.085)
(0.071)
0.025
(0.114)
0.145
(0.103)
0.085
(0.115)
0.231
0.231
0.231
45687
45687
45687
254
254
254

(5)
0.588⇤⇤⇤
(0.111)
0.058
(0.123)
0.149
(0.102)
0.099
(0.120)
0.231
45687
254

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending using short-run default as an outcome. Each
column reports two-stage least squares estimates using the sample described in the notes to Table 1. We instrument
for loan take-up using the leave-out examiner leniency measure constructed using the procedure described in Section
III, and for the interaction of loan take-up and applicant characteristics using the interaction of leave-out leniency
and the same characteristic. All specifications control for store-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects and the baseline
characteristics listed in Panel A of Table 1. Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

41

Figure 1: Illustration of Estimation Problem
(a) Case 1: OLS with Unbiased Examiner

(b) Case 2: OLS with Biased Examiner

(c) Case 3: IV with Unbiased Examiners

(d) Case 4: IV with Biased Examiners

Note: These figures report hypothetical risk distributions for reference and target group applicants. Panel A illustrates
the OLS estimator for an unbiased examiner who chooses the same threshold for take-up for both reference and target
applicants. Panel B illustrates the OLS estimator for a biased examiner who chooses a higher threshold for loan takeup for target applicants than reference applicants. Panel C illustrates the IV estimator for two unbiased examiners.
Panel D illustrates the IV estimator with two biased examiners. See the text for additional details.

42

Figure 2: First Stage and Reduced Form Results
(a) First Stage for All Applicants

(b) Reduced Form for All Applicants

Note: These figures report the first stage and reduced form relationships between applicant outcomes and examiner
leniency. The regressions are estimated on the sample described in the notes to Table 1. Examiner leniency is
estimated using data from other applicants assigned to a loan examiner following the procedure described in Section
III. In the first stage regression, the solid line represents a local linear regression of loan take-up on examiner
leniency. In the reduced form regression, the solid line represents a local linear regression of long-run profits on
examiner leniency. Loan take-up and long-run profits are residualized using store-by-month-by-nationality fixed
eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the examiner level.

43

Figure 3: Joint Distributions of Machine Learning Predictions
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the relationship between predicted long-run profits and predicted short-run default separately by group. Predicted long-run profits and predicted short-run default are obtained using the machine learning
algorithm described in Section V. See the text for additional details.

44

Figure 4: Comparing Additional Profits and Defaults by Ranking Method
(a) Long-Run Profits

(b) Short-Run Default

Note: These figures examine the performance of diﬀerent data-based decision rules versus the actual decisions made
by stricter loan examiners. The rightmost point in the graph represents the loan outcomes and loan take-up rate
of the most lenient bin of examiners. The additional three points on the graph show loan outcomes and take-up
rates for the actual decisions made by the second through fourth most lenient bins of examiners. Each line shows
the loan outcome and take-up trade-oﬀ that comes from denying additional applicants within the most lenient bin of
examiners’ approval set using diﬀerent data-based decision rules. The solid black line shows the trade-oﬀ when using
the machine learning algorithm described in Section V trained using all available variables; the dashed black line for
the same machine learning algorithm omitting nationality, gender, and age; the solid gray line for the credit score
used to screen applicants; and the dashed gray line for randomly rejecting applicants. Panel A presents these results
for long-run profits. Panel B presents these results for short-run default. See the text for additional details.

45

Applicant Age
Old
Young
IV Weights IV Weights
x 100
x 100
(3)
(4)
0.042
0.027
(0.036)
(0.036)
0.001
0.002
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.090
0.013
(0.189)
(0.191)
0.012
0.016
(0.021)
(0.022)
0.025
0.025
(0.021)
(0.021)
0.394
0.394
254
254

Applicant Gender
Female
Male
IV Weights IV Weights
x 100
x 100
(5)
(6)
0.025
0.032
(0.095)
(0.099)
0.006⇤
0.008⇤
(0.004)
(0.005)
0.059
0.053
(0.185)
(0.193)
0.013
0.016
(0.021)
(0.022)
0.025
0.025
(0.021)
(0.022)
0.394
0.394
254
254

Note: This table reports the relationship between instrumental variable weights assigned to a specific examiner cell and observables of the
examiner cell by group. To ease readability, the weights are multiplied by 100. To compute the IV weights assigned to an examiner cell,
we compute continuous IV weights following the procedure described in Cornelissen et al. (2016). We then discretize these continuous
weights by assigning each examiner the weight associated with his or her average leniency. Finally, we divide the discretized examiner
weights by the sum total to ensure the discretized weights sum to one. Examiner discrimination is calculated using the MTE procedure
described in the text. Examiner case load is measured over the entire sample period. Examiner experience is an indicator for being
employed by the Lender at the start of the sample period. See the data appendix for additional information on the construction of the
variables. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations

Male Examiner

Experienced Examiner

Examiner Average Leniency

Examiner Case Load (100s)

Examiner Discrimination (1000s)

Applicant Nationality
Immigrant Native-Born
IV Weights IV Weights
x 100
x 100
(1)
(2)
0.022
0.005
(0.043)
(0.039)
0.007
0.001
(0.005)
(0.003)
0.076
0.137
(0.206)
(0.190)
0.014
0.015
(0.023)
(0.021)
0.026
0.024
(0.023)
(0.021)
0.394
0.394
254
254

Appendix Table A1: Correlation Between IV Weights and Examiner Observables

Appendix A: Additional Results

46

Appendix Table A2: First Stage Results by Applicant Characteristics

Loan Take-Up
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

Applicant Nationality
Immigrant Native-Born
(1)
(2)
0.552⇤⇤⇤
0.792⇤⇤⇤
(0.095)
(0.082)
0.672
0.653
18234
27329
254
254

Applicant Age
Old
Young
(3)
(4)
0.719⇤⇤⇤ 0.716⇤⇤⇤
(0.080)
(0.090)
0.647
0.672
20461
24038
254
254

Applicant Gender
Female
Male
(5)
(6)
0.751⇤⇤⇤ 0.635⇤⇤⇤
(0.074)
(0.113)
0.674
0.644
24948
19601
254
254

Note: This table reports first stage results of examiner leniency on loan take-up estimated separately by group. The
regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. Examiner leniency is estimated using
data from other loan applicants assigned to an examiner following the procedure described in Section III. Observations
in subgroups do not always add to the full sample size due to dropping of singleton observations. All specifications
control for store-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects and the baseline characteristics listed in Panel A of Table 1.
Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, **
= significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

47

48

Applicant Age
Old
Young
(3)
(4)
0.00024
0.00038
(0.00082) (0.00082)
0.00001
0.00001
(0.00004) (0.00008)
0.00146
0.00026
(0.00142) (0.00114)
0.00046
0.00024
(0.00101) (0.00141)
0.00025
0.00004
(0.00028) (0.00030)
0.00001
0.00001⇤
(0.00001) (0.00001)
0.00284
0.00454⇤⇤⇤
(0.00184) (0.00167)
0.00021
0.00026
(0.00109) (0.00098)
0.00000
0.00000
(0.00000) (0.00000)
0.00165
0.00119
(0.00347) (0.00359)
0.00148
0.00038
(0.00439) (0.00384)
0.00142
0.00178
(0.00402) (0.00389)
0.00228
0.00035
(0.00342) (0.00354)
0.000
0.000
20461
24038
[0.833]
[0.317]
254
254
0.00001
(0.00003)
0.00124
(0.00143)
0.00015
(0.00109)
0.00012
(0.00022)
0.00001
(0.00001)
0.00313⇤
(0.00174)
0.00008
(0.00100)
0.00000
(0.00000)
0.00098
(0.00376)
0.00287
(0.00457)
0.00018
(0.00432)
0.00087
(0.00362)
-0.000
24948
[0.860]
254

0.00002
(0.00003)
0.00016
(0.00097)
0.00021
(0.00141)
0.00008
(0.00039)
0.00001⇤⇤
(0.00001)
0.00473⇤⇤⇤
(0.00178)
0.00083
(0.00105)
0.00000⇤⇤
(0.00000)
0.00137
(0.00319)
0.00030
(0.00345)
0.00305
(0.00345)
0.00091
(0.00328)
0.001
19601
[0.029]
254

Applicant Gender
Female
Male
(5)
(6)

Note: This table reports balance tests separately by group. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The
dependent variable is examiner leniency, which is estimated using data from other loan applicants assigned to an examiner following the procedure
described in Section III. The p-value reported at the bottom of the columns is for a F-test of the joint significance of the variables listed in the rows.
Observations in the subgroups do not always add to the full sample size due to dropping of singleton observations. All specifications control for storeby-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level,
** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
p-value on Joint F-test
Clusters

Loan for Shopping or Holiday

Loan for Overdraft Avoidance

Loan for Large One-Time Expense

Loan for Emergency

Loan Amount Requested (£)

Has Other Loan Payments

Has Bank Account

Credit Score

Number of Dependents

Married

One-Plus Years at Residence

Age

Female

Applicant Nationality
Immigrant Native-Born
(1)
(2)
0.00003
0.00030
(0.00066)
(0.00084)
0.00001
0.00002
(0.00003)
(0.00002)
0.00058
0.00183
(0.00087)
(0.00155)
0.00110
0.00081
(0.00113)
(0.00125)
0.00021
0.00005
(0.00035)
(0.00023)
0.00000
0.00001⇤⇤
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
0.00345⇤
0.00387⇤⇤
(0.00192)
(0.00179)
0.00038
0.00061
(0.00120)
(0.00099)
0.00000
0.00000
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
0.00322
0.00008
(0.00273)
(0.00410)
0.00138
0.00317
(0.00276)
(0.00523)
0.00114
0.00120
(0.00356)
(0.00425)
0.00175
0.00071
(0.00253)
(0.00411)
0.001
-0.000
18234
27329
[0.638]
[0.225]
254
254

Appendix Table A3: Balance Tests by Subgroup

Appendix Table A4: IV Estimates Using Loan Approved

Loan Approved

(1)
351.465⇤⇤⇤
(90.555)

Approved x Immigrant Applicant

(2)
214.888⇤⇤
(90.611)
612.468⇤⇤
(249.385)

Approved x Older Applicant

2SLS Estimates
(3)
(4)
359.331⇤⇤
171.385
(141.589)
(136.913)
379.361⇤
(225.900)

Approved x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

12.464
(169.684)
176.533
45687
254

(5)
6.657
(188.256)
609.037⇤⇤
(275.732)
357.771
(221.049)
83.156
(169.625)
176.533
45687
254

Note: This table reports robustness results testing for bias in loan approvals, rather than loan take-up. See the notes
to Table 3 for details on the sample and empirical specification. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant
at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

49

50

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending using discounted long-run profits as the outcome. Long-run profits are discounted
using the discount rate listed in the column header. See the notes to Table 3 for additional details. Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are
reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

Take-Up x Female Applicant

Take-Up x Older Applicant

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

Loan Take-Up

Discount Rates
5 Percent 10 Percent 20 Percent 30 Percent 40 Percent 50 Percent
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
4.910
9.328
18.714
27.132
34.309
40.510
(129.132)
(119.363)
(102.651)
(88.967)
(77.775)
(68.607)
495.398⇤⇤⇤ 456.328⇤⇤⇤ 389.173⇤⇤⇤ 333.695⇤⇤⇤ 285.857⇤⇤⇤ 245.942⇤⇤⇤
(176.610)
(163.295)
(140.305)
(121.476)
(106.043)
(93.625)
289.628⇤⇤
265.695⇤⇤
223.415⇤⇤
187.240⇤⇤
157.245⇤
132.281⇤
(142.971)
(131.549)
(111.723)
(95.195)
(81.648)
(70.609)
74.871
73.357
71.596
69.961
67.328
64.662
(118.907)
(109.905)
(94.611)
(82.193)
(72.123)
(63.927)
185.789
170.494
143.478
120.337
100.458
83.292
45687
45687
45687
45687
45687
45687
254
254
254
254
254
254

Appendix Table A5: IV Estimates Using Discounted Long-Run Profits

Appendix Table A6: Re-Weighted IV Estimates

Loan Take-Up

(1)
331.100⇤⇤⇤
(60.459)

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

(2)
192.886⇤⇤⇤
(64.867)
365.144⇤
(193.036)

Take-Up x Older Applicant

2SLS Estimates
(3)
(4)
380.626⇤⇤⇤ 170.112⇤
(96.777)
(97.563)
313.343⇤
(168.429)

Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

176.533
45687
254

105.317
(130.367)
176.533
45687
254

(5)
25.766
(141.033)
550.917⇤⇤⇤
(191.163)
397.315⇤⇤
(168.378)
135.918
(126.731)
176.533
45687
254

Note: This table reports robustness results testing for bias when the estimates are re-weighted so that the observable
characteristics of target group applicants match the distribution of observable characteristics of reference group
applicants. See Appendix Table A9 for the complier characteristics used to construct the weights and Arnold,
Dobbie, and Yang (Forthcoming) for additional details. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5
percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

51

Appendix Table A7: Marginal Treatment Eﬀect Estimates

Loan Take-Up

(1)
407.290⇤⇤
(172.240)

Loan Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant
Loan Take-Up x Older Applicant

MTE Estimates
(2)
(3)
271.892⇤
234.724⇤
(163.177)
(138.360)
355.785
(302.167)
369.855⇤
(208.183)

Loan Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations

176.533
45687

176.533
45687

176.533
45687

(4)
378.160⇤⇤
(157.663)

54.547
(205.864)
176.533
45687

Note: This table reports robustness results testing for bias using an MTE estimator that puts equal weight on each
examiner. We estimate these MTE results using a two-step procedure. In the first step, we estimate the entire
distribution of MTEs using the derivative of residualized profits with respect to variation in the propensity score
provided by our instrument. To do this, we regress the residualized profit variable on the residualized examiner
leniency measure to calculate the group-specific propensity score. We then compute the numerical derivative of a
local quadratic estimator to estimate group-specific MTEs that are presented in Appendix Figure A5. In the second
step, we use these group-specific MTEs to calculate the level of bias for each examiner and the average level of bias
across all loan examiners. We calculate standard errors by bootstrapping this two-step procedure at the examiner
level. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

52

Appendix Table A8: IV Estimates Using Group-Specific Leniency

Loan Take-Up

(1)
333.146⇤⇤⇤
(60.027)

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

(2)
170.890⇤⇤
(68.293)
697.223
(441.663)

Take-Up x Older Applicant

2SLS Estimates
(3)
(4)
444.428⇤⇤⇤
81.893
(155.915)
(157.320)
469.603⇤
(252.789)

Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

176.465
45687
254

176.465
45687
254

176.465
45687
254

79.943
(177.468)
176.465
45687
254

(5)
70.020
(459.851)
635.336
(901.813)
382.091
(381.573)
132.286
(437.907)
176.465
45687
254

Note: This table reports robustness results testing for bias using an examiner leniency measure that is estimated
separately by group. See the notes to Table 3 for details on the sample and empirical specification. *** = significant
at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

53

Appendix Table A9: Representativeness Statistics

Immigrant
Age
Female
One Plus Years at Residence
Married
Number of Dependents
Credit Score
Has Bank Account
Has Other Loan Payments
Loan Amount Requested (£)
Loan for Emergency
Loan for Large One-Time Expense
Loan for Overdraft Avoidance
Loan for Shopping or Holiday
Observations

E(x|Immigrant)/
E(x|Native-Born)
(1)
–
1.007
0.678
0.801
1.404
0.741
1.051
1.028
0.685
1.299
1.030
2.120
0.714
0.884
45687

E(x|Old)/
E(x|Young)
(2)
1.100
–
0.966
1.094
1.724
1.219
0.991
0.990
1.269
1.164
1.007
0.912
1.194
0.905
45687

E(x|Female)/
E(x|Male)
(3)
0.607
0.986
–
1.057
0.853
2.031
0.967
0.986
1.380
0.860
0.887
0.653
0.978
1.312
45687

Note: This table reports the mean of the listed variable conditional on target group status, divided by the mean of
the listed variable, conditional on reference group status. The means are estimated for the sample as described in
the notes to Table 1.

54

55

50 Percent
(6)
67.274
(108.668)
306.801⇤⇤
(141.482)
197.237⇤
(113.145)
5.606
(103.875)
153.542
45687
254

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending using discounted long-run profits as the outcome. Reference group long-run profits are
discounted using a discount rate of 10 percent. Target group long-run profits are additionally discounted by the amount listed in the column header. See
the notes to Table 3 for additional details. Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent
level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

Take-Up x Female Applicant

Take-Up x Older Applicant

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

Loan Take-Up

Additional Target Group Discount Rate
5 Percent 10 Percent 20 Percent 30 Percent 40 Percent
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.316
9.067
25.103
40.752
55.102
(116.862)
(114.598)
(111.401)
(109.556)
(108.772)
438.152⇤⇤⇤ 420.529⇤⇤⇤ 388.006⇤⇤⇤ 355.720⇤⇤
329.196⇤⇤
(159.390)
(155.706)
(149.904)
(145.771)
(143.153)
255.678⇤⇤
246.511⇤⇤
231.508⇤
218.047⇤
206.795⇤
(128.172)
(125.126)
(120.574)
(117.188)
(114.817)
64.050
55.355
38.789
22.466
7.278
(108.150)
(106.575)
(104.339)
(103.329)
(103.333)
168.226
166.019
162.078
158.714
155.936
45687
45687
45687
45687
45687
254
254
254
254
254

Appendix Table A10: IV Estimates Using Subgroup-Specific Discounted Long-Run Profits

Appendix Table A11: OLS Results of Loan Take-Up on Long-Run Profits

Loan Take-Up
Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant
Take-Up x Older Applicant
Take-Up x Female Applicant
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

OLS Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
209.483⇤⇤⇤ 176.515⇤⇤⇤ 154.520⇤⇤⇤ 168.964⇤⇤⇤ 59.891⇤⇤⇤
(8.278)
(8.276)
(8.805)
(8.318)
(8.555)
101.680⇤⇤⇤
126.766⇤⇤⇤
(11.930)
(12.027)
88.751⇤⇤⇤
89.506⇤⇤⇤
(7.464)
(7.389)
100.296⇤⇤⇤ 123.407⇤⇤⇤
(8.393)
(8.277)
176.533
176.533
176.533
176.533
176.533
45687
45687
45687
45687
45687
254
254
254
254
254

Note: This table reports OLS estimates of bias in consumer lending decisions based on long-run profits. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. All specifications control for store-by-monthby-nationality fixed eﬀects and the baseline characteristics listed in Panel A of Table 1. Standard errors clustered
at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

56

57

(4)
196.732
(397.715)
886.037⇤⇤
(420.153)
693.134
(745.221)
143.904
(159.527)
176.268
28209
157
176.959
16503
95

(5)
22.432
(238.815)
1, 029.177
(1, 653.314)

176.959
16503
95

152.503
(118.315)
223.960
(392.076)
176.959
16503
95

Male Examiner
(6)
(7)
189.656
309.748
(233.538)
(459.876)

(8)
200.523
(438.997)
1, 075.787
(1,743.517)
154.801
(128.643)
204.134
(412.308)
176.959
16503
95

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending separately by examiner gender. See the notes to Table 3 for details on the sample and
empirical specification. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

Take-Up x Female Applicant

Take-Up x Older Applicant

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

Loan Take-Up

Female Examiner
(1)
(2)
(3)
247.900⇤⇤⇤
64.419
386.471⇤⇤⇤
(95.408)
(386.473)
(118.892)
897.649⇤⇤
(437.807)
672.721
(724.215)
64.869
(140.814)
176.268
176.268
176.268
28209
28209
28209
157
157
157

Appendix Table A12: Subsample IV Estimates by Examiner Gender

58

(4)
95.624
(141.114)
531.471⇤⇤⇤
(189.591)
383.466⇤⇤
(183.584)
59.614
(135.970)
145.135
28969
165
232.227
16214
89

(5)
361.300⇤
(191.958)
1, 428.279⇤
(769.228)

232.227
16214
89

194.917
(367.835)
31.410
(310.546)
232.227
16214
89

Experienced Examiner
(6)
(7)
663.668⇤⇤⇤ 743.881⇤⇤⇤
(249.027)
(231.262)

(8)
80.079
(438.516)
1, 631.579⇤
(872.656)
240.363
(362.937)
418.137
(409.934)
232.227
16214
89

Note: This table reports IV estimates of bias in consumer lending separately by examiner experience. Experienced examiners are those employed by the
Lender at the start of the sample period. See the notes to Table 3 for details on the sample and empirical specification. *** = significant at 1 percent
level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

Take-Up x Female Applicant

Take-Up x Older Applicant

Take-Up x Immigrant Applicant

Loan Take-Up

Inexperienced Examiner
(1)
(2)
(3)
106.365⇤
40.557
212.135⇤⇤
(64.235)
(108.859)
(99.514)
553.248⇤⇤⇤
(180.698)
379.179⇤⇤
(179.984)
5.339
(128.921)
145.135
145.135
145.135
28969
28969
28969
165
165
165

Appendix Table A13: Subsample IV Estimates by Examiner Experience

Appendix Table A14: Predicted Long-Run Profits and Applicant Characteristics

Immigrant Applicant

(1)
36.443⇤⇤⇤
(5.643)

Older Applicant

OLS Estimates
(2)
(3)
30.996⇤⇤⇤
(2.459)

Female Applicant
Predicted Default (x100)
Predicted Default Squared (x100)
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Clusters

21.022⇤⇤⇤
(0.515)
0.136⇤⇤⇤
(0.515)
264.689
30192
254

21.439⇤⇤⇤
(0.560)
0.143⇤⇤⇤
(0.006)
264.689
30192
254

4.039
(3.115)
22.150⇤⇤⇤
(0.561)
0.147⇤⇤⇤
(0.006)
264.689
30192
254

(4)
42.558⇤⇤⇤
(5.414)
35.289⇤⇤⇤
(2.539)
14.864⇤⇤⇤
(2.203)
19.930⇤⇤⇤
(0.542)
0.130⇤⇤⇤
(0.005)
264.689
30192
254

Note: This table reports the correlation between predicted long-run profits and applicant characteristics. The regressions are estimated using only applicants who took out a loan. Predicted long-run profits and predicted short-run
default are obtained using the machine learning algorithm described in Section V. Standard errors clustered at the
examiner level are reported in parentheses. See the text for additional details. *** = significant at 1 percent level,
** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.

59

Appendix Table A15: Correlates of the Machine Learning Prediction for Long-Run Profits

Credit Score (/1000)
Immigrant
Age
Female
Married
Disposable Income (£/1000)
Months in UK (/1000)
Number of Dependents
Loan for Emergency
Customer was Referred
Loan Amount Requested (£/1000)
Total Income (£/1000)

OLS Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
431.130⇤⇤⇤ 457.298⇤⇤⇤
364.247⇤⇤⇤
(14.305)
(12.266)
(9.770)
94.743⇤⇤⇤
45.921⇤⇤⇤
(5.448)
(4.936)
7.132⇤⇤⇤
7.363⇤⇤⇤
(0.146)
(0.120)
120.153⇤⇤⇤
112.701⇤⇤⇤
(3.176)
(2.726)
18.395⇤⇤⇤
7.000⇤⇤⇤
(2.568)
(1.898)
30.307⇤⇤⇤
(9.529)
129.030⇤⇤⇤
(8.212)
13.325⇤⇤⇤
(1.048)
9.022⇤⇤⇤
(2.599)
113.343⇤⇤⇤
(3.077)
143.687⇤⇤⇤
(5.437)
62.323⇤⇤⇤
(6.396)

Salary (£/1000)
Other Loan Payments (£/1000)
Debt to Income Ratio (/1000)
Total Credit Outstanding (£/106 )
Number Open Lines of Credit
Months at Current Residence (/1000)
Credit Arrears from Other Lenders (£/106 )
Dep. Variable Mean
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

228.790
45687
0.217

228.790
45687
0.458

228.790
45687
0.659

(4)
184.690⇤⇤⇤
(5.314)
14.910⇤⇤⇤
(4.985)
6.794⇤⇤⇤
(0.091)
116.488⇤⇤⇤
(2.398)
10.755⇤⇤⇤
(1.013)
12.666⇤⇤⇤
(2.781)
77.111⇤⇤⇤
(4.207)
20.925⇤⇤⇤
(0.706)
7.304⇤⇤⇤
(1.310)
89.248⇤⇤⇤
(2.105)
127.304⇤⇤⇤
(4.389)
1.847
(1.298)
14.471⇤⇤⇤
(1.218)
234.608⇤⇤⇤
(9.413)
1, 409.619⇤⇤⇤
(256.804)
37.077
(71.121)
0.334⇤⇤⇤
(0.124)
87.465⇤⇤⇤
(6.018)
64.362
(51.482)
228.790
45687
0.858

Note: This table reports selected coeﬃcients from an OLS regression of predicted total profits on loan and applicant
characteristics. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. All regressions
include store and time fixed eﬀects. Predicted total profits are obtained using the machine learning algorithm
described in Section V. Standard errors clustered at the examiner level are reported in parentheses. See the text
for additional details. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level.

60

Appendix Figure A1: Distribution of IV weights
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the distribution of IV weights separately by group. To compute the IV weights assigned
to an examiner cell, we compute continuous IV weights following the procedure described in Cornelissen et al. (2016).
We then discretize these continuous weights by assigning each examiner the weight associated with his or her average
leniency. Finally, we divide the discretized examiner weights by the sum total to ensure the discretized weights sum
to one. See the text for additional details.

61

Appendix Figure A2: Correlation Between Subgroup-Specific IV Weights
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the correlation between group-specific IV weights. To compute the IV weights assigned to
an examiner cell, we compute continuous IV weights following the procedure described in Cornelissen et al. (2016).
We then discretize these continuous weights by assigning each examiner the weight associated with his or her average
leniency. Finally, we divide the discretized examiner weights by the sum total to ensure the discretized weights sum
to one. The best fit line is estimated using OLS. See the text for additional details.

62

Appendix Figure A3: First Stage and Reduced Form Results by Group
(a) First-Stage for Native-Born Applicants

(b) Reduced Form for Native-Born Applicants

(c) First-Stage for Immigrant Applicants

(d) Reduced Form for Immigrant Applicants

(e) First-Stage for Young Applicants

(f) Reduced Form for Young Applicants

63

(f) First-Stage for Old Applicants

(g) Reduced Form for Old Applicants

(h) First-Stage for Male Applicants

(i) Reduced Form for Male Applicants

(j) First-Stage for Female Applicants

(k) Reduced Form for Female Applicants

Note: These figures report the first stage and reduced form relationships between applicant outcomes and examiner
leniency by group. The regressions are estimated on the sample described in the notes to Table 1. Examiner
leniency is estimated using data from other applicants assigned to a loan examiner following the procedure described
in Section III. In the first stage regressions, the solid line represents a local linear regression of loan take-up on
examiner leniency. In the reduced form regressions, the solid line represents a local linear regression of long-run
profits on examiner leniency. Loan take-up and long-run profits are residualized using store-by-month-by-nationality
fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the examiner level.

64

Appendix Figure A4: Correlation Between Subgroup-Specific Examiner Leniency Measures
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the correlation between group-specific examiner leniency measures. Examiner leniency by
group is estimated using data from other applicants from the same group assigned to a loan examiner following the
procedure described in Section III. The best line fit is estimated using OLS.

65

Appendix Figure A5: Marginal Treatment Eﬀects
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report estimated marginal treatment eﬀects of loan take-up on total profits separately by group.
To compute the marginal treatment eﬀects, we first estimate the predicted probability of take-up using only variation
in examiner leniency. We then estimate the relationship between predicted probability of take-up and total profits
using a local quadratic estimator. We calculate the numerical derivative to estimate the marginal treatment eﬀect at
each point in the distribution. The solid lines represent the estimated marginal treatment eﬀects separately for each
subgroup, while the dashed lines represent 90 percent confidence intervals, with standard errors that are computed
using 500 bootstrap replications clustered at the examiner level. See the text for additional details.

66

Appendix Figure A6: Predicted Long-Run Profit Distributions by Group
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the distribution of predicted long-run profits separately by group. Predicted long-run
profits are calculated using the machine learning algorithm described in Section V. The solid lines report the representativeness ratio for target group versus reference group applicants, or the predicted long-run profits for the target
group divided by the predicted long-run profits for the reference group. See the text for additional details.

67

Appendix Figure A7: Relationship Between Observed and Predicted Long-Run Profits

Note: This figure reports the relationship between observed and predicted long-run profits in the test sample. Predicted long-run profits are calculated using the machine learning algorithm described in Section V. The straight
dashed line is the 45 degree line. See the text for additional details.

68

Appendix Figure A8: Bias in Machine Learning Predictions
(a) Immigrant vs. Native-Born

(b) Old vs. Young

(c) Female vs. Male

Note: These figures report the relationship between observed and predicted long-run profits by group. Predicted
long-run profits are calculated using the machine learning algorithm described in Section V. The straight dashed line
is the 45 degree line. See the text for additional details.

69

Appendix B: Data Appendix
Examiner Leniency: We calculate examiner leniency as the leave-out mean residualized take-up
decisions of loan examiners within a physical branch location. We use the residual take-up decision
after removing store-by-month-by-nationality fixed eﬀects. In our main results, we define loan
take-up based on whether the first-time applicant took up their loan with the Lender.
Loan Approved: An indicator for the loan examiner approving the loan application (versus rejecting
the loan application).
Loan Take-Up: An indicator for the loan applicant taking out a loan with the Lender (versus not
taking out a loan). Loan Take-Up is set to zero if the loan application is rejected or if the application
is approved but the applicant decides not to take out a loan.
Loan Top-Up: An indicator for the loan applicant closing the initial loan and taking out a new loan
to cover the remaining balance on the initial loan. Loan Top-Up is set to zero for applicants who
never take out an initial loan.
Long-Run Profits: We calculate profits as the sum of all payments made from the applicant to the
Lender over the course of their relationship, minus the sum of all disbursements made from the
Lender to the applicant in pounds. Long-Run Profits are set to zero for applicants who never take
out a loan.
Short-Run Default: An indicator for the applicant defaulting on his or her first loan with the Lender.
Short-Run Default is set to zero for applicants who never take out a loan.
Immigrant Applicant: An indicator for whether the applicant is an immigrant (versus native-born).
Female Applicant: An indicator for whether the applicant is female (versus male).
Applicant Age: The applicant’s age in years. We drop applicants who are younger than 18 years
old or older than 75 years old.
Old Applicant: An indicator for whether the applicant is at least 32 years old, the median sample
age in the sample (versus less than 32 years old).
Months at Current Residence: The number of months the applicant has spent at their current
residence as of the time of their application.
One Year at Residence: An indicator for the applicant having spent at least 12 months at their
current residence as of the time of their application (versus less than 12 months at their current
residence).
Married Applicant: An indicator for the applicant being married at the time of his or her first loan
application (versus unmarried).
Number of Dependents: The applicant’s number of dependents at the time of his or her first loan
application. The number of dependents variable is winsorized at the 99th percentile of the distribution.
70

Credit Score: The applicant’s credit score from a nationwide credit bureau at the time of his or
her first loan application. The credit score variable is set to 0 for the approximately 2.6 percent of
the sample with a missing credit score. In all regressions, we include an indicator for whether an
applicant is missing the credit score variable or not.
Has Bank Account: An indicator for the applicant having a bank account at the time of his or her
first loan application (versus no bank account).
Has Other Loan Payments: An indicator for the applicant having other loan payments at the time
of his or her first loan application (versus no other loan payments).
Other Loan Payments: The value of an applicant’s other loan payments in pounds at the time of
his or her first loan application.
Number Open Lines of Credit: The applicant’s number of open lines of credit at the time of his or
her first loan application.
Total Credit Outstanding: The value of the applicant’s total outstanding credit in pounds at the
time of his or her first loan application.
Credit Arrears from Other Lenders: The value in pounds of overdue credit the applicant has to
other lenders at the time of his or her first loan application.
Customer was Referred: An indicator for whether the applicant was referred to the Lender.
Loan Amount Requested: The applicant’s requested loan amount in pounds. The applicant may
take out less than the requested amount.
Loan for Emergency: An indicator for the self-reported reason for the loan being for an emergency.
Loan for Large One-Time Expense: An indicator for the self-reported reason for the loan being
large non-recurring expense.
Loan for Overdraft Avoidance: An indicator for the self-reported reason for the loan being to avoid
overdraft penalties.
Loan for Shopping or Holiday: An indicator for the self-reported reason for the loan being shopping
or holiday expenses.
Loan Amount Net of Fees: The loan amount initially taken out minus all associated Lender fees in
pounds. This variable is missing for applicants who did not take out a loan.
Loan APR: The annualized nominal interest rate of the loan. This variable is missing for applicants
who did not take out a loan.
Loan Duration: Length of the loan in months if the applicant follows the set payment schedule.
This variable is missing for applicants who did not take out a loan.
Male Examiner: An indicator for the examiner being male (versus female). We are missing examiner
gender data for two examiners.
Experienced Examiner: An indicator for the examiner being employed by the Lender at the start
of the sample period.
71

