                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ON AVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT SIZE ACROSS SECTORS AND COUNTRIESY

                                            Pedro Bento
                                           Diego Restuccia

                                        Working Paper 24968
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24968


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2018




For helpful comments we thank the editor, two anonymous referees, Alvaro Garcia Marin, and seminar
participants at the National University of Singapore and the University of Texas at Austin, as well
as participants at the Workshop for Productivity Dynamics, Firm Growth and Factor Reallocation
at the Banco Central de Chile, the CEPR-EIEF Conference on Firm Dynamics and Economic Growth
at the Banco d'Italia, and at the RIDGE Workshop on Macroeconomics and Development in Buenos
Aires. All errors are our own. Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the support from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the Canada Research Chairs program.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pedro Bento and Diego Restuccia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
On Average Establishment Size across Sectors and Countriesy
Pedro Bento and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 24968
August 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. E02,E1,O1,O4

                                              ABSTRACT

We construct a new dataset for the average employment size of establishments across sectors and countries
from hundreds of sources. Establishments are larger in manufacturing than in services, and in each
sector they are larger in richer countries. The cross-country income elasticity of establishment size
is remarkably similar across sectors, about 0.3. We discuss these facts in light of several prominent
theories of development such as entry costs and misallocation. We then quantify the sectoral and aggregate
impact of entry costs and misallocation in an otherwise standard two-sector model with endogenous
firm entry, firm-level productivity, and sectoral employment shares. We find that observed measures
of misallocation account for the entire range of establishment-size differences across sectors and countries
and almost 50 percent of the difference in non-agricultural GDP per capita between rich and poor countries.


Pedro Bento
Texas A&M University
1101 Hollow Creek Dr. Unit 2208
Austin, TX 78704
pbento@tamu.edu

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1    Introduction

We construct a newly-assembled dataset for the average employment size of service-sector es-
tablishments for up to nine service industries across a large sample of countries. We use census
or representative survey data from hundreds of sources. We combine this data for the service
sector with that of the manufacturing sector from Bento and Restuccia (2017) to provide a
more comprehensive view of establishment size in the non-agricultural sector across countries.
We show that average establishment size is generally larger in manufacturing than in services,
and in each sector is strongly positively related with the level of development. In particular, the
cross-country income elasticity of establishment size is positive and remarkably similar across
sectors of around 0.3. A critical element in the construction of our dataset for international
comparisons is the inclusion of all establishments regardless of whether they are registered or
informal and have paid employees or are self-account businesses as there is systematic variation
in these categorizations across countries that can bias the relationship between establishment
size and development.

 Average establishment size is an important outcome in several prevailing theories of devel-
opment and aggregate productivity. An important contribution of our paper is constructing
a comprehensive dataset of average establishment size in the service sector across countries.
Together with similarly constructed data for manufacturing, our unique dataset provides inter-
nationally comparable size data across a large set of countries for the non-agricultural sector.
This is relevant as there is a growing volume of research looking beyond the manufacturing sec-
tor by analyzing also the service sector, which is reflective of the fact that the non-agricultural
sector—and the service sector in particular—is becoming the dominant economic activity as a
result of the process of structural transformation in developed and developing countries. Our
dataset can prove useful in calibrating quantitative models, in assessing alternative theories,
and guiding research towards the most relevant institutional factors determining establishment
size and other aggregate outcomes. Quantitative analyses of establishment size have thus far
focused on non-comparable data across countries, datasets that typically restrict the minimum

                                                2
size of establishments, rendering biased comparisons of most firms in rich countries with few
unrepresentative large firms in poor and developing countries.

 We contribute to this literature by as a first step documenting the empirical cross-country
relationships between our measures of average establishment size and several country- and
sector-specific variables, such as measures of sectoral shares, openness to trade, external fi-
nance, firing costs, and firm-level distortions. In choosing potential determinants of average
size, we focus on variables that are relevant to widely-used models. In many cases, competing
models have different qualitative implications for average size, whereas in other cases, the im-
plications for average size are unambiguous in the theory, both within and across sectors. The
empirical finding that is most closely aligned with current theory is the negative relationship
between average establishment size and the extent of misallocation across countries in each sec-
tor. The measure of misallocation we focus on is the productivity elasticity of distortions across
establishments—correlated distortions for short, which we calculate using micro data from the
World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys for a large number of countries. Models with endogenous entry
and investment in establishment-level productivity are most closely aligned with the evidence
as in these frameworks correlated distortions reduce aggregate productivity by misallocating
factors across heterogeneous establishments, reducing investment in productivity, and reducing
average establishment size (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Bento and Restuccia, 2017). Importantly,
we highlight empirical cross-country relationships between average establishment size and po-
tential determinants that appear at odds with current theories. For example, in widely-used
quantitative models with exogenous productivity, financial frictions and higher firing costs are
predicted to increase average size, while our data suggests the opposite. But to the extent that
financial frictions and firing costs discourage productivity investment by more productive es-
tablishments, incorporating endogenous productivity into these models may generate outcomes
that are more aligned with the empirical relationships we document.

 In light of this empirical evidence and because our data indicates that misallocation around
the world is characterized by larger productivity elasticities of distortions in both sectors in


                                                3
poorer countries, we develop a two-sector model of non-agriculture featuring heterogeneous es-
tablishments making entry and productivity decisions. We focus on productivity investment
by entering establishments, abstracting from investment after entry. Hsieh and Klenow (2014)
and Bento and Restuccia (2017) find that incorporating life-cycle productivity investment does
little to amplify the effect of policy distortions on aggregate productivity, beyond the impact of
factor misallocation. Our model builds on the frameworks of Hopenhayn (1992) and Restuccia
and Rogerson (2008). Upon entering the market, establishments pay a cost to increase their
productivity. After this investment, an idiosyncratic productivity is realized. Establishments
face policy distortions that are related to their overall productivity and hence entering estab-
lishments consider these distortions when making productivity investments. Consumers have
preferences over consumption of manufacturing goods and services, and relative productivities
are key determinants of sectoral allocations. Consistent with evidence, average establishment
size in the model does not depend on cross-country secular differences in aggregate productivity
or sectoral employment shares.

 We calibrate a benchmark economy to U.S. data and study how variations in the productivity
elasticity of distortions affect sectoral establishment size and productivity as well as aggregate
outcomes. Our analysis shows that empirically-reasonable variations in the productivity elastic-
ity of distortions across rich and poor countries in each sector generate substantial differences in
average establishment size and productivity in each sector as well as differences in employment
shares and aggregate output across economies. For instance, when we increase the productivity
elasticity of distortions in each sector from 0.09 in the U.S. benchmark economy to 0.7 (a level
observed for many developing countries in our data), average establishment size drops from
22 to 8 persons engaged in the manufacturing sector and from 4.8 to 1.7 persons engaged in
the service sector, a reduction in size that is consistent with and close in magnitude to the
evidence we document across countries. The increase in distortions also reduces sector produc-
tivity by 57 percent, only half of which is driven by factor misallocation. Because the impact
of misallocation is slightly larger in manufacturing than in services, due to larger productivity



                                                 4
dispersion in manufacturing, sectoral output falls by more in manufacturing (54 percent) than
in services (47 percent) compared to the benchmark economy. We find that accounting for
entry investment roughly doubles the impact of correlated distortions on aggregate output, rel-
ative to the impact of factor misallocation in a static environment. Overall, our results suggest
an important link between policy distortions (misallocation) and technology differences across
countries that substantially contribute to large differences in output per capita (Restuccia and
Rogerson, 2017).

 Our paper builds from the seminal works of Lucas (1978) and Hopenhayn (1992). As such, our
paper is related to a quantitative literature analyzing the size of establishments in development
(Barseghyan and DiCecio, 2011; Moscoso Boedo and Mukoyama, 2012). A related literature
emphasizes the size of the informal sector arising from financial frictions, taxes, and regula-
tions that generate misallocation (D’Erasmo and Moscoso Boedo, 2012; Leal Ordóñez, 2014).
Hopenhayn (2016) provides a systematic evaluation of variants of the Lucas and Hopenhayn
models for average establishment size and Tybout (2000) provides a broader survey of theo-
ries of establishment size in the manufacturing sector. Our analysis is closely related to the
literature on misallocation and aggregate productivity, and within this literature to the work
emphasizing the dynamic implications of misallocation such as Hsieh and Klenow (2014), Bento
and Restuccia (2017), and Guner et al. (2018). These papers focus on correlated distortions
as we do, rather than the total dispersion in distortions as in most of the literature. But the
literature has thus far focused primarily on the manufacturing sector due to data availability.
An important departure of our paper is that we emphasize the sectoral and aggregate impli-
cations of misallocation by documenting correlated distortions and average establishment size
in both manufacturing and services for a large set of countries. Our analysis provides a sys-
tematic quantitative evaluation of misallocation as a driver of differences in establishment size
and productivity across sectors and countries. Dias et al. (2016) study factor misallocation in
manufacturing and services focusing on Portugal, whereas our analysis includes a large set of
countries. More importantly, we document and analyze establishment size differences across



                                               5
countries and sectors. Kumar et al. (2001) also analyze the empirical determinants of average
establishment size across countries but do so in a sample that does not include all establishments
and that comprises only 15 relatively developed countries in Europe.

 The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we document a newly con-
structed dataset on average establishment sizes in manufacturing and services sectors across
a large set of countries. Section 3 discusses the main determinants of average establishment
size differences across sectors and countries and relates these facts to prominent theories of
development. In Section 4 we describe a two-sector model that features endogenous sectoral
employment and production heterogeneity in each sector. The model also features endogenous
entry and productivity investment by establishments. Section 5 calibrates a benchmark econ-
omy to U.S. data in order to assess the quantitative role of distortions on establishment size
and productivity in each sector, as well as sectoral employment shares and aggregate outcomes.
We conclude in Section 6.



2     Average Establishment Size

We describe the construction of a newly-assembled dataset for the average employment size of
service sector establishments across a large sample of countries using census or representative
survey data, and show that average establishment size is strongly positively related to the level
of development. We combine this dataset with data for the manufacturing sector from Bento
and Restuccia (2017) to provide a more comprehensive view of establishment sizes across sectors
and countries.



2.1    Data

We construct a dataset of the average employment size of service sector establishments across
countries using hundreds of reports from economic censuses and nationally-representative sur-
veys. We provide a list of countries included with the sources used for each country in Appendix

                                                6
A. Our goal in the construction of this dataset is to obtain an internationally-comparable mea-
sure of average establishment size for a large sample of countries that is representative of
the world income distribution, for both manufacturing and services. The primary challenges
are: data availability, which typically biases country samples towards rich countries; and in-
ternational comparability, due to data reported using different definitions of employment and
production units, data that disproportionally include larger firms, or especially in the case
of services, having data aggregated across different groups of industries. The four measures of
workers and production units we use are employees, persons engaged, establishments, and firms.
Employees are workers who are formally paid by a business, while persons engaged is a broader
measure of employment, including unpaid (sometimes family) workers and owner-managers. In
the aggregate, persons engaged accounts for all persons working in a sector. Establishments
include businesses with a fixed location, as well as businesses operating out of households when
a sign is posted on the premises.1 Firms are groups of (at least one) establishment with common
ownership and control.

 To assess the relationship between establishment size and development, it is crucially im-
portant that the data include all establishments regardless of whether the establishments are
registered or not, and whether the establishments have paid employees or not, as a substantial
portion of establishments in poor countries are unregistered and own account businesses and
may include unpaid family workers. For example, paid employees account for only one quarter
of persons engaged in Yemen’s retail sector, while paid employees account for 95 percent of
workers in U.K. retail establishments. Similarly, in Sierra Leone, 83 percent of manufacturing
establishments have no paid employees, and in Ghana, unpaid workers account for almost half
of the manufacturing workforce. In rich countries, by contrast, paid employees account for the
   1
    The United States is an exception since nonemployer statistics do not distinguish between nonemployers
with and without physical establishments. For example, a self-employed street vendor without paid employees
would be counted as a retail establishment. Likewise, a full-time visual artist working from home (but not selling
from home) would be counted as an art, culture, and recreation establishment. To address this issue in the
U.S. data, we use the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Occupational Employment Statistics for 2007 to identify
occupations that are likely to be counted as nonemployers, and remove these from our establishment counts. By
industry, we remove door-to-door sales workers and street vendors from Retail; taxi drivers from Transportation
and Storage; real estate agents and photographers from Real Estate and Business Services; artists, musicians,
and authors from Art, Culture, and Recreation; and personal financial advisors from Finance and Insurance.


                                                        7
bulk of persons engaged. As a result of these differences between establishments in rich and
poor countries, excluding nonemployer establishments generates a highly distorted picture of
establishment size differences across countries. Throughout our data collection process, we have
made an effort to search for evidence from methodology documents and other published reports
that small establishments are not included. Any country for which such evidence exists is not
included in our sample. For our manufacturing dataset, we include all countries with publicly-
available data representative of all manufacturing establishments or firms.2 For services, we
collect data for as many as nine service industries per country: retail; wholesale; auto repair
and sales; accommodations and restaurants; finance and insurance; transportation and storage;
information and communications; art, culture, and recreation; and real estate and business
services. We exclude education, health care, and public administration from all countries due
to wildly different levels of government control and involvement. We also exclude construc-
tion to avoid ambiguity about the definition of establishment size, given the ubiquitousness of
sub-contractors. We include all countries with data representative of all establishments in at
least one service industry and collect data for the year closest to 2007. For the manufacturing
sector we had collected data only for the entire sector for a number of years, however, given the
heterogeneity of service industries we focus instead on collecting data for multiple industries
within the service sector.

 Our standardized definition of size is the average number of persons engaged per establishment
across all establishments. For many of the countries in our service sector sample, the data are
reported as total number of persons engaged and total number of establishments. But for
some industries in some countries the data are reported differently as the total number of
employees, the total number of firms, or a combination of these instead of persons engaged and
establishments. Table 1 summarizes the sample of countries and the reported data.3
   2
     We also include in the dataset all territories such as French Guiana, Hong Kong, and Puerto Rico. We use
the word “country” solely for ease of exposition.
   3
     GDP per capita (adjusted for purchasing power parity, PPP) for most countries is from Penn World Table
v. 8.0, the IMF’s World Economic Outlook 2013, and the CIA World Factbook. For overseas departments of
France, GDP per capita is from France’s National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies and is made
relative to the U.S. GDP per capita using market exchange rates. GDP per capita for Âland Islands is from
Statistics and Research Âland, and adjusted for purchasing power parity using Finland’s PPP exchange rate


                                                     8
                         Table 1: Sample of Countries for Services


                                           Total Number    Number of                Number of
         Variable                           of Countries Poor Countries           Rich Countries
         persons engaged                          97                 51                   46
         employees                                78                 30                   48
           engaged and employees                  48                 17                   31
         establishments                           60                 32                   28
         firms                                    80                 37                   43
           establishments and firms               13                  5                    8

Notes: ‘Poor’ and ‘Rich’ refer to countries with GDP per capita below and above the median. ‘Number of
Countries’ refers to number of countries in which at least one industry reports the variable in question. Data
from multiple sources, see text for details.



 To standardize the measure of size in each industry, we impute persons engaged per establish-
ment using the reported data as follows. To impute the number of persons engaged in countries
that only report paid employees in a particular service industry, we regress persons engaged
on employees using all countries for which both measures are reported for that industry. We
then use the resulting coefficient to calculate the number of persons engaged for each country-
industry that reports only employees. For example, for the wholesale sector, we regress (logged)
total persons engaged on (logged) employment using 36 countries that report both measures of
workers, obtaining a coefficient estimate of 1.16. For countries that only report employment in
the wholesale sector, we then impute (logged) persons engaged as (logged) employment times
1.16. To impute the number of establishments in an industry for which only the number of
firms is reported, we follow an analogous procedure.

 Our measure of average establishment size for the entire service sector is persons engaged
per establishment across all service industries. One issue that arises in constructing this size
measure for the entire service sector is that many countries report data for some but not all
service industries. We therefore take the following steps to construct a comparable measure of
establishment size in services across countries. First, we calculate average establishment size
from Penn World Table v8.0.



                                                       9
in a country across all service industries for which we have data. Second, we calculate average
size across the same group of industries in the United States. Third, we take the ratio of
average size in the country to the corresponding number in the United States and multiply this
ratio by the average size in the United States across all service industries (equal to 5 persons
engaged per establishment). This renders a comparable measure of average establishment size
in the service sector across countries even if countries have data for only a subset of industries.
This adjustment is important as there are substantial differences in average establishment size
across industries within the service sector. For instance, Table 2 reports the average size of U.S.
establishments in each service industry, which vary from 2 persons engaged in Art, Culture,
and Recreation to 15 persons engaged in Accommodations and Restaurants.

      Table 2: Average Establishment Size by Service Industry, United States


                             Wholesale                              9
                             Retail                                 6
                             Automobile Related                     8
                             Accommodations and Restaurants        15
                             Transportation and Storage             5
                             Information and Communication         10
                             Real Estate and Business Services      3
                             Art, Culture, and Recreation           2
                             Finance and Insurance                  5



 In our final dataset we report the average of persons engaged per establishment for each
country in services, resulting in a final sample of 127 countries. For manufacturing, we report
the same measure of establishment size for a final sample of 134 countries.



2.2     Establishment Size and Development

Table 3 reports some descriptive statistics concerning average establishment size from our
dataset and GDP per capita. Establishment sizes differ substantially across countries both
in the manufacturing and services sectors. In addition, while average establishment sizes in the


                                                10
                                 Table 3: Descriptive Statistics


                                                                            Poorest      Richest
                                                         Mean    Median     Quartile     Quartile
         Establishment Sizes (persons engaged)
             Wholesale                                     6         5          7            8
             Retail                                        4         3          2           6
             Automobile Related                           5          4          4            6
             Accommodations and Restaurants                8         4          4           10
             Transportation and Storage                    9         5          6           16
             Information and Communication                15         8          5           43
             Real Estate and Business Services            5          4          4            6
             Art, Culture, and Recreation                  5         3          2           10
             Finance and Insurance                        14         8          9           20
          Services                                        4          3          2            6
          Manufacturing                                   12         9          6           17
         GDP per capita (thousands)                       23        17          3           52
Notes: “Poorest” and “Richest” quartiles refer to the quartiles of countries with the lowest and highest GDP
per capita. Data from multiple sources, see text for details.



broader service sector are generally lower than in manufacturing—about one third of the size
on average—establishment size in each sector is systematically lower in poor compared to rich
countries, also a factor difference of 3. For example, in the poorest quartile of countries in our
sample, average establishment size is 2 persons engaged in services compared to 6 persons en-
gaged in the richest quartile of countries. In manufacturing, the difference is 6 persons engaged
in poor countries compared to 17 persons engaged in rich countries. These patterns hold for
individual service industries, with some industries featuring very large differences in average
establishment size between the poorest and richest countries. For instance, the sub-industry
of Information and Communication stands out with a factor difference in establishment size of
almost 9.

 Figure 1 documents the average establishment size in manufacturing and in services for every
country in our sample against GDP per capita. The data clearly show a positive relationship
between average establishment size and GDP per capita in both sectors. The elasticity of



                                                    11
establishment size with respect to GDP per capita is 0.30 in manufacturing and 0.32 in services.
The regression slope coefficient (standard error) in Figure 1A is 0.30 (0.05) and in Figure 1B
is 0.32 (0.04). The corresponding numbers of countries included are 134 and 127.

 Figure 2 shows the average establishment size in non-agriculture (manufacturing and services)
against GDP per capita for 91 countries. We calculate average size across manufacturing and
services by combining our sectoral establishment-size measures with service and manufacturing
shares from Duarte and Restuccia (2019), who use International Comparisons Program (ICP)
data for 2005. If we denote sectoral shares in manufacturing and services by Lm and Ls , then
average establishment size in non-agriculture is equal to (Lm /sizem + Ls /sizes )−1 . While 117
countries in our dataset have establishment size data for both manufacturing and services, only
91 of these have measures of sectoral shares in Duarte and Restuccia (2019). The elasticity
of size (across sectors) with respect to GDP per capita is 0.33. This relationship is almost
identical to that in Figure 1 because the corresponding elasticities are similar across sectors.4

 Table 4 reports the elasticity of establishment size with respect to GDP per capita for each in-
dividual service industry, as well as for the more aggregated service and manufacturing sectors.
In every industry, establishment size increases with development. Although the income elastic-
ity of average size varies across disaggregated service industries, it does not vary systematically
with relative average size differences across industries. Even though the income elasticity of
average establishment size across all services is similar to the manufacturing elasticity of 0.3,
the elasticity is as low as 0.13 for Wholesale services and as high as 0.45 for Information and
Communication services.

 Bartelsman et al. (2009) analyze firm size distributions across employers (firms with paid em-
ployees) in a smaller sample of countries, and suggest that much of the cross-country differences
in average employment size are due to differences within sectors, rather than to differences in
sectoral composition. Although our data includes a larger set of countries and the universe
   4
    We also note that the share of services in non-agriculture is not systematically related to GDP per capita in
our sample of countries. This fact is different from the systematic relationship between the share of agriculture
or services and income per capita in the process of structural transformation, see for instance Duarte and
Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf et al. (2014).


                                                       12
                                                   Panel A: Manufacturing
                                                                           ASM
                                                                                  MNP
                                                                                 MYS
                50
                                                                                                    SGP

                                                                                         TTO AREDEU    LUX LIE
                                                                                                      MCO
Establishment Size (log scale)


                                                                                       PRI                   QAT
                          25

                                                                                                    MAC
                                                                         UKR                   CAN
                                                                                               AUT USA
                                                                               BGRVIR          DNK
                                                                                              JPNNLD    KWT
                                                                          BRA    LVA          GBR
                                                                             VEN    RUS TWN CHE
                                                                                  LTU        FRA IRL
                                                                                            FRO
                                                                                             BEL
                                                               PHL             ROUPOL PYF  GUM
                                                                                         ABW
                                                                                         ISR
                                                              MDA    GEO MKDARG KAZ HRVSVN
                                                                                   HUN         SWE
                                                                                          NZL HKG
                                                            KGZ       TONZAF
               10




                                                    STP GHA              THA
                                                                   BTN PER          EST KOR  ESP
                                                                        COL URY        BHR            SMR
                                                                                                     BRN
                                           MDG NPL             LKAJORSLV MUS MEX MLT    CZE ITAAUS
                                                                                       SAU
                                                                                TUR
                                                    SDN      CPV       BIH SRB PAN PRT FIN             NOR
                                                   BGD KHMVNMBOL        ALB
                                                                      TUN
                                                                      DZA
                                                  RWA CMR    HND PRYMNGECU      LBY SVKCYP        ALA
                                                                                                AND       BMU
                                                               MAR                              GRL
                                                                              IRNMNE
                                                 UGA LAO PSE
     4




                                                                 IDN
                                                               NIC
                                                                 SYR                    REU
                                                                                          GRC NCL
                                                                      KSV
                                                           IND
                                                         YEM
                                                                                 GUF PLWMTQ
                                           SLE                                  MDV
                2




                                       ETH
                                        MWI                                        GLP
                                                 BEN
                1




                                 500                 2500           10000                      50000
                                                         GDP per Capita (log scale)



                                                        Panel B: Services
                25




                                                                                                      BRN

                                                                                                                QAT
                                                                                                    GGY
Establishment Size (log scale)




                                                                           ASM                            KWT
                                                                                            ABW
                         10




                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                              AREGBR  SGP
                                                                                                  HKG
                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                 JPN          LIE
                                                                                  MNE PRI     GUM  GRL
                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                   LVARUS
                                                                                 MDV               NCL
                                                                             SRB MNP EST       FRO        LUX
                                                                                                  AUTIRL MCO
                                                                                    VIRHRV         AUSUSA
                                                                                    LTU   BHR
                                                                                     BLR GRC   TWN       SJM
                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                  CANCHE NOR
                                                                                                 FIN
                                                                                                BEL
                                                                      MNG MKD  MYS
                                                                               BGR        SAU      AND
          4




                                                               PHL        THA             CYP
                                                                                           SVN
                                                    STP GHAKGZ                VEN
                                                                             URY
                                                                         COLARG POLPLW ESP   NZL  SWE
                                                                   PRY ECU     AIA
                                                                                 MEX HUN      KOR
                                                                                 KAZ
                                                                                  PAN MLT
                                        MWISLE                MDA JORSLV                SVKPYF ITA MAC
                                                                                          PRT
                                                         YEM                     TUR       CZE   ISL
                                                 TZA           NIC      BIH  MUS
                                                                           BRA
                                                         KHM   WSM        UKR
                                                                        PER                          ALA
                                                                               ROU
                                                   BGDCMR PSE
2




                                                  KEN
                                                 UGA       IND LKA                   GLP
                                                   TCD       CPV                  GUF
                                                             VNM
                                                 BEN LAO              GEO                                SMR
                                                               MAR     KSV
                                                                         ALB
                                                          FSM
                                                 RWA                    TUN      IRN
                1




                                 500                 2500           10000                      50000
                                                         GDP per Capita (log scale)




                                  Figure 1: Establishment Size and GDP per Capita




                                                                   13
                    25
                                                                                                         QAT
                                                                                                BRN
    Establishment Size (log scale)                                                                 KWT
                                                                                               SGP
                             10
                                                                                      ISR GBR
                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                            HKG
                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                 RUS        DNK    LUX
                                                                               LVA
                                                                         SRB MNE  EST       AUTIRL
                                                                                LTU BHRTWNAUSUSA
                                                                           MYS           BELCANCHE
                                                                                          FRA
                                                                             MDV
                                                                        MKDBGR      SAU
                                                     GHAKGZPHL    MNGTHA  VEN        SVN FIN       NOR
                                                 STP                     URY           GRC
                                                                                       NZL SWE
                                                                     COLARG POL     CYP
              4




                                                                                HUN      ESP
                                                                                        KOR
                                                           MDA PRY ECU       KAZ MLT
                                                                             MEX
                                                               JOR
                                                                       BRA   TUR     CZE ITA MAC
                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                    PRT
                                                                      UKR
                                                                    BIH  MUS
                                                      YEM
                                     MWISLE     BGDCMRKHM           PER
                                                            LKA
                                              UGA       IND
    2




                                                          CPV
                                                          VNM     GEO
                                                    LAO
                                                                     ALB
                                              BEN           MAR
                                               RWA                 TUN     IRN
                    1




                                                 2500           10000                    50000
                                                     GDP per Capita (log scale)




   Figure 2: Establishment Size across Sectors and GDP per Capita




Table 4: Income Elasticity of Establishment Size by Industry


                                     Services                                           0.32
                                       Wholesale                                        0.13
                                       Retail                                           0.39
                                       Automobile Related                               0.20
                                       Accommodations and Restaurants                   0.32
                                       Transportation and Storage                       0.28
                                       Information and Communication                    0.45
                                       Real Estate and Business Services                0.15
                                       Art, Culture, and Recreation                     0.37
                                       Finance and Insurance                            0.22
                                     Manufacturing                                      0.30




                                                               14
of firms (employers and nonemployers) in each country-sector, our results are consistent with
theirs. Further, although countries obviously differ in sectoral composition, our results suggest
that sectoral composition does not differ systematically in such a way as to lower average size
in poor countries. Rather, in poorer countries firms are smaller in every sector.



2.3    Aggregation and Imputation

Our measures of average establishment size in service industries for many countries are calcu-
lated using the imputation procedure detailed previously. We evaluate the importance of these
imputations for our findings by reporting elasticities using just the raw data. To do this, we
use our preferred measure of size—persons engaged per establishment—for country-industries
that report both persons engaged and the number of establishments. For country-industries
without this data, we use persons engaged per firm. For countries without measures of persons
engaged, we use employees per establishment. And for countries without measures of persons
engaged or establishments, we use employees per firm. For each regression, we include dummy
variables for the use of employees and for the use of firms in our size measure, as well as an
additional dummy indicating whether ‘nonemployers’ (businesses without paid employees) are
counted. We then regress (logged) size on (logged) GDP per capita separately for each industry.
The estimated elasticities are reported in Table 5 along with our baseline elasticities from Table
4. The elasticities generated from the raw data are fairly close to those in our baseline data,
within a few percentage points and preserving the direction and relative ranking of differences.

 In calculating average establishment size for the service sector as a whole in each country, we
also perform an imputation for countries that do not report data for some service industries.
This could potentially bias the implied relationship between average size and development if for
instance poorer countries tend to publish data only for industries with smaller establishments.
Further, a size elasticity of income for the entire service sector may reflect both the size elasticity
of income for each industry and systematic differences in industry composition across different
levels of development. To address these concerns, we use the raw data and regress average

                                                  15
Table 5: Income Elasticity of Establishment Size by Service Industry, Baseline
and Raw Data


                                                              Baseline   Raw
                       Wholesale                               0.13      0.13
                       Retail                                  0.39      0.42
                       Automobile Related                      0.20      0.26
                       Accommodations and Restaurants          0.32      0.36
                       Transportation and Storage              0.28      0.30
                       Information and Communication           0.45      0.52
                       Real Estate and Business Services       0.15      0.16
                       Art, Culture, and Recreation            0.37      0.40
                       Finance and Insurance                   0.22      0.24



size at the country-industry level on GDP per capita, again including dummies for the use of
employees, firms, and nonemployers in the reported data, but now we use a pooled regression
with dummy variables for each industry. Our estimated elasticity coefficient for GDP per
capita is 0.32, identical to the elasticity we obtain using our baseline measure of average size
for the entire service sector. We also perform the pooled data regression controlling for fixed
industry effects separately for countries that report persons engaged per establishment, persons
engaged per firm, employees per establishment, and employees per firm. We obtain the following
corresponding coefficients, all significant at the 1% level: 0.37, 0.22, 0.41, and 0.38.

 To summarize, the raw data confirms our main findings of a strong positive relationship
between average establishment size and development.




3     Determinants of Establishment Size

Our comprehensive dataset of average establishment sizes across sectors and countries provides
a unique opportunity to evaluate models of development along the establishment-size dimension.
In this section, we take a first step in this direction by documenting the empirical relationship
between average establishment size in each sector and relevant measures of country-specific



                                                16
variables such as GDP per capita, sectoral employment, openness to trade, the share of external
finance to GDP, firing costs, and firm-level distortions. We then discuss these relationships in
the context of specific theories of development, providing motivation for the model we consider
in the next section.



3.1    Data

We collect relevant cross-country data from several sources. Real GDP per capita is in pur-
chasing power parity terms and is mainly from the Penn World Tables v8.0 (PWT) but also
other sources as discussed in Section 2.1. Openness to trade is from the PWTv8.0, calculated
as the value of imports plus exports as a share of GDP. Sectoral employment is the number
of persons engaged in a sector. Specifically, we use the sectoral shares of manufacturing and
services in Duarte and Restuccia (2019) multiplied by population from the PWTv8.0. We use
population rather than total persons engaged due to a lack of total engaged data for many
countries. Note that the sectoral shares in Duarte and Restuccia (2019) refer to the share of
expenditures in manufacturing or services relative to total expenditures in manufacturing and
services expressed in domestic prices. This share maps into employment shares in standard
models of structural transformation. We use this data since it provides the largest country
coverage. Nevertheless, the results are nearly identical using actual employment data across
sectors from the 10-sector database for a restricted set of countries with available data. External
finance measures the aggregate level of firm-level investment not financed internally, relative
to GDP. We use a measure of external finance from Buera et al. (2011), calculated using data
from Beck et al. (2010). Firing costs are from the OECD’s Indicators of Employment Protection
Legislation for 2008, which account for both individual and collective employee dismissals, and
from Heckman and Pagés (2004). Firing costs measures the cost to a firm of firing a worker,
both monetary and non-monetary (such as mandatory minimum notice before dismissal). To
combine the different measures of firing costs, we regress the (logged) measures from the OECD
on those from Heckman and Pagés (2004), then construct predicted measures consistent with


                                                17
the OECD data for countries included in Heckman and Pagés (2004) but not included in the
OECD data.

 For firm-level distortions, rather than constructing broad measures of distortions based on dis-
persion in marginal products across firms, we focus on a narrower measure that emphasizes the
systematic component of distortions, the extent to which distortions relate to establishment-
level productivity or correlated distortions. We measure the systematic component of distor-
tions by the elasticity of distortions with respect to productivity across firms. This is a more
robust measure of misallocation and more closely related to firm decisions such as entry and in-
vestment which affect establishment size (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Bento and Restuccia, 2017).
We construct sectoral measures of correlated distortions for each country using establishment-
level data from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (WBES). The WBES dataset includes
data from mostly low- and middle-income countries collected through face-to-face surveys, and
contains standardized information about sales, intermediate purchases, inputs, and a host of
other variables for establishments in over 100 countries for at least one year from 2002 to 2012.
We back out our measure of establishment-level distortions and productivity for each establish-
ment within a country-industry-year by imposing the following structure on the data, which is
consistent with the model we develop in Section 4. We assume establishments within an indus-
try differ with respect to their productivity Z, and produce output according to the following
decreasing returns to scale technology;


                                           y = Z`α ,                                         (1)


where α ∈ (0, 1) and ` denotes labor. Note that we abstract from capital in our measures
because this allows us to substantially increase the sample of establishments for each country
and the number of countries in our analysis, as a large number of establishments in WBES do
not report capital and sample sizes in WBES are small. Nevertheless, it is well-known that
empirical measures of wedges for different factor inputs are highly correlated so they are well
captured by a composite output wedge. Assuming establishments take the price of output p and


                                               18
the wage w as given, each establishment optimally chooses ` such that its after-tax marginal
revenue product is equal to the prevailing wage w. This suggests the following relationship
between an establishment’s labor productivity and its distortion (which we model as an explicit
tax on output τ );
                                  py      1    w      1
                                     =             ∝          ,
                                   `   (1 − τ ) α    (1 − τ )

where py is an establishment’s value added (sales minus intermediate inputs). Following Hsieh
and Klenow (2009), we use an establishment’s total wage bill (including benefits) in our com-
putations instead of employment in order to control for differences in human capital across
establishments. Our measure of labor productivity for each establishment is calculated relative
to the weighted average of labor productivity across all establishments within the same indus-
try, weighted by each establishment’s share of value added. Establishment-level productivity
(denoted by Z) is inferred under the same assumptions using the model-implied relationship
between an establishment’s revenue and its output:

                                               y   py
                                          Z=    α
                                                  ∝ α.
                                               `    `

Following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), productivity is calculated relative to industry productivity
                                             1−α
in the absence of distortions, mean Z 1/(1−α)       . Note that the above calculations require a
value for α. We use a value of 2/3 to be comparable to Hsieh and Klenow (2014) and Bento
and Restuccia (2017).

 We estimate the elasticity of distortions with respect to productivity across establishments
in each sector using the above measures by running an OLS regression of logged distortions
on logged productivity across establishments. Following Hsieh and Klenow (2014) we trim
the 1 percent tails of both distortions and productivity for each country-industry to remove
outliers. Some countries have data for two or more years, so we average elasticities over all years,
weighting by the number of observations in each year. We obtain elasticities for 74 countries
in the manufacturing sector and for 63 countries in the service sector. In manufacturing,



                                                19
elasticities range from 0.37 to 1.08, averaging 0.78. In services, elasticities range from 0.36 to
1.09, averaging a higher 0.87. Countries with a higher productivity elasticity of distortions in
manufacturing also tend to have a higher elasticity in services. The corresponding correlation
coefficient between the two sectoral measures of distortions is 0.62.

 Figure 3 illustrates how correlated distortions vary with average establishment size in each
sector. In both manufacturing and services, average size is lower when the productivity elasticity
of distortions is higher. Although the United States is not included in the WBES data, we
include it in Figure 3 for comparison, using an elasticity of 0.09 for both manufacturing and
services. Hsieh and Klenow (2014) estimate a productivity elasticity of distortions of 0.09 for
U.S. manufacturing and we assume the same value for the U.S. service sector. Our measures
of distortions for each country-sector depend in part on the value of α. For robustness, we also
re-estimate the elasticities using a higher value of α = 0.8 (rather than 2/3). The resulting
relationships between the productivity elasticity of distortions and average size are similarly
negative and significant, both in manufacturing and in services. Our assumption that α is
constant across sectors is consistent with Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2008), who find relatively
constant factor shares across sectors in the U.S. data. Our assumption that α is constant
across countries is consistent with Gollin (2002), who finds that the labor share of income is
not systematically related to GDP per capita across countries.



3.2    Theories of Development

In order to provide evidence on the potential determinants of average establishment size across
sectors and countries, we estimate reduced-form empirical relationships between establishment
size and several indicator variables at the core of prominent theories of productivity and devel-
opment. Tables 6 and 7 document the estimated coefficients from bivariate and multivariate
regressions of average establishment size on subsets of country-specific variables such as GDP
per capita, openness to trade, firing costs, external finance, and firm-level distortions. We re-
strict multivariate regressions to subsets of explanatory variables for which we have at least 30

                                               20
                                                     Panel A: Manufacturing

                                                                                                       MYS
                    50
                                                                             TTO
    Establishment Size (log scale)
                              25


                                     USA                                              UKR
                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                 BRA
                                                                               LVA
                                                                                  VEN                         RUS
                                                                                 LTUIRL
                                                                   POL                  ROU  ISR
                                                                                           PHL
                                                                           SVN
                                                                          MDA
                                                                         HUNKAZ        HRVMKD
                                                                                        GEO  SWE
                                                                             ARG
                                                                            KGZ
                   10




                                                           ESP   ZAF          PER URY
                                                                              GHA    THA EST     BTN
                                                                             MEX COL  MDG
                                                                                       SLVMUS
                                                                                         LKA
                                                                                          NPLCZEJOR
                                                                                        SRB             TUR
                                                                                                    BIH
                                                                                                     PAN         SDN
                                                                                   VNMBGD ALB KHM BOLDZA        TUN
                                                                           RWA      MNG
                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                     HND          CMRPRY
                                                                                               ECU
                                                                                     MAR             MNE
                                                                                       UGA         LAO
                                                                                                      IDN PSE
         4




                                                                                    NIC       SYR
                                                                                                    KSV
                                                                                            IND                YEM

                                                                                               ETH MWI
                                                                                               BEN
                    1




                                                .3              .5               .7                   .9
                                                      Productivity Elasticity of Distortions



                                                           Panel B: Services



                                                                                                ISR
    Establishment Size (log scale)
                               7




                                                                               LVA
                                     USA                                       EST         IRL
                                                                                          MNE
                                                                                              HRV
                                                                                               RUS
                                                                                             MYS
                   4




                                                                                     COL
                                                                                BLRGHA KGZ
                                                                                LTU
                                                                                 SVNARG
                                                                                PHL MKD
                                                                               SWE
                                                                                       KAZSRB THA VEN
                                                                                     BGR
                                                     ESP                  POL         MNGJOR
                                                                                         PRY
                                                                                       MDA URY
                                                                               SVK HUN
                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                    MEX
                                                                                     SLV TUR     MUS
                                                                                CZE      ECU
                                                                              UKR
                                                                                NIC        YEMKHM
                                                                                             ROU
                                                                            CMRPER BGD
      2




                                                                                 TZA UGA  KEN        BRA
                                                                                    IND BIHLKA
                                                                                   MWI      PSE
                                                                                                     VNM
                                                                                      GEO
                                                                                               ALB
                                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                BEN             LAO
                                                                                                 KSV
                                                                                                  RWA
                                                                                                   TUN
                    1




                                           .3              .5             .7             .9
                                                      Productivity Elasticity of Distortions




Figure 3: Establishment Size and Productivity Elasticity of Distortions




                                                                    21
observations. Table 8 reports the results of similar regressions for the average establishment
size ratio between manufacturing and services. We discuss these empirical results in the context
of prominent models of development and aggregate productivity.


Entry Costs A number of papers, including Barseghyan and DiCecio (2011), Moscoso Boedo
and Mukoyama (2012), and Bento (2014b), consider entry costs (the cost of starting a firm)
as a potential source of low productivity in poor countries. Entry costs reduce entry and the
number of firms in equilibrium, increasing the size of firms above their optimal size and thereby
lowering aggregate productivity. There is no good data on entry costs, for instance the often-
used variable “startup cost” as a measure of regulatory entry costs from the World Bank’s
Doing Business data indicates the cost of incorporating a large firm, not the cost of starting a
firm. Nevertheless, the positive relationships between size and GDP per capita in Panel A of
Tables 6 and 7 suggest that entry costs are not in fact higher in poor countries.

 A related issue is the modeling of entry costs (and other fixed costs) in quantitative models.
Fixed costs are often specified either in terms of goods or in terms of a fixed factor such as
labor. The units in which costs are specified has implications for how various policies affect
aggregate outcomes. It also has implications on how growth affects average establishment size
over time. If wages grow along with GDP per capita, then a cost of entry in units of labor grows
proportionately, which typically implies a constant number of firms per capita and average firm
size. Instead, a goods cost of entry in a growing economy shrinks relative to the operating
profits of firms, implying more entry and lower average firm size. Bollard et al. (2016) examine
firm-level panel data from the United States, China, and India, and conclude that average
firm size does not shrink over time in growing economies, suggesting that fixed costs should
be specified in terms of a fixed factor such as labor rather than (purely) goods. The positive
coefficients on GDP per capita in Tables 6 and 7 suggest that specifying fixed costs in terms
of goods generates counter-factual implications with respect to the cross-country data as well.
Establishments are definitely not smaller in rich countries in manufacturing or services.



                                               22
     Table 6: Determinants of Average Establishment Size in Manufacturing


                               Panel A: Bivariate regressions
              Dependent variable: Average establishment size in manufacturing
   Independent variables:
     GDP per capita                 0.30∗∗∗
                                    (0.05)
     Mnfg. employment                         0.03
                                             (0.05)
     External financing                                0.42∗∗∗
                                                       (0.06)
     Firing costs                                               -0.31∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.08)
     Openness to trade                                                   0.41∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.11)
     Correlated distortions (Mnfg.)                                                                -1.52∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.33)
   Countries                                  134        74          56         52         95         75
   R2                                         0.22      0.01        0.43       0.15       0.19       0.15

                               Panel B: Multivariate regressions
               Dependent variable: Average establishment size in manufacturing
   Independent variables:
      External financing              0.21∗ 0.38∗∗∗ 0.29∗∗
                                      (0.11) (0.07)      (0.11)
                                           ∗
      Firing costs                    -0.17                      -0.29∗∗∗ -0.20∗
                                      (0.10)                      (0.08)  (0.12)
      Openness to trade                        0.17                0.16                             0.30∗∗
                                              (0.13)              (0.12)                            (0.13)
      Correlated distortions (Mnfg.)                    -1.33∗∗∗          -0.85∗∗                  -1.34∗∗∗
                                                         (0.42)           (0.39)                    (0.39)
   Countries                            38      50         34       47      32                        60
     2
   R                                   0.26    0.50       0.43     0.20    0.26                      0.25
Notes: All variables logged, except for correlated distortions. See the text for the definition of variables and
sources. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ refer to one, five, and ten percent levels of
significance.




                                                      23
          Table 7: Determinants of Average Establishment Size in Services


                                Panel A: Bivariate regressions
                 Dependent variable: Average establishment size in services
  Independent variables:
    GDP per capita                   0.32∗∗∗
                                     (0.04)
    Services employment                         -0.01
                                               (0.03)
    External financing                                  0.33∗∗∗
                                                        (0.06)
    Firing costs                                                -0.32∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.07)
    Openness to trade                                                     0.38∗∗∗
                                                                          (0.09)
    Correlated distortions (Serv.)                                                                  -0.84∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.29)
  Countries                                   127           82       53          49        100         66
  R2                                          0.39         0.00     0.40        0.27       0.22       0.07

                              Panel B: Multivariate regressions
                  Dependent variable: Average establishment size in services
  Independent variables:
     External financing              0.20∗∗∗ 0.25∗∗∗
                                     (0.06)   (0.08)
                                         ∗∗∗
     Firing costs                   -0.20              -0.31∗∗∗
                                     (0.07)             (0.07)
                                                   ∗
     Openness to trade                        0.20       0.10    0.26∗∗∗
                                              (0.11)    (0.09)   (0.10)
     Correlated distortions (Mnfg.)                              -0.74∗∗
                                                                 (0.31)
  Countries                            37       53        48       63
    2
  R                                   0.43     0.44      0.30     0.21
Notes: All variables logged, except for correlated distortions. See the text for the definition of variables and
sources. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ refer to one, five, and ten percent levels of
significance.




                                                      24
          Table 8: Determinants of Size Ratio Manufacturing to Services


              Dependent variable: Ratio of average size manufacturing to services
     Independent variables:
       GDP per capita                    0.01
                                         (0.05)
       Employment ratio (M/S)                    0.30
                                                 (0.33)
       External financing                                 0.11
                                                          (0.08)
       Firing costs                                              0.03
                                                                 (0.09)
       Openness to trade                                                  0.04
                                                                          (0.09)
       Correlated distortions gap (M-S)                                           -1.16∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.40)
     Countries                           117     91       50     48       95      63
     R2                                  0.00    0.01     0.05   0.00     0.00    0.10
Notes: All variables logged, except for correlated distortions. See the text for the definition of variables and
sources. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ refers to a one percent level of significance.



Financial Constraints Buera et al. (2011, 2015) develop what has since become a workhorse
model of heterogeneous firms with financial constraints. In the one-sector version of the model,
the effect of financial constraints on average firm size is theoretically ambiguous. Financial con-
straints lead to slower firm growth, which encourages entry due to lower average productivity
among incumbents (Atkeson and Burstein, 2010). But potential entrepreneurs must accumu-
late savings in order to self-finance fixed costs, which lowers entry. In the two-sector version
of the model, where sectors are differentiated with respect to the size of fixed costs (larger
in manufacturing than in services), Buera et al. (2011) specification of fixed costs in terms
of sectoral output results in less ambiguous predictions. Financial constraints bite harder in
manufacturing, as potential entrepreneurs must save longer to start a (relatively) large manu-
facturing firm. As a result, the relative price of manufacturing increases. This relative change
creates an additional wedge between the ease of entry in manufacturing and services, as the
fixed cost of manufacturing output becomes more costly. The result is a larger average size in
manufacturing, and a smaller average size in services.

                                                      25
 Tables 6 and 7 document a positive relationship between average size and the extent of external
financing in an economy, both for manufacturing and service establishments. The extent of
external financing is a widely-used proxy for financial constraints, as the theory predicts a
monotonically negative relationship between the extent of constraints and external financing.
The results in Table 6 are inconsistent with the prediction of the model that manufacturing
firms should be larger with tighter financial constraints and less external financing. Moreover,
Table 8 suggests the ratio of average size in manufacturing to that in services is uncorrelated
with financial constraints. Table 4 also suggests that average size differences across industries
are uncorrelated with GDP per capita. To the extent that financial constraints are more of
a problem in poor countries, the disaggregated industry data also seems inconsistent with the
theory. It is possible that a specification of fixed costs in terms of labor would help reconcile
the implications of the model with data.


Firing Costs Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) extend the model of firm dynamics in Hopen-
hayn (1992) to evaluate the general equilibrium impact of firing costs on aggregate employment.
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) find that firing costs dampen the response of firms’ labor deci-
sions to productivity shocks, lowering aggregate employment and reducing aggregate TFP due
to a misallocation of labor across firms and fewer firms in equilibrium. Average firm size is pre-
dicted to increase with firing costs. This prediction is inconsistent with the data as suggested
by the results in Tables 6 and 7. Among economies with data on firing costs, higher firing costs
are associated with smaller establishments, both in services and manufacturing. Although the
coefficients are not significant across all specifications, they are all negative. Note that Hopen-
hayn and Rogerson (1993) predict a quantitatively small effect on firm size, which we might
not pick up with so few observations and controls. But the negative relationship between firing
costs and establishment size suggests that more research into the mechanisms through which
firing costs operate is needed. One mechanism that we highlight below is that the misallocation
generated by firing costs may induce a change in establishment-level productivity, potentially




                                                26
generating implications for average establishment size more in line with data.5


Endogenous Markups Several strands of the development literature have incorporated en-
dogenous markups in models of firm size. Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Desmet and Par-
ente (2010), for example, use endogenous markups to investigate the pro-competitive gains
from trade, while Bento (2014a) incorporates endogenous markups in a model of innovation
in order to rationalize the empirical relationship between competition and innovation. To our
knowledge, almost all models with endogenous markups and endogenous firm size imply a pos-
itive relationship between population and firm size.6 In models with constant markups such
as Melitz (2003), an increase in population results in a proportional increase in the number of
firms, leaving average firm size unchanged. But if markups are endogenous and depend on the
number of competitors, more firms leads to lower markups, thereby lowering profits (relative
to the constant markup case). As a result, the number of firms increases less than population,
and average firm size is larger. Panel A of Tables 6 and 7 show that establishment size in
services and manufacturing are unrelated to sectoral employment (the product of population
and the sectoral share of employment). Although not shown, average establishment size in each
sector is also unrelated to population. Interpreted through the lens of models with endogenous
markups, these results suggest that while larger populations are associated with more firms,
they are not associated with more competition.


Trade Models of international trade imply that the relationship between openness to trade
and firm size depends on which trade barrier is driving the variation in openness—tariffs vs.
fixed trade costs (Melitz, 2003), fixed firm-specific vs. product-specific trade costs (Bernard
et al., 2011). For example, lowering tariffs across countries should cause exporters to expand
while firms who only sell domestically contract or exit in response to the increase in imports,
   5
      See Da-Rocha et al. (2016) and Da-Rocha et al. (2017) for frameworks where firing costs and misallocation
induce changes in the productivity distribution.
    6
      An exception is Bento (2018b) where firms face a market-entry cost which is increasing in the number of
markets entered. If the number of markets in an economy increases with population, then so does the number
of firms, but each firm continues to serve the same number of markets. As a result, the number of firms in each
market is independent of population.

                                                      27
resulting in larger firms. Table 6 reports a positive relationship between establishment size in
manufacturing and openness to trade, consistent with variation in tariffs (and distance-related
costs) as the dominant driving force behind differences in the extent of trade across countries.
But this result is not robust across all specifications in Table 6. Further, Table 7 reports
an identical unconditional relationship between openness to trade and average establishment
size in services, and Table 8 shows that the relative size of establishments in manufacturing
relative to services is unrelated to how open a country is to trade. To the extent that goods are
more likely to be traded than services, the data seems inconsistent with tariffs driving average
size. Rather, the data seems consistent with differences in openness to trade across countries
being driven by variation in several types of trade barriers, with no one barrier dominating
empirically. It is possible that incorporating inter-sectoral linkages and trade in services, which
has been emphasized less in the trade literature, may generate richer implications for relative
establishment sizes from trade.


Correlated Distortions A recent but growing literature evaluates the impact of misallo-
cation when the wedges faced by firms are dependent on firm characteristics that are in part
chosen by firms. For instance, Hsieh and Klenow (2014), Bento and Restuccia (2017), and
Guner et al. (2018) consider models of misallocation where firms face distortionary effective
taxes that depend on firm productivity, and firms take this into account when choosing their
productivity. In addition to the impact on aggregate productivity from the misallocation of
inputs across firms, correlated distortions reduce the marginal incentive of firms to invest in pro-
ductivity, further reducing aggregate productivity and lowering average firm size. The empirical
results in Tables 6, 7, and 8 are consistent with this broad theory. Average establishment size
in each sector is declining in the extent of correlated distortions, and the ratio of average size in
manufacturing relative to services is decreasing in the difference between correlated distortions
in the two sectors. Note that the type of misallocation (correlated distortions) considered in
this literature comprises many types of policies and institutions that are known to create the
specific patterns including informality, financial frictions, selective regulation, firing costs, and


                                                 28
trade policy, among others. For example, financial frictions may disproportionally impact the
more productive establishments as the credit friction is likely to more greatly affect their op-
timal size, thus reducing the return to investment in productivity and decreasing the average
size of establishments. In calculating the extent of correlated distortions using the reported
decisions of establishments, our measure of correlated distortions captures the net impact of
many policies and institutions working through this mechanism.

 We note that correlated distortions arise from specific policies and institutions discussed earlier
such as financial frictions, firing costs, and trade restrictions (Buera et al., 2013; Hopenhayn,
2014). As a result, an important element in reconciling the implications of models featuring
correlated distortions with the empirical evidence is the endogenous determination of firm-level
productivity. The mechanism generating a link between correlated distortions and average size
relies on the property that establishments reduce their investment in productivity to avoid
higher effective taxes, that is, correlated distortions effectively reduce the return to produc-
tivity investment. This lowers the share of revenue allocated to investment, which results in
higher profits, encouraging entry and thereby lowering average establishment size in equilibrium
(Hopenhayn, 2016).

 We caution that our empirical results in Tables 6, 7, and 8 cannot be used to assess which
variables are most important in explaining the variance in average size across countries since
country samples vary in each regression. For instance, when restricting to the same sample of
countries, financial frictions and correlated distortions are equally important in accounting for
the variance in average establishment sizes across countries, which combined account for about
50 percent of the variance.

 To summarize, models of correlated distortions (including financial frictions, firing costs, and
trade restrictions) with endogenous entry and productivity generate qualitative predictions
consistent with the establishment size data across sectors and countries. Appendix B shows
that the empirical determinants of establishment size just discussed are robust to instead using
only the raw data.. In the next section, we incorporate correlated distortions into a two-sector


                                                29
model to assess the impact on sectoral average establishment size, and to quantify the impact
of correlated distortions on sectoral and aggregate productivity.




4         A Model of Size across Sectors and Countries

We develop a two-sector model of establishment size with endogenous sectoral employment
shares. We focus on the non-agricultural sector and hence the environment includes manufac-
turing and services. We abstract from agriculture as the details of the production unit and
the relevant definition of size are different for agriculture than for the rest of the economy.
Nevertheless, the same economics emphasized for non-agricultural establishments applies for
agriculture as well (Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014).

 There is a stand-in household (of measure one) endowed with one unit of productive time,
and there are two goods produced in sectors: manufacturing and services. The production unit
in each sector is an establishment operating with a decreasing returns to scale technology.7
There are a large number of potential firms who are free to enter, but must pay a fixed entry
cost and make a costly productivity-investment decision before producing. Producers face
output distortions which may be correlated with firm-level productivity, and entrants take these
policy distortions into account when investing in productivity. We assume a static economy for
simplicity, but our results do not depend critically on this assumption. We study a competitive
equilibrium of the economy in which firms take prices as given and free entry ensures the value
of entry is driven to zero. We then consider how the extent of correlated distortions affects the
number of firms, investment, and aggregate output. We begin by describing the environment
in more detail.
    7
        Throughout we use the terms ‘firm’, ‘producer’, and ‘establishment’ interchangeably.




                                                         30
4.1    Economic Environment

Preferences and Endowments There is a representative household of measure 1 that has
preferences for manufacturing (m) and service (s) goods according to the following utility
function,
                                       ρ
                     U (Cm , Cs ) = [bCm + (1 − b)Csρ ]1/ρ , b ∈ (0, 1), ρ < 0.              (2)

The household is endowed with one unit of productive time each period that is supplied inelas-
tically to the market.


Technologies In each sector, an homogeneous good is produced in establishments. An es-
tablishment produces output y according to the following production function,


                                       y(h, z, `; i) = Ai hz`α ,


where ` is labor, Ai is a sector-wide productivity term, h and z are idiosyncratic productivity
terms, and α ∈ (0, 1). Of the productivity terms, h is chosen by the firm upon entering the
market with a sector-specific labor cost wcih hθ with cih > 0 and where w denotes the real wage;
and z is exogenous and known after entering and investing in h according to a distribution with
cdf F (z). There are a large number of potential firms, each of which can become a producer by
incurring a sector-specific labor cost of entry wcie with cie > 0.


Market Structure and Distortions Consider a competitive economy where households and
firms take prices as given. There are a large number of firms operating in the manufacturing and
services sectors, renting labor services from consumers at the rate w and selling consumption
goods to households at prices pm and ps . In each sector, producers face a proportional tax on
revenue τ which depends on firm-level productivity in the following way,


                               1 − τ (h, z; i) = κi · (hz)−γi , γi ≥ 0.                      (3)



                                                  31
where γi is the elasticity of distortions with respect to productivity in sector i and κi is a level
shifter that changes with γi to ensure that the sectoral average weighted distortion (weighted
by each firm’s sectoral revenue share) is constant across different levels of γi . This allows us
to isolate the impact of a higher productivity elasticity of distortions, keeping average distor-
tions constant. Considering different levels of γi while keeping the average distortion constant
is consistent with the counterfactuals examined in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Bento and
Restuccia (2017). In what follows, we assume that this average tax is equal to zero.


Definition of Equilibrium A competitive equilibrium is a list of prices (w, pm , ps ); decision
functions for firms in each sector: labor demand `(h, z), operating profits π(h, z), endogenous
productivity hi , value of entry Vei , and number of firms Ni in each sector; and allocation for
consumers: Cm , Cs such that;


  (i) Given w, ps , and pm ; allocation (Cm , Cs ) solves the household problem, i.e. maximizes
      utility subject to the budget constraint.

 (ii) Given w, ps , and pm ; producers in each sector choose labor `(h, z) to maximize per-period
      operating profits π(h, z), which in turn determine the value of an incumbent producer.

(iii) Given w, ps , and ps ; entrants choose productivity hi in each sector to maximize the
      expected value of operating profits net of investment.

(iv) Free entry Vei = 0 in each sector ensures that the expected value of operating profits is
      equal to the optimal productivity investment plus the entry cost.

 (v) Markets clear, i.e., the supply of labor (equal to one) is equal to the quantity of labor
      demanded by firms plus the entry and investment costs of labor; and the supply and
      demand of the output good are equal.




                                                  32
4.2    Characterization

The household problem is simply to maximize utility subject to the budget constraint by choos-
ing consumption in each sector,


                                            ρ
                                     max [bCm + (1 − b)Csρ ]1/ρ ,


subject to
                                              pm Cm + ps Cs = w.

The solution to this problem (Cm , Cs ) satisfies,

                                                         ρ−1
                                           b         Cm              pm
                                                                 =      ,                        (4)
                                          1−b        Cs              ps

and the budget constraint specified above.

 A producer with productivity hz in sector i solves the following problem,


                              max (1 − τ (h, z; i))pi y(h, z, `; i) − w`,
                                `



where y(h, z, `; i) = Ai hz`α and (1−τ (h, z; i)) = κi ·(hz)−γi , which implies the following optimal
output y(h, z; i) and operating profits π(h, z; i),

                                                                                      α
                                                                                     1−α
                                                 1        αpi · (1 − τ (h, z; i))
                        y(h, z; i) = (Ai hz)    1−α                                         ,    (5)
                                                                    w

                                                                               1
                                         αα pi · (1 − τ (h, z; i))Ai hz
                                                                            1−α
                      π(h, z; i) =                                                  (1 − α).     (6)
                                                      wα

Before learning z and producing, an entrant to sector i must choose h to solve the following
problem,
                                     max E[π(h, z; i)] − wcih hθ ,
                                          h




                                                      33
which implies
                                                                 
                                                        1 − γi
                                   wcih hθi   =                       Ez [π(z; i)].          (7)
                                                       (1 − α)θ

Finally, free entry ensures that firms enter each sector until expected operating profits net of
productivity investment is exactly equal to the cost of entry,

                                                                      
                                             (1 − α)θ − 1 + γi
                              wcie   =                                     Ez [π(z; i)].     (8)
                                                 (1 − α)θ

Note that equations (7) and (8) together imply the following h is chosen by firms in each sector,

                                                                               θ1
                                                         cie (1 − γi )
                                              
                                     hi =                                            .       (9)
                                                  cih [(1 − α) − 1 + γi ]


 The average (weighted) distortion in each sector is characterized by the following expression,

                                                   Ez [y(z; i)(1 − τ (z; i))]
                                     1 − τi =                                 .             (10)
                                                          Ez [y(z; i)]

To keep τi equal to zero across different values of γi , we set κi equal to
                                                           h 1−αγi i
                                                         Ez z 1−α
                                              κi = hγi i    h 1−γi i .                      (11)
                                                         Ez z 1−α


 Combining equations (5), (6), (8), and (11), we can now derive the average size of firms in
each sector. If Ni and Li denote the number of firms and the quantity of labor in sector i, then
average firm size in sector i is
                                         Li          θcie
                                            =                   .                           (12)
                                         Ni   (1 − α)θ − 1 + γi

We note that average size in each sector is increasing in entry costs cie and decreasing in
γi . Average size is not dependent on exogenous sectoral productivity. Average size is also
independent of exogenous aggregate productivity.

 Equations (5), (12), labor-market clearing, and goods-market clearing can be combined to


                                                          34
derive measured T F P in each sector;
                                                                                          h 1−αγi i
                             α
                                                 θ1                       (1−α)θ−1 E   z 1−α
                      Ci   α            1 − γi            (1 − α)θ − 1 + γi      θ      z
           T F Pi ≡      = 1−α Ai                                                         h 1−γi iα .   (13)
                      Li  θ               cih                    cie                   Ez z 1−α


Sectoral T F P is increasing in exogenous productivity Ai , and decreasing in the costs of entry
and productivity investment (cie and cih ) as well as the productivity elasticity of distortions γi .
The first two bracketed terms in the T F Pi expression in equation (13) represent the combined
effects of (cie , cih , γi ) on the number of firms per worker Ni and the endogenous productivity
term hi , which affect T F Pi in opposite ways. The last term in equation (13) represents the
negative effect on aggregate T F Pi arising from misallocation due to distortions γi .

 The price of manufactured goods, relative to services, is

                                                 pm   T F Ps
                                                    =        .                                          (14)
                                                 ps   T F Pm


 We solve for sectoral labor shares by combining the above results with equation (4) from the
household’s problem. The shares of labor allocated to each sector are:

                                              Ψ                        1
                                  Lm =           ;             Ls =       ,                             (15)
                                             Ψ+1                      Ψ+1

where
                                                      1 
                                                     1−ρ                  ρ
                                                                         1−ρ
                                              b                T F Pm
                                 Ψ≡                                             .
                                             1−b               T F Ps

In the Cobb-Douglas case, Lm = b when ρ goes to 0, and sectoral shares do not depend on
sectoral productivities. When ρ < 0, a higher ratio of productivity in manufacturing to services
results in a higher share of labor in services. In a dynamic version of the model, if labor
productivity growth is faster in manufacturing than in services, then labor reallocates over
time from manufacturing to services.

 We define real GDP as equivalent to U (Cm , Cs ). If the price of a unit of real GDP is normalized


                                                          35
to one, then GDP is equal to the wage w. Using equations (2), (13), (14), and (15), we can
express the wage as

                                                                             1
                       w = (Ψ + 1)−1 [b · T F Pmρ · Ψρ + (1 − b) · T F Psρ ] ρ ,


or
                                             1                     1−ρ
                                w = (1 − b) ρ · T F Ps · (1 + Ψ)    ρ    .                     (16)




5     Quantitative Analysis

We calibrate a benchmark economy to U.S. data. We use the calibrated model to quantify
the implications of cross-country variations in the degree of correlated distortions and entry
costs in each sector on establishment size and productivity in each sector; and on the sectoral
composition of the economy and aggregate output.



5.1    Calibration

We calibrate a benchmark economy to U.S. data, with τ i set to zero and γi to 0.09 in each
sector. The parameters to calibrate are: preferences (b,ρ), entry and productivity investment
costs (cie ,cih ), technology (α,θ), and exogenous productivity distributions (Ai ,F (z)). We assume
cih = 1 in both sectors since our model cannot separately identify the level of costs cih and
exogenous sector productivity Ai .

 We assume α = 2/3 which maps into the curvature parameter used in the monopolistic
competition model of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), where the elasticity of substitution between
varieties is assumed to be 3. For θ, we choose this parameter to match the elasticity of revenue
with respect to investment in productivity reported in Bento and Restuccia (2017), equal to




                                                  36
0.72. In our model, this elasticity is equal to

                                             1 − αγi
                                                     .
                                            (1 − α)θ

With the value of α and using γi = 0.09 in the U.S. in both sectors, we obtain θ = 3.92.
We choose cie to match average size in manufacturing and services from equation (12) in the
United States, obtaining cm             s
                          e = 2.18 and ce = 0.50. From Duarte and Restuccia (2010), we select

ρ = −1.5. Given ρ and a target for the relative price of manufacturing to services, we obtain
b = 0.05 to match U.S. sectoral shares from equation (15).

 We obtain distributions of z for each sector in our benchmark economy by interpreting the
employment-size distributions of establishments in the United States through the lens of our
model. For this purpose we use data from the U.S. Census Bureau. Our model with no
distortions implies a simple mapping between productivity z and employment in equation (5),
such that the labor demand of establishment i relative to that of establishment j is;

                                                            1−γ
                                                            1−α
                                         `i           zi
                                            =                      .
                                         `j           zj

The U.S. data reports the number of establishments in each employment-size bin, using the
number of paid employees as the measure of employment. We adjust the data to account
for both unpaid workers and owner-managers by assuming the number of persons engaged
among nonemployers ranges from 1-2, and by assuming the number of persons engaged among
establishments with 1-4 paid employees ranges from 3-4. As a result, we obtain separate
distributions of persons engaged per establishment in manufacturing and services ranging from
1 to 3000 persons. In each sector, we match exactly the fraction of establishments falling
within each size bin, illustrated in Figure 4. The size distribution of establishments in services
is more skewed to the right than in manufacturing, with less dispersion in size among service
establishments. For our calibrated productivity distributions, we assume the productivity of
establishments within each bin are uniformly distributed.


                                                  37
                              .8
                Fraction of Establishments
                 .2          .4
                              0        .6




                                             1−2   3−4   5−9   10−19    20−49   50−99    100−249 250−499 500−999   1−3000
                                                                       Persons Engaged

                                                                Manufacturing                 Services




                                             Figure 4: Establishment Size Distributions, U.S. Data


 Importantly, we treat very small establishments (including ‘nonemployers’) as simply small
establishments - that is, establishments with access to the same technology as larger establish-
ments, but with lower productivity. This is consistent with a growing literature comparing the
characteristics of nonemployers to employers in the U.S., including Davis et al. (2009), Acs et
al. (2009), and Fairlie et al. (2018). The literature has documented that nonemployers: coexist
with employers within distinct industries; share similar survival rates with small employer es-
tablishments; and transition into employer status at a rate consistent with average employment
growth across small employers. Although we do not have cross-country data on the share of
establishments that are nonemployers, in the next section we discuss the implications of our
model for the share of nonemployers.

 This completes the calibration for the benchmark economy. We now characterize parameters
that differ across countries. We assume countries are otherwise identical to the benchmark
economy except on 6 exogenous parameters: the productivity elasticity of distortions γi , entry
costs cie , and exogenous productivity Ai in each sector i. The values of γi for each sector and
country are given by the data illustrated in Figure 3. We choose cie in each sector and country

                                                                          38
to match the average establishment size data across sectors and countries reported in Figure 1.
Combining the above values with sectoral shares in each country from Duarte and Restuccia
(2019), we back out the ratio of exogenous productivity between manufacturing and services
Am /As using equations (13) and (15). Finally, differences in real GDP per capita determine
the absolute differences in Am (and As ) across countries using equation (16).



5.2    Results

The Role of Correlated Distortions We start by reporting how variation in γi alone
across countries affects average establishment size, sectoral productivity, and sectoral output.
Table 9 reports the results of increases in γ, from 0.09 in the benchmark economy to 0.9 in the
most distorted economy. For these results, we assume γm = γs so that correlated distortions
are the same across sectors within an economy but vary across economies. For instance, an
increase in correlated distortions from 0.09 to 0.7—well within the range observed in the cross-
country elasticities reported earlier—implies that average establishment size drops by about 60
percent in both sectors: from 22 persons engaged to 9 in the manufacturing sector and from 5
to 2 persons engaged in the service sector. This range in establishment size corresponds well
with the range reported earlier in the data across rich and developing countries. Similarly,
productivity in each sector drops by 41 percent, while the direct impact of misallocation is
about half as large. As a result of these effects, sectoral output drops by about 35 percent in
each sector with a similar effect on aggregate output.


Average Establishment Size We now study the implications of our data on the produc-
tivity elasticity of distortions on average establishment size across sectors and countries. By
construction, cross-country and sector variation in correlated distortions γi and entry costs
cie match average establishment sizes in all countries. Recall from equation (12) that average
establishment size depends on both correlated distortions and entry costs. Since entry costs
are derived as a residual, we are interested in the extent to which cross-country variation in γi


                                               39
               Table 9: Model Results across Correlated Distortions γ


                 γ       Establishment       Endogenous       Impact from         Sectoral
                              Size           Productivity     Misallocation       Output
                         (M)      (S)          (Both)         (M)     (S)        (M) (S)
                 0.09     22       5.0              1           1         1        1    1
                 0.3      14       3.3            0.84        0.96      0.95     0.92 0.92
                 0.5      11       2.5            0.72        0.88      0.89     0.80 0.80
                 0.7       9       2.0            0.59        0.78      0.82     0.63 0.67
                 0.9       7       1.6            0.43        0.67      0.77     0.42 0.48
Notes: Results of the model for variations in γ assuming γ = γm = γs . Entry costs and exogenous sector
productivity are kept constant. Columns report equilibrium values for average establishment size in each sector,
endogenous sectoral productivity, sectoral productivity from factor misallocation, and real sectoral output.
Results in columns 4 through 8 are reported relative to the benchmark U.S. economy.



can account for the variation in establishment sizes in the data. Figure 5 reports the average
establishment size in the data and the model when only γi varies for each sector. We note
that differences in γi in poorer countries vis a vis the benchmark economy generate large dif-
ferences in average size both in manufacturing and services. For example, the average γi across
developing countries in our data is 0.78 in manufacturing and 0.87 in services. This implies an
average size of 8 in manufacturing and 1.7 in services. In the data, the average across coun-
tries with γ’s close to these averages is an average size of 9 persons engaged in manufacturing
and 2.8 in services. These averages are calculated over countries with γm ∈ (0.73, 0.83) and
γs ∈ (0.82, 0.92).

 In rationalizing the large difference in average establishment size between the United States
and poorer countries in our data, the quantitative model does quite well. At the same time, it is
also clear from Figure 5 that the model has a difficult time generating the observed variation in
average size among poorer countries. Mechanically, the model predicts a decreasing marginal
impact from γ on average size, as documented in Table 9. Given the consistently high γ’s
estimated across the (mostly low-income) countries in our sample, the model predicts much
less variation in average size across these countries. As a result, the differences in average
establishment size predicted by the model due to variation in γ are small compared to the

                                                      40
                     25




                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   USA
                                                                                               USA
                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                  4
 Model Establishment Size (log scale)




                                                                                                                               Model Establishment Size (log scale)
                          15




                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESP

                                                                                  ESP
              10




                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                       POL
                                                                                     HUN                                                                                                                POL
                                                                        RWA          MDA
                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                     KAZ
                                                                                   KGZ                                                                                                     CMR
                                                                               MEX
                                                                                GHA
                                                                                PER ARG                 TTO                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                            PER    SVK    SWE            LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                              LVA                                                                                              NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CZE PAN         LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PHL BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SVN
                                                               NIC MAR   VNM
                                                                       SVK
                                                                       MNG
                                                                               COL
                                                                               URY
                                                                                          LTU  BRA
                                                                                          IRLVEN UKR                                                                              GEO     BGD TZAMWI
                                                                                                                                                                                        IND           HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SLV ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                         COLGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             BGR
                                                                  UGA  HND
                                                                         BGD     THA
                                                                               MDGEST
                                                                               SLV   HRV                                                                                                UGA        MDAKAZ     MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MKD
                                                                            SRB
                                                                              LKA    GEO
                                                                               MUS MKD  ROU     BGR                                                                                      KEN  BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                TUR JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ECU   URYMYS HRV SRBMNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          KGZ        IRL
                                                  BENETH   IND SYR      KHM
                                                                      ECU
                                                                              NPL
                                                                         ALB CZE
                                                                              JOR
                                                                                      PHL
                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                       ISR                                                                                 RWA
                                                                                                                                                                               ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                 LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                KSVVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                       LKA  KHM YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                        PSEROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RUS         ISR
                                                                                 BTN                                                                                       TUN                              THA
                                                    MWI      KSV   LAO CMR
                                                                        BOLBIH                                      MYS                                                                        MUS
                                                                IDN MNEPRY
                                                                        DZA
                                                                          PAN
                                                                             TUR                                                                                                MAR           BRA
                                                                 PSE
                                                           YEM          TUN                  RUS
                                                                          SDN
                     5




                                                                                                                                                  1
                                          1           2       4             10                 25             50                                                       1                  2                4                          10
                                                             Establishment Size (log scale)                                                                                                     Establishment Size (log scale)



                                                           (a) Manufacturing                                                                                                                      (b) Services

                                                                  Figure 5: Average Establishment Size, Model vs. Data
                     25




                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                        MYS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ISR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MNE
                                                                  UKR                                                                                                                                                       SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LVA             IRL
 Entry Costs




                                                                                                                               Entry Costs




                                                                               BGR                                                                                                                                              EST
         5




                                                                                 LVA
                                                                                                  IRL                                                                                                                MYS
                                                PHL                    MKD
                                                                                 LTU   ISR       SWE                                                                                                  MNG              MKD LTU
                                                                     GEO                                                                                                                                     KGZ URY      BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PHL                          SVN
                                                             MDA ARG          KAZEST
                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                        SVN                                                                                                                     COLARG
                                                                                                                               1




                                                         KGZ
                                                     JOR LKA          TUR         POL                                                                                                                    PRY   ECU         KAZHUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MEX         SWE
                                                       PER    COL URY                   CZE                                                                                                                JOR                POL
                                                                     ZAF SRBMEX                               USA                                                                                              MDA
                                                   PRY        BOL       ALB                ESP                                                                                                                        TUR       SVK
                                                             ECU                                                                                                                                                                  CZE
                                                MNG                  MNE             SVK                                                                                         TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UKR                      ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                                                                                  .5
                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ALB


                                         2000                           10000                                       50000                                             500                       2500                  10000                           50000
                                                           GDP per Capita (non−ag, log scale)                                                                                                 GDP per Capita (non−ag, log scale)



                                                           (a) Manufacturing                                                                                                                      (b) Services

                                                                              Figure 6: Entry Costs and GDP per Capita


observed size differences. However, the variation in average size unexplained by differences in
γ does not appear systematically related to the level of development since the implied entry
costs for each country, calculated as a residual to match observed average establishment size
in each sector, suggest that entry costs are no higher in poorer countries, if anything they are
lower (see Figure 6). While surprising at first sight, this implication of entry costs is consistent
with smaller establishments in poor countries.8
                   8
    These results are also consistent with the evidence in Bento (2018a), who uses a model of multi-product
firms to decompose observed barriers to competition into product-specific barriers and firm-specific entry costs.
He finds entry costs hardly vary across countries and are slightly lower in poorer countries.



                                                                                                                          41
 To calibrate the model in Section 5.1, we assumed that nonemployers in the U.S. data are
establishments with less than three persons engaged (including owner-managers and unpaid
workers). If we continue to assume that establishments with less than three persons engaged
do not employ paid workers, then we can use the calibrated model to predict how the fraction
of nonemployers in a sector should change, given a country’s average establishment size and
productivity elasticity of distortions in each sector. While we do not have data related to the
size distribution of establishments across countries, we can compare the predictions of the model
with data from Sierra Leone, which reports an average establishment size in manufacturing of
2.3 persons engaged, much lower than the average size in the United States (22). We do not
have data for the productivity elasticity of distortions for Sierra Leone in manufacturing, but
if we assume a value of 0.78 (the average among developing countries), the model predicts
that the fraction of establishments that are nonemployers will be 90%, compared to 50% in
U.S. manufacturing. This is close to the 83% reported for Sierra Leone’s manufacturing sector,
suggesting that average size (and as a consequence, correlated distortions) may be important
in accounting for the variation in the share of nonemployer establishments across countries.


Sectoral Productivity The elements affecting sectoral productivity in the model, as spec-
ified in equation (13) are: exogenous variation in sector productivity Ai , endogenous entry
productivity, establishment size, and misallocation. Figure 7 shows the variation in sector pro-
ductivity that arises due to variation in γ. As with establishment size, the model generates
a substantial drop in sectoral productivity in distorted economies which is about half of that
observed in the data. Of the total impact of correlated distortions on sectoral productivity, Ta-
ble 9 suggests just over half of the impact comes from misallocation across establishments and
the rest from the distortionary effects on entry and investment. Relative to the model’s results
for differences in average establishment size, Figure 7 shows the model generates variation in
sectoral productivity that more closely matches the differences implied by the data.




                                               42
                                                                                                                   USA                                                                                                                                USA
                         1




                                                                                                                                                       1
 Model Sectoral Labor Productivity (log scale)




                                                                                                                               Model Sectoral Labor Productivity (log scale)
                                                                                                                         ESP                                                                                                         ESP

                                                                                             POL




                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                      .8


                                                                                   HUN
                                                                                     BLR
                                                           MDA KGZ                    SVN       KAZ                                                                                                                       POL
                                                            GHA                      ARG                 MEX
                                                                                       LVA         PER                                                                                                     UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                PER                   LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EST SVK SWE
                                                                        LTU                        COL                                                                                 PHL                               LTU CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SVN
                                                    VNM             MNG       IRL
                                                                             URY     SVK                                                                                       TZA
                                                                         BGD           UKR                          KEN                                                                                    ARG            HUN




                                                                                                                                                        .6
                                                                                                      UGA                                                                                             COL     GEOMEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BGR
                                                                                       GEO BGR EST
                         .6




                                                               LKA          SRB                                                                                                              MNG
                                                  TZA                             MKD                                                                                                                     MDA   MKD KAZ
                                                                          ALB                        PHL
                                                                                  IND        CZE   SWE                                                                                        JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                PRY
                                                                       KHM ECU                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KGZECU MNE
                                                                                             JOR                                                                                                                TUR                         IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LKA URY    SRB
                                                                              CMR           MWI                                                                                                               MYSALB
                                                                   LAO        MYS                                                                                                                                              ISR
                                                                                   BIH
                                                                 PRY




                                                                                                                                        .4
        .4




                                                                       TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUS



                                                          .2                      .4             .6      .8    1     1.2                                                                               .2              .4        .6        .8     1
                                                               Sectoral Labor Productivity (log scale)                                                                               Sectoral Labor Productivity (log scale)



                                                               (a) Manufacturing                                                                                                          (b) Services

                                                                        Figure 7: Sectoral Labor Productivity, Model vs. Data


Sectoral Employment and Aggregate Productivity We now explore the implications
for sectoral employment and aggregate productivity. Figure 8a illustrates the variation in
the employment share of manufacturing relative to services generated by the model with only
variation in γi across countries and the variation in the data. The model captures about half
the variation in the ranges of employment across sectors but we note, as discussed earlier, that
there is not a systematic relationship between sectoral shares of manufacturing and services in
the non-agricultural sector and GDP per capita in the data. Figure 8b reports the variation in
non-agriculture GDP per capita in the model and data. We isolate the effect of differences in
observed γi across sectors and countries on GDP per capita by applying each economy’s γi to
our benchmark U.S. economy, while keeping Ai and cie constant at U.S. levels in each sector.
The model implies substantial variation in non-agricultural GDP per capita and this variation
represents almost 50 percent of the variation observed in the data (≈ log(3)/ log(10)).




6                                                Conclusion

We construct and document comprehensive and comparable data for the average size of estab-
lishments across countries within both manufacturing and services. We report a strong positive



                                                                                                                          43
                                               .35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   USA




                                                                                                                                                    1
 Model Employment Share Ratio (Lm/Ls) (log scale)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ESP

                                                                                                     CMR
                                       .3

                                                                                               TUR




                                                                                                                                   Model GDP per Capita (log scale)
                                                                                                                                                                 .8
                                                                                   MWI                                                                                                                         POL
                                                                             SWE        CHL             PRY                                                                                           ZAF CHL
                                                                                  CZEBIH MOZ               PAK
                                                                          PHL
                                                                            BOLEST                                                                                                      PER     UKR        LVA
                                                                                       MLIETHIND
                                                                                            UKR                          TZA                                                                                LTU    SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ESTSVK
                           .25




                                                                                      ARM                                                                                                                      HUN CZE SWE
                                                                   ESP     JOR              SVK                                                                       TZA        PHL             ARG     MEX
                                                                           USA BGREGY          CIV    BGD
                                                                                    MYS GEO ECU                                                                                               COL




                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                              BWA      MKD
                                                                                     LVA               LTU                                                                                         GEO    BGR
                                                                       UGA ZMBPER                  NPL                                                                            MNG        MDA ARM       KAZ
                                                                                          SWZ LAO                                                                                                     MKD
                                                                      MRT COL    LBNPOL               MNG              ZWE
                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                       BLR ALB               GHA TJK                                                                 PAK KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                           AZE
                                                                     MEX    ZAF       ARG                                                                                                     BOL
                                                         KEN     ISR                   SRB
                                                                                         HUN             LKA                                                                           JOR   ECU                        IRL
                                                                          AZE              KHM         GIN                                                                           PRY LKA     URY    SRB
                                                                          KAZ        IRL
                                                                                       URY
                                                                                       BDI                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                            MDA                                                                                       ALB
               .2




                                                                                                   KGZ                                                                                              MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TUR           ISR




                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                MDG
                                                                           AGO
 .15




                                                                                              VNM

                                                                .2                .3              .4            .5       .6                                                                     .2           .4    .6     .8   1
                                                               Employment Share Ratio (Lm/Ls) (log scale)                                                                    GDP per Capita (non−ag, log scale)



                                                     (a) Sectoral Employment Ratio (Lm /Ls )                                                                                (b) GDP per Capita

                                                                                                    Figure 8: Model versus Data


relationship between establishment sizes and GDP per capita and a remarkably similar income
elasticity of average establishment size in manufacturing and services. We also construct and
document data for the productivity elasticity of distortions across a large set of countries for
manufacturing and service sectors showing a strong negative relationship between this elasticity
and GDP per capita in both sectors.

 Relating the average size data to several prominent theories of development and TFP, we find
that measures of correlated distortions are robustly related to average size and, in particular,
to the ratio of average size across sectors. We then consider an otherwise standard model
of production heterogeneity with endogenous entry and productivity investment to assess the
quantitative impact of policy distortions on establishment size, establishment productivity, and
aggregate output. In the theory, entry and productivity investment by establishments is affected
by the productivity elasticity of distortions. In a version of the model calibrated to match U.S.
data, increasing the productivity elasticity of distortions from 0.09 to 0.7—a level observed for
many developing countries in our data—reduces average establishment size in each sector by 60
percent, establishment-level productivity by 41 percent, and output per worker by 37 percent
in manufacturing and 33 percent in services.

 Our results suggest a strong link between policy distortions (misallocation) and technology


                                                                                                                              44
across countries that substantially contributes to differences in establishment size and output
per capita across countries. Our evidence on distortions and average establishment sizes across
sectors and countries suggest similar impacts of policy distortions on manufacturing and services
industries, even though establishment size is generally larger in manufacturing than in services.
We also uncover substantial variation in establishment sizes across service industries, which we
think is an important issue that warrants further work.




                                               45
References
Acs, Zoltan J., Brian Headd, and Hezekiah Agwara, “Nonemployer Start-up Puzzle,”
 Technical Report, Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy 2009.

Adamopoulos, Tasso and Diego Restuccia, “The Size Distribution of Farms and Interna-
 tional Productivity Differences,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1667–1697.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Tomás Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and Interna-
 tional Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.

Barseghyan, Levon and Riccardo DiCecio, “Entry costs, industry structure, and cross-
 country income and TFP differences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2011, 146 (5), 1828–1851.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta, “Measuring and Analyz-
 ing Cross-Country Differences in Firm Dynamics,” in “Producer Dynamics: New Evidence
 from Micro Data” University of Chicago Press 2009, pp. 15–76.

Beck, Thorsten, Aslı Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, “Financial institutions and
 markets across countries and over time: The updated financial development and structure
 database,” The World Bank Economic Review, 2010, 24 (1), 77–92.

Bento, Pedro, “Competition as a discovery procedure: Schumpeter meets Hayek in a model
 of innovation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2014, 6 (3), 124–52.

  , “Niche Firms, Mass Markets, and Income Across Countries: Accounting for the Impact of
  Entry Costs,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2014, 48, 147–58.

  , “Competition, Innovation, and the Number of Firms,” Technical Report, Texas A&M Uni-
  versity 2018.

  , “Trade Without Scale Effects,” Technical Report, Texas A&M University 2018.

   and Diego Restuccia, “Misallocation, establishment size, and productivity,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (3), 267–303.

Bernard, Andrew B, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott, “Multiproduct firms
 and trade liberalization,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1271–1318.

Boedo, Hernan J. Moscoso and Toshihiko Mukoyama, “Evaluating the Effects of Entry
 Regulations and Firing Costs on International Income Differences,” Journal of Economic
 Growth, 2012, 17 (2), 143–170.


                                            46
Bollard, Albert, Peter J Klenow, and Huiyu Li, “Entry Costs Rise with Development,”
 2016. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.

Buera, Francisco J, Benjamin Moll, and Yongseok Shin, “Well-intended policies,” Re-
 view of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16 (1), 216–230.

  , Joseph P Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin, “Finance and development: A tale of two
  sectors,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1964–2002.

  , , and , “Entrepreneurship and financial frictions: A macrodevelopment perspective,”
  Annual Review of Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 409–436.

Da-Rocha, José-Marı́a, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia, “Firing costs,
 misallocation, and aggregate productivity,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research 2016.

  , , and , “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with endogenous establishment-
  level productivity,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ronald S. Jarmin, C. J. Krizan, Javier Mi-
 randa, Alfred Nucci, and Kristin Sandusky, “Measuring the Dynamics of Young and
 Small Businesses: Integrating the Employer and Nonemployer Universes,” Producer Dynam-
 ics: New Evidence from Micro Data, 2009, pp. 329–366.

D’Erasmo, Pablo N and Hernan J Moscoso Boedo, “Financial structure, informality
 and development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59 (3), 286–302.

Desmet, Klaus and Stephen L Parente, “Bigger is better: market size, demand elasticity,
 and innovation,” International Economic Review, 2010, 51 (2), 319–333.

Dias, Daniel, Carlos Robalo Marques, Christine Richmond et al., “Comparing misal-
 location between sectors in Portugal,” Banco de Portugal, Economics Research Department
 Economic Bulletin and Financial Stability Report Article, 2016, 201602.

Duarte, Margarida and Diego Restuccia, “The Role of the Structural Transformation in
 Aggregate Productivity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 129–173.

   and , “Relative prices and sectoral productivity,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2019.

Fairlie, Robert W., Javier Miranda, and Nikolas Zolas, “Job Creation and Survival
  among Entrepreneurs: Evidence from the Universe of U.S. Startups,” Technical Report,
  University of California, Santa Cruz 2018.

                                           47
Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110,
 458–474.

Guner, Nezih, Andrii Parkhomenko, and Gustavo Ventura, “Managers and productiv-
 ity differences,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2018, 29, 256–282.

Heckman, James and Carmen Pagés, “Introductory Chapter,” Law and Employment:
 Lessons from the Latin America and the Caribbean, 2004, pp. 1–108.

Herrendorf, Berthold and Ákos Valentinyi, “Measuring Factor Income Shares at the
 Sectoral Level,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11, 820–835.

Herrendorf, Berthold M., Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi, “Growth and
 Structural Transformation,” Handbook of Economic Growth, 2014, 2, 855–941.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A., “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,” Econo-
 metrica, 1992, 60, 1127–50.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A, “Firms, Misallocation, and Aggregate Productivity: A Review,” An-
 nual Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 735–770.

  , “Firm Size and Development,” Economı́a, 2016, 17 (1), 27–49.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A. and Richard Rogerson, “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A
 General Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, pp. 915–938.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
 and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

   and , “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  August 2014, 129 (3), 1035–1084.

Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, “What Determines Firm
 Size?,” Technical Report, University of Southern California 2001.

Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
 1978, pp. 508–523.

Melitz, Marc J, “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
 productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Melitz, Marc J. and Giancarlo I.P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (1), 295–316.


                                            48
Ordóñez, Julio César Leal, “Tax collection, the informal sector, and productivity,” Review
 of Economic Dynamics, 2014, 17 (2), 262–286.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
 with Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707–720.

   and , “The causes and costs of misallocation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017,
  31 (3), 151–74.

Tybout, James R, “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do,
 and Why?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2000, 38 (1), 11–44.




                                             49
Appendix

A     Service Sector Establishment Size Data

Table 10 lists each country in the final service sector dataset, the number of industries for
which data is available, and the sources from which data have been collected. See Bento and
Restuccia (2017) for the corresponding table for manufacturing.

                        Table 10: List of Countries and Sources

  Country             Code   Industries Sources
 Âland Islands       ALA    5          Statistics and Research Âland: Statistical Yearbook of
                                        Âland 2010 and www.asub.ax
 Albania              ALB    6          Instituti i Statistikave:      www.instat.gov.al/en/figures/
                                        statistical-databases.aspx
 American Samoa       ASM    9          U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
 Andorra              AND    8          Departament d’Estadı́stica: www.estadistica.ad
 Anguilla             AIA    8          Anguilla Statistics Department: Abstract of Statistics 2000
 Argentina            ARG    8          Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica y Censos: 2005 Economic
                                        Census
 Aruba                ABW    8          Central Bureau of Statistics: Business Count 2003
 Australia            AUS    9          Australian Bureau of Statistics: Counts of Australian Busi-
                                        nesses 2007, Labour Force Surveys (Quarterly)
 Austria              AUT    8          Statistik Austria: statcube.at
 Bahrain              BHR    8          Kingdom of Bahrain Central Informatics Organization:
                                        Population, Housing, Buildings, Establishments and Agri-
                                        culture Census
 Bangladesh           BGD    9          Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics: Economic Census 2013
 Belgium              BEL    7          OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
 Benin                BEN    9          Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse
                                        Economique: General Census of Companies
 Bosnia and Herze-    BIH    5          Institute for Statistics of FB&H: Statistical Yearbook 2012
 govina, Federation
 of
 Brazil               BRA    9          Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics: Cadastro
                                        Central de Empresas
 Brunei               BRN    7          Department of Economic Planning and Development:
                                        Brunei Darussalam Statistical Yearbook 2010
 Bulgaria             BGR    7          Eurostat
 Cambodia             KHM    8          National Institute of Statistics: Economic Census 2011
 Cameroon             CMR    5          Institut National de la Statistique du Cameroun: Recense-
                                        ment Général des Entreprises 2009
 Canada               CAN    9          Statistics Canada: CANSIM
 Cape Verde           CPV    9          Instituto Nacional de Estatı́stica: Estatı́sticas de Empresas
                                        - Inquérito Anual ás Empresas 2013

                                               50
                     Table 10: List of Countries and Sources

Country            Code   Industries Sources
Chad               TCD    8          Institut National de la Statistique, des Etudes Economiques
                                     et Démographiques: Recensement Général des Entreprises
Columbia           COL    4          Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadı́stica:
                                     www.dane.gov.co
Croatia            CRV    8          Eurostat and Central Bureau of Statistics: Statistical Year-
                                     book 2009
Cyprus             CYP    7          Eurostat
Czech Republic     CZE    7          OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Denmark            DNK    7          OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Dominican    Re-   DNK    7          Oficina Nacional de Estadı́stica: Registro Nacional de Es-
public                               tablecimientos
Ecuador            ECU    8          Instituto Nacional Estadı́stica y Censos: National Economic
                                     Census 2010
El Salvador        SLV    9          Ministerio de Economica: Tomo I de los VII Censos
                                     Económicos Nacionales 2005
Estonia            EST    7          Statistics Estonia:       Statistical Yearbook 2011 and
                                     pub.stat.ee
Faroe Islands      FRO    7          Statistics Faroe Islands: www.hagstova.fo
Finland            FIN    7          Statistics Finland: www.stat.fi
France             FRA    8          Eurostat
French Guiana      GUF    7          Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques:
                                     L’Enquête Annuelle d’Entreprise en Guyane en 2006 and
                                     Tableaux Économiques Régionaux Guyane
French Polynesia   PYF    8          Institut de la Statistique de la Polynésie Française:
                                     www.ispf.pf and Les entreprises polynésiennes en 2010
FYR Macedonia      MKD    7          State Statistical Office: www.stat.gov.mk
Georgia            GEO    8          National Statistics Office of Georgia: Statistical Yearbooks
                                     2008 and www.geostat.ge
Germany            DEU    7          Eurostat and OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Ghana              GHA    9          Ghana Statistical Service: Integrated Business Establish-
                                     ment Survey 2014
Greece             GRC    7          Eurostat and OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Greenland          GRL    7          Statistics Greenland: bank.stat.gl
Guadeloupe         GLP    4          Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques:
                                     Caractéristiques des entreprises et établissements and
                                     L’Enquête Annuelle d’Entreprise: Les Services en Guade-
                                     loupe en 2006
Guam               GUM    9          U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
Guernsey           GGY    9          States of Guernsey: Facts and Figures 2016: Supplementary
                                     Data
Hong Kong          HKG    8          Census and Statistics Department: 2007 Annual Surveys
                                     of Wholesale, Retail, Import and Export Trades, Restau-
                                     rants, Hotels, Building, Construction, Real Estate Sectors,
                                     Transport and Related Services, Storage, Communication,
                                     Banking, Financing, Insurance, and Business Services


                                             51
                  Table 10: List of Countries and Sources

 Country        Code   Industries   Sources
Hungary         HUN    7            Eurostat and OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Iceland         ISL    8            Eurostat
India           IND    8            Central Statistics Office: 2005 Economic Census
Iran            IRN    4            Statistical Centre of Iran: Statistical Yearbook 1389
Ireland         IRL    8            Central Statistics Office: www.cso.ie
Israel          ISR    9            Eurostat and OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Italy           ITA    7            Eurostat and OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
Japan           JPN    8            Statistics Japan: Establishment and Enterprise Census 2006
Jordan          JOR    8            Department of Statistics: www.dos.gov.jo
Kazakhstan      KAZ    9            Committee on Statistics: www.stat.gov.kz
Kenya           KEN    9            National Bureau of Statistics: Micro, Small and Medium
                                    Enterprises (MSMEs) Basic Report 2016 and Statistical Ab-
                                    stract 2016
Korea           KOR    8            Statistics Korea: Censuses on Establishments 2007
Kosovo          KSV    6            Statistical Agency of Kosovo: Statistical Register of Busi-
                                    ness
Kuwait          KWT    8            Central Statistical Bureau: Annual Surveys of Establish-
                                    ments 2007
Kyrgyzstan      KGZ    9            National Statistical Committee of Kyrgyz Republic: stat.kg
Laos            LAO    9            Lao Statistics Bureau: Economic Census 2006
Latvia          LVA    7            Eurostat
Liechtenstein   LIE    9            Statistical Office: Statistical Yearbooks 2014
Lithuania       LTU    7            Eurostat
Luxembourg      LUX    7            Eurostat
Macau           MAC    5            Statistics and Census Service: Statistical Yearbook 2007
Malawi          MWI    4            National Statistical Office: Statistical Yearbook 2005
Malaysia        MYS    3            Department of Statistics Malaysia: Census of Distributive
                                    Trade in 2014
Maldives        MDV    8            Department of National Planning: Economic Survey
                                    2007/2008
Malta           MLT    7            Eurostat
Mauritius       MUS    8            Statistics Mauritius: Censuses of Economic Activity 2002,
                                    2007, Phases I and II
Mexico          MEX    9            Instituto Nacional de Estadstica y Geografı́a: Censos Eco-
                                    nomicos 2009
Micronesia      FSM    8            Division of Statistics: www.sboc.fm
Moldova         MDA    8            Statistica Moldovei: www.statistica.md
Monaco          MCO    3            Monaco Statistics: Commerce Observatory 2008
Mongolia        MNG    8            National Statistical Office: Mongolian Statistical Yearbook
                                    2011
Montenegro      MNE    8            Statistical Office of Montenegro: www.monstat.org and Sta-
                                    tistical Yearbook 2010
Morocco         MAR    9            Haut-Commissariat au Plan du Maroc: 2001-2 Economic
                                    Census
Netherlands     NLD    7            Eurostat


                                           52
                       Table 10: List of Countries and Sources

Country              Code   Industries Sources
New Caledonia        NCL    8          Institut de la Statistique et des Etudes Economique:
                                       www.isee.nc
New Zealand          NZL    9          Statistics New Zealand: www.stats.govt.nz
Nicaragua            NIC    9          Instituto Nacional de Información de Desarrollo: Urban
                                       Economic Census
Norfolk Island       NFK    2          Australian Business Statistics: www.ausstats.abs.gov.au
Northern Mariana     MNP    9          U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
Islands
Norway               NOR    7         Eurostat
Palau                PLW    8         Office of Planning and Statistics: 2012 Economic Indicators
Palestinian Terri-   PSE    9         Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics: Establishment
tories                                Censuses 2007
Panama               PAN    8         Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica y Censo: Economic Census
                                      2012
Paraguay             PRY    9         Direccin General de Estadı́stica, Encuestas y Censos: Na-
                                      tional Economic Census 2011
Peru                 PER    9         Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica e Informática: IV Censo
                                      National Economico 2008
Philippines          PHL    9         National Statistics Office: NSO’s 2012 List of Establish-
                                      ments
Poland               POL    7         Eurostat
Portugal             PRT    7         Eurostat
Puerto Rico          PRI    9         U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
Qatar                QAT    9         Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics: Establish-
                                      ment Censuses 2008
Romania              ROU    7         National Institute of Statistics: Statistical Yearbooks 2007-
                                      2009
Russia               RUS    7         Federal State Statistics Service: Industry of Russia 2009,
                                      and Small and Medium Businesses in Russia 2015
Rwanda               RWA    9         National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda: Establishment
                                      Census 2011
Samoa                WSM    8         Bureau of Statistics: www.sbs.gov.ws
San Marino           SMR    8         Ufficio Informatica, Tecnologia, Dati e Statistica: Il Bilancio
                                      di Previsione per l?Esercizio Finanziario 2010
São Tomé and       STP    7         Instituto Nacional de Estatı́sticas de São Tomé e Prı́ncipe:
Prı́ncipe                             Business Statistics 2007
Saudi Arabia         SAU    9         Central Department of Statistics and Information: 2010
                                      Economic Census
Serbia               SRB    8         Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia: Classification
                                      Units in the Republic of Serbia 2012, Employees in the Re-
                                      public of Serbia 2012, and Labor Force Survey 2011
Sierra Leone         SLE    8         Statistics Sierra Leone: Report of the Census of Business
                                      Establishments 2005
Singapore            SGP    8         Department of Statistics Singapore: Yearbook of Statistics
                                      2012, 2014, 2015


                                             53
                        Table 10: List of Countries and Sources

  Country             Code   Industries Sources
 Slovak Republic      SVK    9          Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic: slovak.statistics.sk
                                        and Statistical Yearbook 2013
 Slovenia             SVN    7          Eurostat
 Spain                ESP    7          Eurostat
 Sri Lanka            LKA    7          Department of Census and Statistics - Sri Lanka: Census of
                                        Trade and Services 2003-2006
 Svalbard             SJM    9          Statistics Norway: www.ssb.no
 Sweden               SWE    7          Eurostat
 Switzerland          CHE    5          Swiss Statistics: www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/en/index.html
 Taiwan               TWN    9          National Statistics: Industry, Commerce and Service Cen-
                                        suses 2006
 Thailand             THA    7          National Statistical Office: Business Trade and Industrial
                                        Census 2008 and 2012
 Tunisia              TUN    8          Institut National de la Statistique: www.ins.nat.tn
 Turkey               TUR    8          OECD’s SDBS Structural Business Statistics
 Uganda               UGA    8          Uganda Bureau of Statistics: Report on the Census of Busi-
                                        ness Establishments 2010/2011
 Ukraine              UKR    9          State Statistics Service of Ukraine: www.ukrstat.gov.ua
 United Arab Emi-     ARE    6          National Bureau of Statistics: www.uaestatistics.gov.ae
 rates
 United Kingdom       GBR    7          Eurostat
 United States        USA    9          U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
 Uruguay              URY    8          Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica: Directory of Companies
                                        and Establishments
 U.S. Virgin    Is-   VIR    9          U.S. Census Bureau: U.S. Economic Census 2007
 lands
 Venezuela            VEN    8          Instituto Nacional de Estadı́stica: IV Censo Económico
 Vietnam              VNM    9          General Statistics Office: Survey of Business Establishments
                                        Producing Non-Agricultural Individual Period 2005-2015
 Yemen                YEM    8          Central Statistical Organization: Services Survey Report
                                        2004, Transport and Telecom Survey Report 2003, and In-
                                        ternal Trade Survey Results 2004




B     Determinants of Establishment Size, Raw Data

We re-estimate the empirical determinants of average establishment size in the service sector and
the relative size ratio across sectors using only the raw data. We confirm the main findings using
our baseline imputed data. We use the pooled raw size data for service industries, controlling
for fixed effects related to both industry and the data used to measure size as described in


                                                54
Section 2.3. The results of these regressions are reported in Tables 11 and 12. We confirm that
all of the estimated coefficients are of the same sign and of similar magnitude.

 Table 11: Determinants of Average Establishment Size in Services, Raw Data


                                Panel A: Bivariate regressions
                  Dependent variable: Average establishment size in services
   Independent variables:
     GDP per capita                  0.32∗∗∗
                                     (0.02)
     Services employment                       -0.00
                                              (0.02)
     External financing                                 0.29∗∗∗
                                                        (0.03)
     Firing costs                                               -0.19∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.05)
     Openness to trade                                                    0.34∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.04)
     Correlated distortions (Serv.)                                                                -1.16∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.18)
   Country-Industries                        1189       1189        525        525        978        650
   R2                                        0.40       0.23        0.33       0.21       0.28       0.33

                               Panel B: Multivariate regressions
                   Dependent variable: Average establishment size in services
   Independent variables:
      External financing              0.19∗∗∗ 0.22∗∗∗
                                      (0.04) (0.04)
      Firing costs                    -0.13∗∗           -0.16∗∗∗
                                      (0.06)             (0.05)
      Openness to trade                       0.18∗∗∗ 0.14∗∗∗ 0.21∗∗∗
                                              (0.06)     (0.05)   (0.04)
      Correlated distortions (Mnfg.)                             -1.10∗∗
                                                                  (0.18)
   Country-Industries                   388     525       510      620
     2
   R                                   0.28    0.35       0.22     0.36
Notes: All variables logged, except for correlated distortions. See the text for the definition of variables and
sources. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ refer to one, five, and ten percent levels of
significance.




                                                      55
  Table 12: Determinants of Size Ratio Manufacturing to Services, Raw Data


             Dependent variable: Ratio of average size manufacturing to services
    Independent variables:
      GDP per capita                    0.03
                                        (0.03)
      Employment ratio (M/S)                    0.03
                                                (0.13)
      External financing                                0.16∗∗∗
                                                        (0.04)
      Firing costs                                               -0.05
                                                                 (0.05)
      Openness to trade                                                  -0.03
                                                                         (0.04)
      Correlated distortions gap (M-S)                                           -1.92∗∗∗
                                                                                 (0.20)
    Country-Industries                  1105    892     496      518     934     622
    R2                                  0.24    0.27    0.33     0.29    0.28    0.39
Notes: All variables logged, except for correlated distortions. See the text for the definition of variables and
sources. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ refers to a one percent level of significance.




                                                      56
