NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION:
BEYOND CERTAINTY EQUIVALENCE

Olivier Jean Blanchard
N. Gregory Mankiw

Working Paper No. 2496

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1988

The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #2496
January 1988
NBER

Consumption:
Beyond Certainty Equivalence

ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the recent research on the consumption function

has attempted to relax the assumption of certainty equivalence. While
there remain many open questions, both theoretical and empirical, it is
that

clear

that the assumption of certainty equivalence can be misleading.
Under more plausible specifcacions of preferences toward risk, uncertainty
levers the level of consumption, increases the expected rate of growth of
consumption, and increases the response of consumption to news about
Income. Moraover changes in the amount of uncertainty are a potentially
leportant source of fluctuations in consumption.

N. Gregory Mankiw
National Bureau

Ohvier J. Blanchard
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute

of

Economic Researcn

Technology

1050 Massachusetts

Cambridge, MA 02139

Cambridge,

Ave.

MA 02138

Twenty years ago, it was standard practice in describing macroeconomic behavior to
build theoretical models assuming all current and future variables were known with
certainty. When models were applied to the data,

the only concession to the presence

of

uncertainty was more often than not the introduction of an unexplained error term in
the regression.

Ten years ago, under injunctions to 'ftake uncertainty seriously", macroeconomista
started introducing uncertainty explicitly at the model building stage. Much
theoretical and empirical progress has been made, most of it under assumptions yielding
certainty equivalence, or the property that optimal behavior depended only on
expectations of other variables, and not on their higher moments.
Certainty equivalence yields convenient characterizations of behavior. Assumptions
yielding certainty equivalence, namely that constraints are linear and objective
functions quadratic, are however quite stringent and, in moat contexts, highly
implausible. Recent research has attempted to go beyond certainty equivalence, and to
characterize behavior under more appealing assumptions It is a difficult endeavor,
both theoretically and empirically. In most cases, closed form solutions are
unavailable and one only gets glimpses into the nature of the solution. In most cases
also, the decision rule depends on higher moments of the exogenous variables, about
which little hard evidence is available, making empirical implementation perilous.
Nevertheless, much has been learned; in this paper, we present recent developments on
the consumption front.1

1. Consumption under certainty ec'uivalence

Consider the decision problem of a consumer who maximizes at time t:
T- t
E [X
U(C÷.)IIl

(1)

t=.O

1

subject to

At++i

—

+

At+

Y+ - C÷; A

given;

A11

— 0.

For simplicity, we assume that both the interest rate and the discount rate are equal
to zero.

Y labor

At is wealth,

income. The only source

of uncertainty is labor

income,

which is random.

If utility

E(C+ilIt)

is quadratic, the set of first order conditions is:

—

C,

for

i

T-t

I

(2)

and the solution to the maximization problem has the familiar form:

—

(l/(T-t+lfl(

A +ZE[Y

I

(3)

]).

Consumption is a linear function of initial wealth and the present value of
expected future income. Higher momenta of income do not matter. The marginal propensity
to consume out of total wealth is equal to the inverse of remaining number of years.
The assumption of quadratic utility is crucial to dertve the "certainty
equivalence" consumption function (3) in the presence ci uncertain labor income. Yet,
quadratic utility is an unappealing way of describing consumera' behavior towards riak.

It implies increasing absolute risk

aversion,

a willingness to pay more to avoid a

that this is a
given bet as wealth increases. Introspection and casual evidence suggest
poor description of behavior under uncertainty.
Simple utility functions with more plausible properties towards risk are
available, of course. Two

such

functions are the exponential and the isoelastic utility

functions. Yet, in the presence of risky labor income, neither yields certainty
to
equivalence. Indeed, they imply systematic effects of uncertainty on consumption,
which we now turn,

2

2.

The slope and variance of consumption
If we return to the set of first order conditions of the maximization problem

above, this time without restrictions on utility beyond risk aversion, U' '<0, we get

E[U'(C+JlIJ

—

U'(C)

for

i

— 1 to

T-l.

(4)

Uncertainty affects the first order conditions, and thus optimal consumption, only
if it affects expected marginal utility. If the third derivative of the utility
function U''' is positive, as is true of most plausible utility functions, an increase
in uncertainty raises expected marginal utility. Thus to maintain equality in (4),
expected future consumption must increase compared to current consumption. Uncertainty
leads consumers to defer consumption, to be more prudent. The role of the condition
U' ''>0 in generating more prudent behavior in the face of uncertainty was first derived

by Leland (1968) and further analyred by Sandmo

(1970)

and Dreze and Modigliani (1972).

How strong is the effect of uncertainty on the slope of the consumption path
likely to be?

Kimball (1987) has shown that,

in the same way as the Arrow-Pratt

coefficients of risk aversion help study the effects of uncertainty on expected
utility, coefficients of absolute and relative prudence help study the effects of
uncertainty on expected marginal utility and thus on consumption. In parallel to the
Arrow-Pratt coefficients, the coefficient of absolute prudence is defined as -U'' '/U'
and the coefficient of relative prudence as -U' '

'C/U''.

Constant absolute prudence

implies that the increase in consumption required to keep the same level of expected
marginal utility in the face of a small increase in risk is independent of the initial
level of consumption, and a parallel interpretation applies to the coefficient of
relative prudence.
In general, there need not be any tight relation between the coefficients of risk
aversion and the coefficients of prudence.

Conveniently

however, the exponential utility function, U(C)
constant absolute risk aversion,

-y,

-(l/-y)

-

-

and perhaps

exp(-yC),

exhibits both

and constant absolute prudence, also equal to

3

-

misleadingly-

.

Similarly, the isoelastic utility function U(C)
relative risk aversion,

(l/(l-e))c

and constant relative prudence,

exhibits both constant

(e-+-l).

Thus, under those two

specifications, specifying the degtee of risk aversion also pins down the degree of
prudence.
Equipped with those definitions, we can take a second order approximation of (4)
around

U(c).2

Rearranging gives:
1/2 a

or, dividing both aides by

(5)

EI(C+.G)2II]

c:

= 1/2

r E[((CtC)/C)2lI3

(6)

where a and r are the coefficients of absolute and relative prudence. Equation (5)
gives a relation between the slope of the consumption path and the variance of the
change in consumption (around zero). Equation (6) gives a relation between the expected
growth rate and its variance.
While they still only give a relation between two endogenous variables, those two
equations show the basic effects of uncertainty on consumption. Uncertainty, by
increasing the variance of consumption, leads to a more steeply sloped consumption
path. The effect is stronger the larger the coefficient of absolute or relative
prudence. And, as increases in uncertainty do not affect the budget constraint, any
increase the slope of the consumption path implies a decrease in the initial level of
consumption.

3. Uncertainty and the consumption function

To go beyond equations (5) and (6) requires solving for consumption as a function

of the income process. This is in general difficult.
The case of exponential utility, of constant absolute prudence, has proven
analytically tractable (Kimball and Mankiw 1987, caballero 1987).

Yet what makes it

tractable however also makes it somewhat unattractive. To aee why, we consider a simple

4

-

example, which follows Caballero. Suppose that utility is exponential with exponent
and that

labor

income follows

--y,

a random walk with normally distributed innovations with

standard deviation a. It is easy to verify that optimal consumption satisfies:

E[C1II)

— C +

a2/2.

(7)

Using the budget constraint, one can show that the level of

C

C

is given by:

- (i(T-t)/4)a2.

(l/(T-t+lflA +

(8)

The slope of the expected consumption path, rather than being equal to zero as
under certainty equivalence, is positive and constant;
absolute prudence,

'y,

it depends both on the degree of

and the variance of income changes. This in turn implies that the

consumption function is the same as under certainty equivalence, except for a negative
term which depends on the degree of uncertainty, the degree of prudence, and the
horizon.
We can use (7) and (8) to get a feel for magnitudes. If we evaluate the expected
rate of growth of consumption at a point where consumption and labor income are roughly
equal, equation (7) implies:

(E[Ct1II)C)/C

(9)

(7Ct)(afi2/2.

Using panel data, Hall and Hishkin (1982) found that the standard deviation of the
change in permanent income was about $1200; as median household income was about
$12,000 during the period (1972), this finding suggests a value of a/I of about .1. The
term

-C

is equal to the coefficient of relative risk aversion. If we assume this

coefficient to be equal to 4, then equation (9) implies an expected growth rate of
consumption of 2 percent.
consumption per capita.

This number is roughly the same as the growth in aggregate
Since the cross-sectional age-consumption profile is upward

sloping, the growth in individual consumption must be at least 2 percent?
Cumulated over many years, such a tilt in the consumption path implies
substantially lower consumption at the beginning of life, and thus much higher avetage
5

wealth. Indeed

and thia reveals the unattractive aspect of the assumption of constant

absolute prudence, equation (8) can easily generate negative initial consumption as a
result of uncertainty. Negative consumption is not ruled out by the exponential
utility.
When we turn to more attractive utility function which do rule out negative
consumption, such as isoelastic utility,

obtaining closed form solutions becomes

generally impossible. But, from some analytical results (Kimball 1987), and from
simulations (Zeldes 1984, Baraky, Mankiw, and Zeldes 1986), we know the consumption
function has the following property.

Under decreasing absolute prudence, the convenient

dichotomy between the effects of expected income and the effects of uncertainty which
is exhibited in (8) disappears.

On the one hand, the impact of uncertainty on consumption depends on the level of
wealth. At higher levels of wealth,

under our assumption of a

a larger portion of lifetime income is certain

constant interest rate -- and the

variance

--

of the percentage

change in consumption decreases. This in turn implies a flatter consumption path.
Zeldes shows for example that under isoelastic utility, the consumption path is
initially very steep and flattens as wealth accumulates. This effect is very much in
accordance with empirical evidence. Kotlikoff and Summers (1981, Figure 1) for example
show that the annual rate of change of consumption for the cohort born in 1910 was over
3 percent from age 18 to age 50, but was 1 percent thereafter.

On the other hand,

the marginal propensity to consume depends

on the amount of

uncertainty. An increase in income decreases the need for precautionary savings,
leading to a larger response in consumption than would be the case under certainty
equivalence. As a result, conaumptinn can show what appears as excess aensitivfty to
income movements (Zeldes 1984).

4. Changes in uncertainty and movements in consuztp.tI.tn

If uncertainty is an important determinant of the level of consumption, changes in
uncertainty can potentially he an important aource of fluctuations in consumption.
the typically
Measuring changes in individual income uncertainty is difficult given
short time aeries on individuals in panel data.

A useful starting point is to look at changes
do

in aggregate income uncertainty. To

so, we computed the standard deviation of n-period ahead forecasts

of ON? by

DRI,

probably a good proxy for the relevant measure of subjective uncertainty. Each month,
in addition to ita main forecast,

DRl issues a set of two or three alternative

forecasts for the next three years. Each forecast is given a probability by DRI. When

we computed DRI's subjective uncertainty, three results stood

out,

(1)

At each date,

the subjective standard deviation increases roughly as rhe square root of the forecast
horizon, indicating that the uncertainty about the future level of output increases

with the horizon.

(2) The subjective standard deviation, three years ahead,

fluctuates

substantially: it varies between 1.14 percent in 1978, and 2.70 percent in 1981. (3)
The level of aggregate uncertainty is small relative to the standard deviation of
income uncertainty facing individuals, roughly 17 percent over three years (based on
Hall and Mishkin).
This last fact suggests that if all consumers share fluctuations equally,
movements in aggregate uncertainty are unlikely to have a large impact on aggregate
consumption. But if fluctuations fall more hesvily on some individuals, the aggregate
effect can be much larger. If we assume for example that all consumers follow equsrion
(8), mnd that only e fraction m of the consumers is subject to the aggregate shocks,

is easy to show that the effect on aggregate consumption is proportional to I/a. The
more concentrated the effect of aggregate fluctustions, the stronger the impact of
uncertainty on aggregate consumption.
This impact of changing uncertainty underlies the papers by Bsrsky, Msnkiw,

and

it

Zeldes and by Kimball and Mankiw, Bath emphasize the deviations ftom Ricardian
equivalence caused by the intetaction between ptecautionary saving and idiosynchratic
income risk.

If taxes vaty with income, incteases in taxes have, in addition to their

direct effect on expected after-tax income, an insurance effect which works in the
opposite direction. Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes use simulations to show, assuming
isoelastic utility,

that debt finance--a decrease in taxes today financed by higher

proportional taxes later- -can have a significant impact on consumption. They conclude
that,

for plausible parameter values, the marginal propensity to consume out of a tax

is approximately half the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth. Kimball and
Mankiw derive analytic results for the case of exponential utility. They show that, if
individual income is serially correlated, the initial effect of deficit finance on
cut

consumption is

stronger, the larger the anticipated length of time to the eventual tax

increase. The reason is a simple one: the longer the deferral,

the more uncertain

individual income and the higher the insurance effect of future taxes.

5. Conclusion

While macroeconomists have long understood the behavior of consumers under
certainty equivalence, the behavior of consumers with plausible utility functions
facing uncertain future income has remained largely a mystery.

Recent research has

begun to reveal some the properties of optimal consumer behavior under uncertainty.
Perhaps most important, this research has taught us that,

of certainty equivalence can be highly misleading.

S

in many ways,

the assumption

Notes
1.

Developments on other fronts would also warrent a report.

See in particular ertola

(1987> for an analysis of the interaction of uncertainty and irreversibility in
determining investment.
2.

As is usual,

these formula can be derived exactly under appropriate assumptions if

the consumer's problem is set in continuous time.
3.

See Rreeden (1986).

Kuehlwein (1987) studies the relation between the growth and variance of

consumption in panel data.

References
Bersky, Robert B., Mankiw, N. Gregory and Zeldes, Srephen P.,

"Ricardian Consumers

and

Keynesian Properties", American Economic Review, September 1986, 76, 676-691.
Bertola, Giuseppe, "Irreversible Investment," mimeo MIT, November 1987.
Breeden, Douglas T., "Consumption, Production, Inflation, and Interest Rates: A
Synthesis," Journal of Financial Economics, 1986, 16, 3-39.
Caballero, Ricardo,

J., "Consumption and Precautionery Savings:

Empirical

Implications", mimeo MIT, April 1987.
Dreze, Jecques,

M

and Modigliani, Franco,

"Consumption Decisions under Uncertainty",

Journal of Economic Theory, 5, December 1972, 308-335.
Hell, Robert E. and Mishkin, Frederic S., "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory
Income:

Estimates from Panel Data on Households", Economerrica, March 1982,

50,

461-81.

Kimball, Miles S., "Essays on Intertemporal Household Choice", PhD Thesis, Harvard,
1987.

Kimball, Miles S. and N. Gregory Mankiw,

"Precautionary Saving and the Timing of

Taxes", mimeo Harvard, February 1987.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J, and Summers,

Lawrence

H,,"The

Role of Intergenerational

Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation", Journal of Political Economy, 89-4,
August 1981, 706-732.
Kuehlwein, Michael K.," Consumption in the Presence of Uncertainty," PhD Thesis, MIT,
1987.

Lelmnd, Hayne K., "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary Demand for Saving",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1968, 82, 465-73.

Sandmo Agnar, "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions",

dew of Economic

Srudies, July 1970, 37, 353-60.
Zeldes, Stephen P.,"Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income",
10

PhD Thesis, MIT, 1984.

