                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MISMATCH AND ASSIMILATION

                                          Ping Wang
                                        Tsz-Nga Wong
                                        Chong K. Yip

                                      Working Paper 24960
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24960


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2018




This paper has been circulated under various titles. We are grateful for valuable comments and
suggestions by Costas Arkolakis, Bob Becker, Mark Bils, Rick Bond, Anton Braun, Tom Cooley,
Boyan Jovanovic, Loukas Karabarbounis, Sam Kortum, Finn Kydland, Zheng Liu, Serdar Ozkan,
Steve Parente, Ed Prescott, B. Ravikumar, Ray Riezman, Peter Ruppert, Rob Tamura, Yin-Chi
Wang, and Jianpo Xue, as well as those of the participants at the North America Summer
Meeting of the Econometric Society, the Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society, the
Conference on Dynamics, Economic Growth, and International Trade, the Midwest
Macroeconomic Conference, the Society for Advanced Economic Theory Meeting, Tsinghua
Macro Workshop, Academia Sinica, National Taiwan University, San Francisco Fed, UC-Santa
Barbara, and Vanderbilt University. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of
Academia Sinica, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and the Center for Economic Dynamics.
Terry Cheung, Ting-Wei Lai and Kevin Li have provided excellent research assistance at various
stages. The usual disclaimers apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ping Wang, Tsz-Nga Wong, and Chong K. Yip. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mismatch and Assimilation
Ping Wang, Tsz-Nga Wong, and Chong K. Yip
NBER Working Paper No. 24960
August 2018
JEL No. D90,E23,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Income disparity across countries has been large and widening over time. We develop a tractable
model where factor requirements in production technology do not necessarily match a country's
factor input profile. Appropriate assimilation of frontier technologies balances such multi-
dimensional factor input-technology mismatch, thus mitigating the efficiency loss. This yields a
new measure for endogenous TFP, entailing a novel trade-off between a country's income level
and income growth that depends critically on the assimilation ability and the factor input
mismatch. Our baseline model accounts for 80%-92% of the global income variation over the
past 50 years. The widening of mismatch and heterogeneity in the assimilation ability account for
41% and 20% of the global growth variation, whereas physical capital accounts for about one
third with human capital largely inconsequential. In particular, about 30% of the output growth in
miracle Asian economies comes from narrowing the gap arisen from mismatch, and 94% of the
growth stagnation in trapped African economies due to the widening mismatch. A country may
fall into a middle-income trap after a factor advantage reversal that changes the pattern of
mismatch.

Ping Wang                                       Chong K. Yip
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis              Chinese University of Hong Kong
Campus Box 1208                                 Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
One Brookings Drive                             chongkeeyip@cuhk.edu.hk
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu

Tsz-Nga Wong
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
701 E Byrd St
Richmond, VA 23219
purpleteeth@gmail.com
         “The sixteenth-century Dutch, on the verge of becoming economic leaders
     of the world, borrowed heavily from the techniques of the Italians, the outgoing
     leaders. By then, the English were already learning not only from the Low
     Countries but also from other parts of the continent. The Americans borrowed
     heavily from the English and from other European sources, particularly from the
     time they achieved independence up until the middle of the nineteenth century.”
     (Baumol et al., 1991, p. 271-272)


1    Introduction
The world income distribution has been widening over the past 50 years. In 1960, the
real GDP per worker of the top 10th percentile country was about 12 times higher than
that of the bottom 10th percentile; in 2014 it has doubled to 24 times (the black line in
the left panel of Figure 1). However, the same ratio for factor inputs, such as physical
capital and human capital per worker, remained largely constant at 5 times (the red
line). This evidence suggests a large and widening TFP gap between the rich and poor
countries. Furthermore, the TFP gaps are widening in diverging directions. The dash
line in the right panel of Figure 1 delineates the frontier of growth: the growth rate of
real GDP per worker as the sum of the growth rate of factor inputs per worker and the
growth rate of frontier productivity (represented by the TFP of the U.S.). If the TFP
gaps were not widening, then countries should be well aligned on the frontier. If the
TFP gap were widening but at a constant rate, then they should be parallelly shifted
below the frontier. Instead, evidence suggests an ampli…cation mechanism à la anti-
clockwise rotation in the …gure: countries having their factors accumulation faster than
the U.S. tend to have their TFP gaps shrinking and their income growing increasingly
faster than the U.S. - the growth miracles we have witnessed in the past half century.
The rotation is also consistent with a poverty-trap puzzle where some countries (dots
on the far left of the U.S.) experience negative income growth in spite of slower yet
positive growth of factors in general. Indeed, in some of these trapped countries the
positive factor accumulation is driven by strong growth in human capital comparable
to the miracle economies (for example human capital in Zimbabwe is growing 1.16%
faster than in the U.S., see Table 4 for details). Furthermore, their income level in
1970 were comparable with those of the Asian tigers and were ahead of some of their
ASEAN counterparts. How can some countries successfully catch up with the rich
countries? But why at the same time some other countries are worsening, even with
similar initial condition and similar improvement in human capital? Explaining these


                                            1
         Ratio between top 10% and bottom 10%                                                                        Distribution of growth
  30                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                         5




                                                                                  Growth of income (%)
  25
                                                                                                         4
  20
                                                                                                         3

  15                                                                                                     2
                                                      Output ratio
                                                      Factors ratio aggregated                           1
  10                                                  by Cobb-Douglas
                                                                                                         0                                   Country's time-series average
                                                                                                                                             U.S. production frontier
  5
                                                                                                         -1                                  Fitted line
                                                                                                                                             U.S.

  0                                                                                                      -2
  1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000     2005    2010                            -2   -1   0      1     2      3            4           5          6
                                                                                                                         Growth of factors (%)


Figure 1: Left black: the ratio between the top and the bottom 10 percentiles of real
GDP per worker. Left red: the top-bottom ratio of factors per worker. The factors
are physical capital and human captial aggregated by a Cobb-Douglas function with a
capital share of 1/3. Right: the average growth rate of per-worker real GDP against
the average growth rate of per-worker factors, each dot represents a country in the
sample. Outliners like oil rich countries in OPEC, and former members of USSR and
Yugoslavia are excluded. Source: Penn World Table 9.0.

regularities of TFP gap is crucial to answering these questions. Unfortunately, it is
challenging under the standard aggregate production function framework.
       To address these issues, we revisit a microfoundation of the aggregate production
function framework. Production technology often requires the composition of factor
inputs very di¤erent from the country’s available factor inputs, a concept entailing
factor input-technology mismatch. This is particularly true when the technologies are
adopted from developed countries: they are usually more productive but also require
demanding factors such as sophisticated machines and skilled workers, not always avail-
able in less developed countries. In reality the mismatch is more severe in some factors
and less in others. We refer the former the disadvantageous factors, and the latter the
advantageous factors. To mitigate the impact of mismatch, it is natural to leverage the
advantageous factors to compensate for the disadvantageous factors. We refer to this
process as technology assimilation. In practice the ability to assimilate technologies
is a key component of …rms’ intangible organizational capital – depending on entre-
preneurs’understanding of foreign techniques, their learning from experimenting, the
‡exibility of organization and institution, and the infrastructure and policies relevant
to adaptation.1 It is therefore natural to expect that the cross-country variations in the
   1
     The importance of assimilation is supported by a vast body of evidences from various case stud-
ies. For example Wan (2011), emphasizes the successful assimilation of technology as the common
denominator in Asian economic development, whereas Rosenberg (1994) many developed countries
today are successful cases for modi…ed existing technology. Policy issues concerning the assimilation
of foreign techniques are discussed in Dahlman et al. (1987) and Nelson and Pack (1999)


                                                                                  2
         Ratio between top 10% and bottom 10%                                                                              Distribution of growth
 30                                                                                                        6
                Output ratio
                Factors ratio aggregated                                                                   5




                                                                                    Growth of income (%)
 25
                by Cobb-Douglas
                Factors ratio with mismatch                                                                4
 20
                                                                                                           3

 15                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                           1
 10
                                                                                                           0                                     Country's time-series average
                                                                                                                                                 U.S. production frontier
  5
                                                                                                           -1                                    Fitted line
                                                                                                                                                 U.S.

  0                                                                                                        -2
  1960   1965   1970     1975     1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010                            -2   -1      0     1      2     3            4           5          6
                                                                                                                       Growth of factors and mismatch (%)


Figure 2: Left black and red are the same as those in Figure 1. Left blue: the top-
bottom ratio of the same factors but aggregated by (3). Right: the average growth
rate of per-worker real GDP against the average growth rate of per-worker factors in
the assimilation model. Source: see Figure 1.

mismatch and in assimilation ability serve to explain part of the cross-country income
disparities. Notwithstanding, mismatch and assimilation are missing in the standard
aggregate production function.
   The main contribution of this paper is to develop a tractable framework for analyz-
ing factor input-technology mismatch under imperfect technology assimilation, subse-
quently accounting for cross-country income disparities. Our framework encompasses,
for example, the technological frontier model, the stochastic techniques model, and the
multi-tier CES production model. This mechanism can generate large income varia-
tions in both the level and the growth rate across countries. Our theoretical results
show that, a lower ability of assimilation reduces production e¢ ciency by deterring
adaptation to the frontier technology and aggravating the mismatch, thus widens the
variation of income level. However, a lower ability of assimilation increases factor
complementarity, and the disadvantageous factors become more important in produc-
tion. Thus, a modest variation in the growth of the disadvantageous factors translates
to a much larger variation in the income growth. Moreover, disadvantageous factors
may eventually become advantageous. If the factor advantage reversal takes place,
mismatch would be widening again, slowing down the income growth.
      Upon establishing the theory, we then verify its explanation power with the data.
Identifying technology and assimilation ability in our framework faces the similar chal-
lenge from Diamond-McFadden impossibility theorem. We circumvent the impossibil-
ity theorem by using the solution to the …rm’s technology choice problem as an extra
identi…cation condition from the theory. The quantitative results show that our frame-
work helps reducing the reliance on the unexplained TFP gap, illustrated in the left


                                                                                    3
panel of Figure 2. In addition, the unexplained TFP gap is growing much slower in our
framework, as illustrated by the ‡atter …tted line in the right panel of Figure 2, indi-
cating that the mismatch story is promising in explaining the rotation pattern of TFP
gaps. Indeed, our framework yields better …t in about 95% of the sample countries.
   We then examine the quantitative importance of the mismatch mechanism by con-
ducting development and growth accounting. In development accounting, accounting
for the factor input-technology mismatch improves the success rate from 33% to 92%.
In growth accounting, changes in the factor input-technology mismatch contribute to
41% of the income growth gap from the U.S., exceeding the contributions of physical
capital accumulation (about one-third), human capital (almost negligible) and residual
(about a quarter). Accumulation of factors matters a lot to growth when they are the
disadvantageous factors. In development-trapped countries such as Congo, Zimbabwe,
and many others, their disadvantageous factor, physical capital, has been decumulat-
ing and the advantageous factor, human capital, has been accumulating signi…cantly
over time. It widens the factor input-technology mismatch and lowers growth - our
explanation to the poverty-trap puzzle. For these trapped countries, our mismatch
channel explains on average 94% of the widening income gap from the U.S., whereas
the standard approach would predict a converging gap otherwise. On the other hand,
in miraculously fast growing countries such as Korea, China and Vietnam, the dis-
advantageous factor, physical capital, has out-grown the advantageous factor, human
capital. As a result, factor input-technology mismatch has been improving over time,
accounting for 30% of their prolonged growth. We further investigate the role of cross-
country heterogeneity in assimilation ability, and …nd it to account for another 20% of
the income growth gap from the U.S., on top of the 41% from the widening mismatch.
We …nally extend our analysis to alternative assimilation targets as well as early stop
or late start in assimilation, …nding a more important role played by mismatch.
    The mechanism of factor advantage reversal can also serve as a plausible explanation
for the middle-income traps that features a signi…cant slowdown of once fast-growing
economies in the midst of its development. We …nd that the timing of reversal in
several countries, including Spain, Greece, Hong Kong and Taiwan, matches well the
timing of middle-income trap [cf. Eichengreen et al. (2014)], as well as their structural
breaks in relative incomes (identi…ed by Chow test).
   The main takeaway is that factor input-technology mismatch and assimilation abil-
ity are crucial for disparities in income levels and growth rates, accounting for a large
portion of the otherwise unexplained residual TFP component. Successful assimila-
tion narrowing mismatch has promoted economic development, with Western Europe


                                           4
and America taking o¤ early, then Japan and followed …rst by the newly industrial-
ized Asian Tigers in the 1960s and various emerging latecomers since the 1980s, as
argued by Baumol et al. (1991) in our opening quote. This dynamic process of de-
velopment generates an ever changing cross-section distribution as observed in data.
Conversely, failure to assimilate technology has caused the backwardness seen in Sub-
Saharan countries. What distinguishes miracles from traps is not just the speed of
factor accumulation; it is the accumulation of the right factor.

Related Literature
       To formalize the concepts of technology-factor input mismatch and assimilation, we
refer to the now-classic pieces by Houthakker (1955) and recently by Kortum (1997),
Jones (2005) - HKJ hereafter - and Lagos (2006). With di¤erent frictions and focuses,
HKJ and Lagos (2006) obtain a Cobb-Douglas global production function as an aggre-
gation of Leontief local productions in which …rms’production techniques are drawn
from the Pareto distribution. HKJ derive a measure of TFP that summarizes the pro-
duction e¢ ciency of the economy, and show how the TFP depends on frictions and
fundamentals of the economy. Another theoretical lesson from HKJ and Lagos (2006)
are that the macro elasticity of substitution (EOS) can be much higher than the micro
EOS, because of factor reallocation across …rms or techniques (in spite of various fric-
tions and constraints). Our framework includes the results of HKJ and Lagos (2006)
as special cases. Related but on the time dimension, León-Ledesma and Satchi (2017)
show that with the presence of adjustment cost to techniques, a short-run EOS of about
0.2 can generate a long-run EOS of about 0.6 and explain the short- and medium-run
behaviors of labor shares.2
       Our framework emphasizes the fact that the frontier techniques available can be
very restrictive. To this end, our paper is also closely related to Caselli and Coleman
(2006). The Caselli-Coleman paper explains cross-country income disparities by as-
suming that the frontier technology is not available and countries choose from their
own technology menus. Given that skilled and unskilled labor are gross substitutes un-
der a CES production function, Caselli and Coleman show that rich (poor) countries
who are skilled (unskilled)-labor abundant choose skilled (unskilled)-labor augmenting
   2
    In this regard, our paper is also related to a growing literature that investigates the role of
disaggregated (sectoral, …rm or plant level) EOS on explaining the declining labor share, since the
seminal work of Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). Also see Ober…eld and Raval (2014) and Lawrence
(2015) for some recent studies on the EOS and labor share. See the Appendix for a detailed discussion
about the methodology of estimating the EOS.




                                                 5
technologies. We show that the factor input-technology mismatch alone can explain
much of income di¤erences even when the frontier technology is available.
   Some studies have focused on costly (or frictional) learning, including Caselli (1999).
Atkinson and Stiglitz (1969) suggest a theory that country’s production features lo-
calized learning by doing. Based on that idea, Basu and Weil (1998) construct a
Solow-type one-factor growth model of technological progress that emphasizes that
technological advances will only bene…t the technologies with similar capital intensity.
Parente and Prescott (1994) examine how barriers to technology adoption a¤ect the
process of development. With the exogenous growth of world knowledge, the amount
of investment required for technological advances decreases, which enhances long-term
growth. Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) study the economy where skilled labor avail-
able does not match the technology requirement. Therefore, even if all technologies
are freely available and instantly transferred, a country may refrain from using a new
but inappropriate technology.
    In these studies, the mismatch or the inappropriateness is summarized by one factor
(e.g. skill or capital). While it proves useful to explain the cross-sectional variation,
it does not fully explain why over time the income gap is widening even though the
inappropriateness in some aspects, for example the gap of human capital, is narrowing.
And the importance of human capital has been emphasized to explain the Asian mir-
acles [see the survey by Lucas (1993)], but it cannot explain why no miracle happens
in those trapped countries with comparable growth in human capital. Insteads, our
framework allows for multi-dimensional mismatch which is useful to generate various
income dynamics.
   In the equilibrium our production function falls into a class of normalized CES
(NCES) function, popularized by Klump and de La Grandville (2000). The tractability
of NCES allows us to estimate the model with cross-country time series, and to apply
the estimated model to development accounting and growth accounting. León-Ledesma
et al. (2010) demonstrate that EOS estimation without normalization can be seriously
biased. A summary of the empirical literature using NCES and CES will be provided
in the methodology section.


2    The Aggregate Production Function: A Prelude
We …rst preview the key innovation of this paper before the details of the theoretical
and quantitative analyses. The existing literature of the neoclassical production adopts



                                            6
the following prototypical model for a country j:

                                       y = zj F (kj ; hj ) :                           (1)

According to (1), output y is produced with a constant-returns-to-scale technology,
F , using physical capital k and human capital h with TFP z. Letting s denote the
benchmark country with frontier technology, the literature [see the survey by Caselli
(2005)] focuses on the Cobb-Douglas speci…cation of F which is given by

                                   y = exp ( j ) zs kj h1j     ;                       (2)

where    2 (0; 1) is the output elasticity of physical capital and all countries share the
TFP zs , By normalizing     s   = 0,   j   becomes the residual TFP gap from the leading
country –or, in short, the TFP residual. Then the common conclusion is: only about
20%-40% of the variation in world income can be attributed to variation in factor
inputs, with the TFP residual alone accounting for most of the variation. This result
is viewed as unsatisfactory.
   Departing from the neoclassical production framework, we generalize the concept of
production techniques developed by HKJ. While we will lay out the micro-foundation
to derive the general case in the next section, here we illustrate with a simple two-factor
case. The resulting production function takes a normalized CES form:
                                  "       1                  1#  1
                                    kj                 hj
                 y = exp ( j ) ys           + (1    )              ;                   (3)
                                    ks                 hs

where    2 [0; 1] and the normalization is taken at the frontier techniques summarized
by the triplet fys ; ks ; hs g. Figure 3 illustrates the isoquants of the normalized CES
production function under assimilation. An isoquant consists of combination of fac-
tors (k; h) needed to produce a one unit of output. Point Es represents the frontier
technology on the isoquant Fs if the benmark country is endowed with country j’s
factors. Point Ej1 represents the production of country j on the isoquant Fj with      <1
capturing the imperfect assimilation of the frontier technology. Isoquants with vari-
ous are tangent at the production point Ej on the (k=h)s ray. Isoquants moving
downward from Ej along the (k=h)s ray represents increasing TFP            j.   The factor
input-technology mismatch is represented by the intersection of these isoquants and
the (k=h)j ray. When no factor input-technology mismatch can be assimilated, country
j is producing on the kinked isoquant Fj with = 0 and the factors needed to produce
one unit of output are captured by point Ej0 . Caselli (2005) is the special case of the
isoquant Fj with      = 1, associating with a lower point Ej2 . The ranking of factor

                                                7
                  k                          𝑘𝑘
                                             ℎ s

                                                                  𝑘𝑘
                                                                  ℎ j
                                                        Ej0        Fj , σ=0
                            Ej
                                              Ej1             Fj, σ<1
                                       Ej2                              Country j’s isoquant
                              Es                                    Fj , σ=1

                                                         Fs             Frontier isoquant
                                                                                                    h

                          Figure 3: Assimilation and the isoquants.

requirements is Ej0 > Ej1 > Ej2 . The e¢ ciency loss measured by the standard TFP
residual from (2) is associated with the increased factor requirement given by Ej2 Es .
The e¢ ciency loss due to the factor input-technology mismatch is the increased factor
requirement given by Ej1           Ej2 . As the mismatch increases, the (k=h)j ray moves away
from the (k=h)s ray and the factor requirement gap Ej1                                   Ej2 increases. Similarly, as
assimilation ability decreases, the isoquant moves closer to Fj with = 0, and the
factor requirement gap Ej1 Ej2 also increases. Thus, the assimilation model generates
additional e¢ ciency loss due to mismatch and imperfect assimilation.


3       The Framework
Let production technique speci…es the organization of factor inputs for output. A
typical technique is de…ned by the input-output parameters, a                                   (a1 ; :::; aN ), such that
its output level given the factor inputs, n                       (n1 ; :::; nN ), is
                                   "                                    1   #
                                         X                nm
                                                                                1
                                                                                          X
               y = f (n; a)                         m                               ;               m   = 1:          (4)
                                       m=1;:::;N
                                                          am                            m=1;:::;N


That is, the technique requires n = a units of di¤erent factors to produce one unit
of output. The tuple of ratios                      (n1 =a1 ; :::; nN =aN ) represents the factor input-
technology mismatch between factor inputs and the factor requirement of the technique.
We interpret the EOS parameter 2 [0; 1] as the ability of assimilation.3 In the absence
    3
    This is a parsimonious setup to capture two sided matching between heterogeneous factor inputs
with technical progress as in Chen et al. (2012). The idea of learning-by-using (LBU) or …xed adoption
costs of dynamic technology adoption models [e.g., Arthur (1989) and David (1985)] can be captured



                                                              8
assimilation ( = 0), the output level is determined entirely by the worst mismatched
factor –one with the lowest nm =am .
  Given a combination of factor inputs, n, …rms to choose the best technique from a
menu, a 2 P. With its best selected techniques, a …rm’s output level is then given by
the following global production function:

                                       f (n) = max f (n; a):                                           (5)
                                                 a2P


Assuming that P is a compact connected set in RN  ++ with a di¤erentiable envelope,
Proposition 1 provides necessary and su¢ cient condition for the Cobb-Douglas speci-
…cation to arise given a menu set.4

Proposition 1 Given P, there exists z > 0 such that the global production function
(5) is given by
                                                  Y
                                                                    m
                                    f (n) = z               (nm )       ;
                                                m=1;:::;N

if and only if a? (n)       arg maxa2P f (n; a) / n.5

    Notably, a? (n) / n if there exists a positive scalar k such that a?m = nm =k for
all m = 1; :::; N , i.e., the optimal technique is proportional to factor inputs. Under
Proposition 1, if the optimal technique is proportional to factor inputs, then the global
production function is Cobb-Douglas and the output e¤ect of the optimal technique is
completely summarized by the TFP parameter z. The "only if" part of Proposition 1
points out that having a? (n) / n is necessary in any environments that "microfound"
the Cobb-Douglas speci…cation. We illustrate the following special cases to Proposition
1 of particular interest.

Example 1 (Caselli and Coleman, 2006) Consider N = 2 and de…ne P                                f(a1; a2 ) j
              1       2
B     (a1 )       (a2 ) g, where B > 0 is a measure to the barrier to technology frontier.
Then the optimal technique is a?1 = B (n1 =n2 ) 2 and a?2 = B (n2 =n1 ) 1 and the global
production function is given by f (n) = z (n1 ) 1 (n2 ) 2 , where z = B 1 .6
by our ‡exilibility parameter . We can translate a high cost of LBU or adoption to a low ‡exibility
in production, i.e., a low .
   4                                    N 1
     De…ne a       fa1 ; :::; aN 1 g 2 R++  , and A (a ) min ai;N s.t. ai 2 P and am       ai;m for all
m = 1; :::; N 1. P has a di¤erentiable envelope if A (a ) is di¤erentiable for any interior a .
   5
     All proofs are relegated to Appendix A.
                                                     h                  i(1 )=
   6
     Caselli and Coleman (2006) assume Y = K (Au Lu ) + (As Ls )                , which is isomorphic
                                                                            1=                  1=
to our framework by taking Y =K as our y, Lu =K as n1 , Ls =K as n2 , Au    1    as a1 and As   2    as a2 .



                                                   9
      Our framework also encompasses the model of stochastic technique, for example
Kortum (1997) and Jones (2005), where ai is drawn from a stationary distribution
that can lead to an extreme value distribution of the technology frontier. In this case
P is the limited set as the number of technique goes to in…nity.7

Example 2 (Kortum, 1997; Jones, 2005) Consider                                           = 0 and N = 2. Suppose ai;m ,
m = 1; 2 and i = 1; :::; I, is drawn from independent inverse Pareto distributions with
the shape parameter m and the scale parameter m I 1= , where > 1 and m > 0.
When I ! 1 the optimal technique converges to satisfy n1 =a?1 = n2 =a?2 almost surely,
                                                                                                                              1
and the global production function converges in distribution to f (n) = z (n1 )                                                   (n2 ) 2 ,
where z = "      1
                     1
                         2
                             2
                                 and " follows the Fréchet distribution with parameter .

      Without much loss of generality, the local production production (4) consists of a
single-tier structure. Proposition 1 can be extended to the local production function
featuring multi-tier CES like in Krusell et al. (2000).

Example 3 (Krusell et al., 2000) Consider N = 3 and the following local production
function
             2 "                                                       #""1     1                                     3   1
                                   " 1                           " 1                                              1
                             n1     "                    n2       "                                     n3
y = max 4                                + (1        )                              + (1           )                  5       ;        ;    2 (0; 1) :
       a2P                   a1                          a2                                             a3
                                                                                                                                           (6)
                                                                                                                                  (1       ) 1
There exists z > 0 such that the global production function is given by y = zn1 n2                                                          n3     ,
                                           ?
if and only if the solution a (n) to (6) satis…es that                              n1 =a?1   =    n2 =a?2   =   n3 =a?3 .

      Krusell et al. (2000) use the local production function (6) to study capital-skill
complementarity –think of n1 as capital, n2 skilled labor, n3 unskilled. In their model
there is a CES aggregation of capital and skilled labor with a complementary elasticity
of substitution (EOS) "    1, whose outcome is then aggregated with unskilled labor
with an EOS       1. If " = then (6) is a special case to (4), analyzed in Proposition
1. For the generic values of " and , rewrite (6) as
             "                                           1   #   1
                                                                                     "                 " 1                                 " 1   #""1
                             1                  n3                                            n1        "                         n2        "
y = max          (n)             + (1      )                         ; s.t. n                                + (1         )                             :
       a2P                                      a3                                            a1                                  a2

Applying Proposition 1 sequentially –…rst on n with inputs n1 and n2 given a3 , then
on y with inputs n3 and n – we reach the result in Example 3. While our results
  7
   Wong and Yip (2014) extend the results of Jones (2005) to the general case with N    2 and
                                                         1=   m                  1 1=
 2 [0; 1). A CDF of ai;m is given by Pr (ai;m x) = x m I         for all x 2 0; m I   .


                                                                 10
are readily extensible to more sophitiscated structure like (6), we will, for the sake of
parsimony, focus primarily on the more commonly speci…ed setting given by (4).
   In Proposition 1 what matters to give rise to the Cobb-Douglas speci…cation is that
the technique chosen is proportional; the environment (like the shape of menu, cost
or other frictions) do not matter much. To see it, consider that, alternatively, the
technology choice is no longer restricted to any menu but the choice is costly. The
…rm’s net output is given by the following global production function

                                f (n)    max ff (n; a)        C (a)g ;                            (7)
                                           a


where C : RN
           + ! R+ is a twice-di¤erentiable cost function. Analog to Proposition 1,
Proposition 2 provides necessary and su¢ cient condition for the Cobb-Douglas speci-
…cation to arise under the problem of costly technology choice.8

Proposition 2 Given C, there exists z > 0 such that the global production function
(7) is given by
                                                 Y
                                                                   m
                                   f (n) = z               (nm )       ;
                                               m=1;:::;N

if and only if a? (n)      arg maxa ff (n; a)      C (a)g / n.

3.1     Assimilating the Frontier and Endogenous TFP
Consider a leader country s, say, the U.S. or a major advanced economy regarded as a
regional leader (e.g., Japan in Asian; France, UK or Germany in Europe). The leader
country is using the most productive “frontier”technique as (maybe because it has the
largest menu P or lowest cost C) to produce ys with its factor input ns . In this section
we analyze the world development when as is avaliable to the rest of the world.
   Depending on P or C, the chosen technique can be anything. In practice, we
do not have su¢ cient information to separately identify the techniques and the pa-
rameter of assimilation ability [Diamond et al. (1978)]. To circumvent this problem,
we assume that the resulted global production function, f (ns ), in the leader country
is Cobb-Douglas - probably the most common assumption in macroeconomics. This
identi…cation assumption is maintained only on the leader country, and the local pro-
duction functions in the rest of world are not restricted. Applying Proposition 1 or
   8
     Lagos (2006) derives a Cobb-Douglas global production function in the presence of labor search
friction. One can formulate the …rm’s problem of Lagos (2006) in term of (7). Since the technology
in Lagos (2006) is assumed to be Hick-neutral, with n1 = n2 in the equilibrium (or in term of his
notations hours n as n1 in our model and capital k as n2 , where the total labor is the total hours of
employed workers) the techniques of the …lled …rms are always proportional to the factor inputs.


                                                 11
2, it is necessary (the part of "only if") that the frontier technique in equilibrium is
proportional to the leader’s factor inputs, i.e., as;m = ns;m =ys for all m = 1; :::; N .
Thus, the output level of a country with factor input n after assimilating the frontier
technique is tractably given by
                       "                   1#
                          X          nm
                                                1
                                                                   Y
   y = f (n; as ) = ys             m              = Z (n; ns ; )           (nm ) m ; (8)
                         m=1;:::;N
                                     ns;m
                                                                 m=1;:::;N

where Z (n; ns ; ) is a TFP measure given by
                                                        "                                   #1+1=(   1)
                                   Y       ns;m    m         X             nm
                                                                                     1 1=
 Z (n; ns ; ) =      zs                                                m                                  : (9)
                    |{z}                   nm                              ns;m
                  source TFP   m=1;:::;N                  m=1;:::;N
                               |                                  {z                                  }
                                                       mismatch and assimilation

Equation (8) is the key equation in this paper; we shall examine in the rest of this paper,
theoretically and quantitatively, how assimilating the frontier technique is accountable
for the world income disparity.
    Since the frontier technique is chosen only based on the leader country’s own inter-
est, it does not necessarily match the factor inputs in other countries. More speci…cally,
when a country assimilates the frontier technique, as , its TFP measure, Z (n; ns ; ),
becomes endogenous and contains two e¤ects: (i) a source TFP e¤ect captured by zs ;
and (ii) an assimilation e¤ect, jointly captured by the assimilation ability parameter, ,
and the mismatch from assimilating the frontier technique,                  s   = (n1 =as;1 ; :::; nN =as;N ).
The following proposition relates the TFP with the assimilation ability:

Proposition 3 The TFP, Z(n; ns ; ), is increasing in the assimilation ability, .

   Proposition 3 states that for a given degree of factor input-technology mismatch,
production e¢ ciency improves with more ‡exible assimilation that enables better adap-
tation to the frontier technique. If! 1 then the country inherits the frontier pro-
                                                              Q
ductivity and output such that Z(n; ns ; ) = zs and f (n) = zs m=1;:::;N (nm ) m ; a
special case studied in Caselli (2005).
    The e¤ects of the leader’s factor input on the TFP are more involved. The leader’s
factor input, ns , now matters for the TFP in other countries, through assimilating the
frontier technique, as , which is chosen according to ns . Clearly from (9), assimilating
the frontier technique does not always lead to a higher TFP. De…ne the most disadvan-
tageous factor as md arg minm=1;:::;N (nm =ns;m ) and the most advantageous factor as
ma    arg maxm=1;:::;N (nm =ns;m ). The following proposition shows that the e¤ects of
ns;m depend crucially on the relative factor advantage:

                                                  12
Proposition 4 There exists        y    2 [nmd =ns;md ; nma =ns;ma ] such that the TPF, Z(n; ns ; ),
is decreasing in ns;m if and only if nm =ns;m               y,   i.e. when the factor is disadvanta-
geous.

   On the one hand, an increase in the leader’s factor input ns;m induces the use
of more productive technique (higher as;m ) and yields higher output via assimilation.
This resembles the conventional positive productivity e¤ect of technology adoption.
On the other hand, an increase in as;m widens the factor input-technology mismatch,
thereby harming the assimilated production outcome. This is our novel mismatch
e¤ect as a result of discrepancies between factor inputs and factor requirements for
assimilating the frontier technique. Proposition 4 concludes that the factor input-
technology mismatch e¤ect dominates when the m-th factor is an disadvantageous one
(nm < y ns;m ). When the m-th factor is the advantageous one, the two e¤ects align
and always increase the assimilated output. In the exercise of development accounting,
we will check whether the theoretical predictions drawn from our propositions are
supported by the cross country data.
   Finally, by taking log and totally di¤erentiating with respect to time, the rate of
growth assimilated output is derived as
                                   X               X
        y^ =         z^s       +            mn
                                             ^m +           ( m   m ) (^
                                                                       nm n
                                                                          ^ s;m ); (10)
                    |{z}
             source TFP growth   m=1;:::;N        m=1;:::;N
                                 |       {z    } |              {z             }
                                       factor growth                change in mismatch


                                             nm
                                                        1
                                                            P                 nm
                                                                                         1

where x^   d ln x=dt and   m           m    ns;m             m=1;:::;N   m   ns;m
                                                                                             . Thus, output
growth with assimilation can be decomposed into three components: (i) source TFP
growth, (ii) the conventioanl factor growth component as in Caselli (2005) and others,
and (iii) the new component highlighted by this paper measuring changes in factor
input-technology mismatch over time. Focusing on the mismatch component, we stress
that the di¤erence in the relative growth of factor m between the two countries, n
                                                                                 ^m
^ s;m , must be properly weighted by the associated gap between the factor share ( m )
n
and the technology share (      m ).    When this gap is larger, changes in the factor input
di¤erence becomes more important for driving output growth.
   It is interesting to note that widening factor input-technology mismatch need not
lower output growth. The following corollary to Propositon 4 provides the necessary
and su¢ cient condition for the harmful e¤ect of widening mismatch to arise.

Corollary 1 Output growth, y^, is increasing in the relative factor growth, n
                                                                            ^m                        ^ s;m ,
                                                                                                      n
if and only if nm    y ns;m .


                                                       13
        Corollary 1 states that the disadvantageous factors have a positive weight in the
growth component of the mismatch, i.e.,             m      m   > 0 for m such that nm              y ns;m .
Given that the factor is a disadvantageous one, then the mismatch component dimin-
ishes with an increase in the factor input di¤erence. So narrowing the mismatch of
such disadvantageous factors, i.e., by having n
                                              ^ md              ^ s;md > 0, will bring additional
                                                                n
growth in the assimilated output.9
    The next proposition further establishes the relationship between assimilation abil-
ity ( ) and relative factor advantage (nm =ns;m ), as well as their interaction on growth.

Proposition 5 There exists           g   2 [nmd =ns;md ; nma =ns;ma ] such that the growth coe¢ -
cient,      m     m,   is decreasing in     if and only if nm           g ns;m .   Moreover,   g         y
where the equality holds if either         = 1 or nm =ns;m =      0   > 0 for all m.

   Interestingly, although a higher assimilation ability always raises the level of output
(Proposition 3), Proposition 5 points out that its e¤ect on output growth is ambiguous
and depends on the relative factor advantage. Speci…cally, if the factor is a disad-
vantageous one, the positive e¤ect on output growth from its growth relative to the
source country diminishes when assimilation ability is greater (higher ). The key
insight of Proposition 5 on how assimilation ability a¤ects the relationship between
the degree of mismatch and the relative factor advantage is elaborated intuitively as
follows. Given the complementarity nature of factor inputs in the assimilation process,
the more disadvantageous a factor is, the more essential it would be in production
using assimilated techniques. With lower assimilation ability, factor complementarity
rises and the disadvantageous factors become more important in production, so it is
harder to assimilate the frontier techniques (see Propositions 3 and 4). As a result,
narrowing the mismatch of these disadvantageous factors has a much larger impact on
output growth when assimilation ability is low.


4         Data and Methodology
In the quantitative analysis, we estimate the assimilation model with the data from
the Penn World Table 9.0 (PWT) for 107 countries over the period of 1950 to 2014.10
We exploit several nice features of this new generation of the PWT. First, to compare
    9
     Similarly, the ma -th factor captures the most advantageous factor in assimilation. The explanation
goes through in vice versa.
  10
     See Feenstra et al. (2015) for details. We exclude outliners like the former USSR countries, former
Yugoslav countries (long time series are not available anyway) and all OPEC countries (due to large
dependence on energy production where the output price is heavily in‡uenced by nonmarket factors).
In the end, we have a panel of 106 countries and the U.S. While we always use maximal length of


                                                  14
                  Log output                                Log capital                             Log human capital                               Correlation
                  per worker                                per worker                                 per worker                                  of log factors
  12                                            13                                          1.4                                         0.9

 11.5                                          12.5
                                                                                            1.2
  11                                            12                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                             1
 10.5                                          11.5
                                                                                                                                        0.7
  10                                            11                                          0.8

  9.5                                          10.5                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.6
   9                                            10
                                                                                            0.4
                                 10% to 90%
  8.5                                           9.5                                                                                     0.5
                                 U.S.
                                 Mean                                                       0.2                                                                       95% c.i.
   8                                             9
                                 Median                                                                                                                               Correlation

  7.5                                           8.5                                          0                                          0.4
    1960   1970    1980   1990   2000   2010      1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010    1960    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010




              Figure 4: Global output, capital and human capital. Source: PWT 9.0

production capacity, an output-based measure of real GDP, rgdpo , is used income
measure, yt . Second, consistent measures of physical capital, kt , and (years-of-school
based) human capital, ht , are available to calibrate our assimilation model, where
multi-dimensional factors in addition to per capita physical capital are crucial for the
mismatch problem (thus, view n1 = k and n2 = h, from now on). Here, we divide both
output and physical capital measures by employment to obtain per-worker series.11
Finally, this new generation of the PWT is based on multiple vintages of price data to
construct the income time series. The PWT provides reliable information without the
concerns about inconsistency raised by Johnson et al. (2013) for the earlier version.
   Figure 4 illustrates the time-series of global incomes, physical capital and human
capital. Over the last …fty years, while the gaps between the U.S. and the world average,
in terms of output or factor input, are pretty much constant (the gap between the two
series), the inequalities in physical capital and output among countries are widening
(the grey area). Human capital inequality has been steadily improved, due to faster
increases in years of schooling in poor countries compared to the U.S. Nevertheless,
human and physical capitals are increasingly correlated, which also contribute to the
overal inequality of the factor input.
   Let the U.S. be the technology frontier. Following Propositions 1 or 2, the US
technique in our model is a1;t = kU S;t =yU S;t and a2;t = hU S;t =yU S;t . We estimate the
data in each country for our analysis, not many have data available prior to 1960, so in the rest of
the paper we only report our post-1960 results. Results based on the earlier vintages of PWT are also
available upon request.
  11
     Note from Barro and Lee (1996) that human capital is based on the Mincerian returns from the
year of schooling, so it is already a per capita measure.




                                                                                            15
following speci…cation of the aggregate production function
                                      "                                                                      #1   1=(1   )
                                                         1 1=                                         1 1=
                                             kj;t                                        hj;t
        yj;t = exp (   j;t ) yU S;t                                  + (1         )                                          ;        (11)
                                            kU S;t                                      hU S;t

where the TFP residual follows a standard speci…cation:

                                                             0
                                            j;t+1    =       j   +    j j;t   +   j;t+1 :                                             (12)

with i.i.d. zero-mean innovation,                    j;t ,   satisfying E (           i;t ;   j;t )   =      and E (     j;t j;t0 )   =0
                0 12
for any t 6= t . In general, the assimilation mechanism and the TFP residual are the
two competing forces in explaining the income variation. Here we restrict to a single
to …t 107 countries for more than 60 years of time series, but allow that countries have
its own process of TFP residual, where its innovation has country-speci…c variance and
correlates with other countries’ innovation contemporarily. This ‡exible spec…cation
on j;t gives the TFP residual the best explanation power to the data, implying that
the explanation power of                  would be conservative.
       Following Hall and Jones (1999), we set                                = 1=3 for the physical capital share
such that our speci…cation allows the standard Cobb-Douglas parameterizartion as a
special case. The estimation of the EOS , altogether with f 0j ; j g and , follows
the non-linear feasible generalized least square estimator outlined in Antras (2004) and
León-Ledesma et al. (2010). The non-linear feasible generalized least square estimator
…nds that = 0:42.
   The empirical literature of estimating EOS is huge. Summarizing a large number
of studies (mostly without normalization), Chirinko (2008) …nding that “while the
estimates range widely, the weight of the evidence suggests a value of EOS in the range
of 0:40 and 0:60." León-Ledesma et al. (2010) demonstrate that the estimates of EOS
can be biased, depending whether the technical changes are rightly modelled. Table 1
focuses on the literature that allows biased technical changes. Our estimate of                                                  = 0:42
is in line with this literature, which found                          between 0:2 and 0:9 [with a notable outlier
  = 1:2 by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)]. See Online Appendix B for a discusion
about our estimate and the literature.13
  12
    As commonly hassumedi in the literature, factor inputs are determined at the beginning of each
                  kj;t hs;t
period, so E j;t ks;t  hj;t = 0. We do, however, allow E ( j;t0 kj;t ) 6= 0 and E ( j;t0 hj;t ) 6= 0 for
t0 t, so factor inputs can be contemporarily correlated with the TFP residual through the shocks in
previous periods. These capture the standard environment in growth models that factor inputs take
time to build and the aggregate shocks are usually persistent.
   13
      Data on the labor shares is also available for some countries in PWT 9.0. We also estimate
from the labor shares, after introducing more structure to pin down these shares as in the literature.
Results are available upon request.


                                                                 16
                                    EOS ( )                 Sample                  Biased technical change
Brown and de
                                     0.08-0.35           1890-1958, U.S.            Constant growth
Cani (1963)
David and van de                                                                    Constant growth, allowing
                                       0.32              1899-1960, U.S.
Klundert (1965)                                                                     incomplete capital adjustment
Wilkinson (1968)                        0.5              1899-1953, U.S.            Constant growth
Sato (1970)                           0.5-0.7            1909-1960, U.S.            Constant growth
                                                                                    Constant growth, allowing
Panik (1976)                           0.76              1929-1966, U.S.
                                                                                    learning-by-doing
Kalt (1978)                            0.76              1929-1967, U.S.            Constant growth
Antràs (2004)                        0.64-0.89           1948-1998, U.S.            Constant growth
Klump et al. (2007)                    0.56              1953-1998, U.S.            Time-varying, Box-Cox model
                                                                                    Capital-augmenting change
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)        1.20        1975-2012, 129 countries
                                                                                    proxied by TFP growth
Ober…eld and Raval (2014)              0.71      1972-2007, U.S. manufacturing Aggregating plant-level EOS
Lawrence (2015)                      0.41-0.69   1947-2010, U.S. manufacturing Constant growth
León-Ledesma and Satchi (2017)          0.2              1948-2013, U.S.            Adjustment cost to technical changes
This paper                             0.42        1950-2014, 107 countries         Time-varying, assimilating the U.S.

Table 1: Empirical studies of the elasticity of substitution. References before 2007 are
combined from Chirinko (2008) and León-Ledesma et al. (2010), see therein for details.

5      Development Accounting
Development accounting asks how much world income disparities can be explained
by factor input di¤erences, controlling for production e¢ ciency (Caselli, 2005). This
section conducts development accounting under our assimilation framework. A useful
feature of our framework for accounting exercises is that it can allow the set of frontier
techniques and its productivity changing over time (but each country still assimilates
the same frontier technology). The relative outputs of country j to the frontier in the
data and in the three models are given as follows.

       Data:
                                                         data      yj;t
                                                        qj;t  =          :
                                                                  yU S;t
       Our Assimilation Model:
                        "                                                                  #1   1=(1       )
                                                 1 1=                               1 1=
                            kj;t                                            hj;t
                 qj;t =                                  + (1         )                                        :    (13)
                           kU S;t                                          hU S;t

       The Cobb-Douglas Model:
                                                                                                1
                         CD        zU S;t (kj;t ) (hj;t )1                 kj;t        hj;t
                        qj;t     =                                =                                    :            (14)
                                             yU S;t                       kU S;t      hU S;t

                                                          17
                 Success rate                   Top-bottom 10% ratio                       Success rate (weighed)
 1.2                                   1.2                                        1.2



  1                                      1                                         1


          Assimilation
 0.8      Cobb-Douglas                 0.8                                        0.8
          CES
          Assimilation ( = 1.2)
 0.6                                   0.6                                        0.6



 0.4                                   0.4                                        0.4



 0.2                                   0.2                                        0.2



  0                                      0                                         0




                                  Figure 5: Comparison of success rates.

         The Hick-neutral CES Model:
                                                      h                                                   i1   1=(1   )
                                                  1
                CES
               qj;t = (kU S;t )     (hU S;t )              (kj;t )1   1=
                                                                           + (1         ) (hj;t )1   1=
                                                                                                                          :   (15)

To facilitate comparison, we …x the EOS =                              for all countries. We also compare with
the model with high assimilation ability = 1:20 [as in Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2014)] to contrast the impact of imperfect assimilation under our estimate = 0:42.
       In the standard development accounting exercise, we measure how much interna-
tional income variation can be accounted by the model with the following success rate:
                                                           V AR (log qj;t )
                                             St                      data
                                                                            :                                                 (16)
                                                          V AR log qj;t

Similarly, we construct StCD , StCES and StH for the Cobb-Douglas model, the Hick-
neutral CES model and the assimilation model with a high value                                       = 1:20 respectively.
In principle, the better the model is capable of explaining the income disparity, the
closer the success rate is to 100%. Nonetheless, Caselli (2005) argues that the variations
can be sensitive to outliers. A measure that is less sensitive to outliers, while at the cost
of forgoing some information in the data, is a measure of the inter-percentile di¤erential.
As such, we also calculate the success rate based on the comparison between the top
10-th percentile, q90th;t , and the bottom 10-th percentile, q10th;t , as

                                                            q90th;t =q10th;t
                                                Sp;t         data     data
                                                                             :                                                (17)
                                                            q90th;t =q10th;t
                            CD     CES      H
with similar counterparts, Sp;t , Sp;t and Sp;t . Figure 5 reports the results of the
development accounting since 1960.
   No matter which measure of success rates, our assimilation model consistently yields
better success rates than the alternatives for almost the entire sample period. For

                                                               18
instance, our assimilation model on average can explain 92% of the income disparities
in terms of the conventional success rate, compared to a rate of about 33% of the
Cobb-Douglas model, 9% of the CES model and 28% for the high- model; for the top-
bottom 10-th percentile measures of the success rates, our assimilation model yields a
rate of 80%, compared to 31%. 14% and 27% for the three alternative models.
   Finally, one might also argue that the income variation is biased toward small
countries; for example, China and India together are counted as a tenth of the twenty
African countries in computing the income variation even though China and India are
forty-times larger than in population. One way to address (at least partly) this concern
is to weight the success rate with population:
                                        V ARw (log qj;t )
                               Sw;t                data
                                                          :                          (18)
                                       V ARw log qj;t
                             CD     CES      H
with weighted success rates Sw;t , Sw;t and Sw;t for the the three alternatives. Again, as
shown in Figure 5, the previous ranking on the success-rate remains valid. The success
rate of our assimilation model is almost the same (92%), and the success rates of the
three alternatives reduce slightly (31% for the Cobb-Douglas, 8% for the CES and 26%
for the high- ). Notice that the weighted success rate is calculated as if no inequality
within the country, so the correction may remain biased in another direction.

5.1    Why do standard models underperform?
To understand why the standard models underperform in development accounting,
Figure 6 compares the distributions generated by these models. Speci…cally, we classify
the sample countries based on their (i) initial (relative) incomes in 1960, (ii) “current”
(relative) incomes in 2010, and (iii) average growth rates (relative to the U.S.) during
the sample period. The initial/current incomes indicate a country’s initial/current
development stage; the average growth indicates its catching up speed with the U.S.
   Cobb-Douglas and high . Comparison with models of Cobb-Douglas and high
  highlighs the role of imperfect assimilation. Regardless of which income-level classi-
…cations we use, the Cobb-Douglas model always generates too much upper tail of the
relative income distribution while missing the lower half of the distribution. Intuiti-
ively, Proposition 3 shows that, under our NCES setup, income level is increasing in
 . So a model with imperfect assimilation ( = 0:42 in our estimation) can generate
more lower tail in the level than the Cobb-Douglas model with     = 1. Increasing
assimilation ability to = 1:2 (the last column in Figure 6) only misses more lower
tail than Cobb-Douglas since the better assimilation ability mitigates the output loss
due to mismatch.

                                           19
                                                            1960 log income relative to the U.S.
 25                                                 25                                                35                                           25
             Data                                                Data                                 30                                Data                  Data
 20          Assimilation                           20           Cobb-Douglas                                                           CES        20          = 1.2
                                                                                                      25
 15                                                 15                                                20                                           15

 10                                                 10                                                15
                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                      10
  5                                                 5
                                                                                                      5                                            5
  0                                                 0                                                 0
   -5   -4        -3   -2       -1     0        1    -5     -4       -3   -2       -1     0       1    -5   -4       -3   -2       -1   0      1   0
                                                                                                                                                    -5   -4        -3   -2       -1    0       1
                                                            2010 log income relative to the U.S.
 35                                                 35                                                70                                           35
             Data                                                Data                                                                   Data                  Data
 30                                                 30                                                60                                           30
             Assimilation                                        Cobb-Douglas                                                           CES                    = 1.2
 25                                                 25                                                50                                           25

 20                                                 20                                                40                                           20

 15                                                 15                                                30                                           15

 10                                                 10                                                20                                           10

  5                                                 5                                                 10                                           5

  0                                                 0                                                 0                                            0
   -5   -4        -3   -2       -1     0        1    -5     -4       -3   -2       -1     0       1    -5   -4       -3   -2       -1   0      1    -5   -4        -3   -2       -1    0       1
                                                         Income growth rate relative to the U.S. (%)
 50                                                 50                                                70                                           50
                                 Data                                              Data                                                 Data                                          Data
                                                                                                      60
 40                              Assimilation       40                             Cobb-Douglas                                         CES        40                                  = 1.2
                                                                                                      50
 30                                                 30                                                40                                           30


 20                                                 20                                                30                                           20
                                                                                                      20
 10                                                 10                                                                                             10
                                                                                                      10

  0                                                 0                                                 0                                            0
   -2         0             2            4           -2          0             2           4           -2        0             2        4           -2         0             2          4




Figure 6: Distributions of log(qj;1960 ), of log(qj;2010 ) and of time-series average q^j ac-
cording to di¤erent models.

      The last row of Figure 6 re‡ects the prediction of Proposition 5. For the growth
distribution, the Cobb-Douglas model misses the two tails because the mismatch con-
tribution for the extreme (both positive and negative) growing economies are severely
underpredicted. The assimilation model with = 0:42 gives rise to addition contribu-
tion (positive and negative) to growth so that the predicted number of extreme growing
countries increases. Thus, the distribution spreads more evenly. These outcomes are
consistent with the right panel of Figure 2. With a lower than the Cobb-Douglas
technology, the …tted line in Figure 2 generated from the assimilation model tilts in
the clockwise direction and reduces the bias of the two ends.
      Hick-neutral CES. Comparison with the Hick-neutral CES models highlighs the
role of mismatch. The Hick-neutral CES model shifts the distribution to the left but
inevitably misses the upper half of the income distribution. Since the Hick-neutral
CES model misses the factor biasness of technology, if we lower the EOS from Cobb-
Douglas toward the our EOS estimate ( = 0:42), then factor complementarity over-
corrects the skewness of the Cobb-Douglas model with all the predicted outcomes




                                                                                                  20
concentrated at the left tail. This can be seen by rewriting (15) as
                   2                        !1                                        !1        31   1=(1   )
                                                 1=                                        1=
                               kj;t                                      hj;t
           CES
          qj;t =4                                     + (1     )                                5               :   (19)
                           kU S;t h1U S;t                            kU S;t hU1 S;t

So the CES model can be understood as an NCES setup with the baseline normaliza-
tion at the geometric average of the frontier factor inputs. It implies that one of the
relative factor inputs in (15) must be smaller compared with those in (13). As a result,
factor complementarity makes the predicted relative output smaller. This explains the
di¤erence in the …rst and last panels of the …rst two rows in Figure 6.
   For the growth distribution, the Hick-neutral CES production function ignores the
relative factor advantage so that there is no mismatch consideration. With the EOS
 = 0:42, factor complementarity implies that the less-growing countries dominates the
fast-growing ones.14 This reduces the spread of the relative distribution so that the
predicted growth outcomes are more concentrated around the zero benchmark than
the Cobb-Douglas model.

5.2     Fitness
So far the development accounting distinguishes that how well our framework can
explain the income inequality on the global level. It would also be useful to examine
how well our framework can explain the income dynamics for each country. This
diagnostics is pursued in this section with two …tness measures. Recall that the TFP
                                             data
residual in our model is given by j;t = log qj;t  log qj;t ; similarly, CD
                                                                        j;t for the Cobb-
                     CES
Douglas model and j;t for the Hick-neutral CES model. De…ne relative TFP as

                                                 zj    exp(E   j;t );                                               (20)

and similarly zjCD        exp(E    CD
                                   j;t )    and zjCES        exp(E      CES
                                                                        j;t )   for the Cobb-Douglas and the
Hick-neutral CES models. A model that competently explains the income dynamics
should feature     j;t   close to zero on average and a value of zj close to one; a lower-
than-unity (higher-than-unity) relative TFP means the model implies a lower (higher)
productivity and hence underpredicts (overpredicts) the output data. Thus, we can
rank the model explanation power by comparing zj , zjCD and zjCES to one.
    A model that misses some signi…cant movements in the output dynamics may still
feature zj close to one if these movements happen to cancel each other. In this regard
  14
     This applies to countries with either positive or negative growth rates. See a discussion of this
non-balanced growth result for the case of positive growth rates in Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008).


                                                         21
                      #       zj       zjCD       zjCES      MSE           MSECD   MSECES
 Fraction of U.S. income in 1960
  25%         39 0.62     0.40                     8.61        0.60         97%    95%
(25%; 50%]    16 0.74     0.69                    18.93        0.20         94%    100%
(50%; 75%]    10 0.83     0.79                    22.61        0.11         90%    100%
> 75%         3    0.87   0.85                    27.12        0.03        100%    100%
Fraction of U.S. income in 2010
  25%         56 0.63     0.32                     5.83        0.67        100%     92%
(25%; 50%]    21 0.75     0.62                    14.60        0.27         86%    100%
(50%; 75%]    16 0.81     0.72                    20.40        0.17         88%    100%
> 75%         13 0.78     0.75                    23.15        0.10         25%    100%
Fraction of U.S. growth rate
  50%                 23     0.66      0.32        5.52        0.56         96%    91%
(50%; 100%]           17     0.63      0.50       12.12        0.44        100%    100%
(100%; 200%]          47     0.70      0.56       14.88        0.34         96%     96%
> 200%                19     0.81      0.52       11.95        0.57         89%     95%
Overall               106 0.70         0.49       11.94        0.44        95%     95%

                           Table 2: Comparison of explanation power.

we also complement our diagnostics with the following M SE measure:

                                                 1X
                                                    T
                                                                   2
                                      M SEj            (   j;t )       :              (21)
                                                 T t=1

Speci…cally, M SEj captures the time-series average variation of the income gap of
country j that cannot be generated by the assimilation model. We then construct
comparable measures, M SEjCD and M SEjCES , for the two alternative models.
      Table 2 summarizes our …ndings. For all the countries in the sample, the CES model
yields the worst performance, in terms of both the relative TFP and the M SE metrics,
just like when we judge the development accounting performances using success rates.
As such, we shall focus on the comparison between the assimilation model and the
Cobb-Douglas model.
      The relative TFP of our assimilation model is 0.7 on average, about 40% higher
than that of the Cobb-Douglas counterpart. In terms of M SEs, the overall average
of our assimilation model is 0.44, lower than the Cobb-Douglas counterpart in 95%
of the sample countries. We also group countries according to the income quartiles
in 1960 and 2010, as well as according to their average income growth rates.15 In
 15
      The average income growth rate of the U.S. for the sample period is 1.79%.


                                                 22
terms of the relative TFPs, our assimilation model is always better than the Cobb-
Douglas model in the low tail of the income distributions, and also for fast-growing
countries. These results are robust in terms of the M SEs. Speci…cally, the M SEs of
our model for the above three low-income or low-growth groups are smaller than the
Cobb-Douglas model in 97%, 100% and 96% of the sample countries, respectively. For
the fast-growing countries, the M SEs of the assimilation model is still lower than the
Cobb-Douglas model in 89% of the sample countries.
   Summarizing, our assimilation framework yields better …t in general, generating
zj closer to unity and lower M SEs. The highest explanatory power is obtained in
the following three groups: (i) countries with su¢ ciently low income (no more than a
quarter of the U.S. income); (ii) countries with very low growth (no more than half of
the U.S. growth rate); (iii) countries with very high growth rates (more than doubling
the U.S. rates). These conclusions are consistent with our …ndings given in Figure 6,
showing that our assimilation model is better in capturing the tails observed in the
data than the alternatives. In other words, technology assimilation can be regarded
as crucial for understanding why some developing countries advanced successfully and
some lagged behind or even fell into the development trap. As a result, the consideration
of technology assimilation enables a sizable reduction in the unexplained income gap:
lowering it from 51% under the standard Cobb-Douglas model to 30%.


6      Growth Accounting
To gain further insight into the role of technology assimilation played in driving a
country’s growth path, we check how much it is able to explain changes in income gap
over time. By assimilating the U.S. technique, relative income growth of country j can
be, utilizing (10), decomposed as

      data
    q^j;t  = q^j;t +       j;t   =    k^j;t     k^U S;t + (1     ^ j;t
                                                               ) h          ^ U S;t + M
                                                                            h         ^ j;t +       j;t ,   (22)

where                  "                                       #1
                                                 1 1=                1=(1   )
                                  kj;t hU S;t                                    kj;t hU S;t
             Mj;t                                       +1                                      :           (23)
                                 kU S;t hj;t                                    kU S;t hj;t
The …rst two terms on the right side of (22) measure the conventional factor growth
contribution, via the accumulation of physical capital and human capital, as in the
Cobb-Douglas model. The di¤erence of the factor growth contribution from the data
is typically regarded as the Solow residual,    CD
                                                   = M ^ j;t + j;t , which is usually
                                                               j;t
found very large (see the literature cited as well as our replication below). In our

                                                         23
                    Relative growth(pp)              Contribution to growth(%)
             # Income Capital Human               Capital Human Mismatch Wedge
                                  capital                 capital
Fraction of U.S. income in 1960
  25%         39       0.66    0.36     0.39      28.84     6.38      49.93      14.85
(25%; 50%]    16       0.97    1.13     0.23      25.46     5.52      10.21      58.81
(50%; 75%]    10       0.21    0.77     0.01      36.19     3.07      4.56       56.18
> 75%          3       0.01    0.36     -0.11     -28.86    20.89     -1.95      109.93
 Fraction of U.S.     income in 2010
  25%         56       -0.15   -0.31    0.47      32.55     -14.29    60.63      21.11
(25%; 50%]    21       1.16    1.65     0.49      35.49     26.00     23.79      14.73
(50%; 75%]    16       1.33    1.73     0.24      37.74     17.18     19.70      25.38
> 75%         13       1.32    1.40     0.14      31.48     8.77      6.31       53.44
 Fraction of U.S.     growth rate
  50%            23   -1.74    -1.45    0.51      21.58     -24.76    51.24      51.94
(50%; 100%]      17   -0.28    -0.20    0.17      39.81     -54.78    55.36      59.61
(100%; 200%]     47   0.96     1.13     0.34      38.89     28.91     36.13      -3.93
> 200%           19   2.84     2.46     0.61      30.53     14.57     24.96      29.94
Overall         106 0.51       0.60     0.40      33.78     1.27      40.49      24.45

               Table 3: Growth accounting in di¤erent groups of countries.

assimilation framework, we can further isolate the contribution of an endogenous TFP
component due to changes in the factor input-technology mismatch, M      ^ j;t . We will
show the importance of this new and interesting component and check its validity by
referring back to the development accounting results obtained before.
   Table 3 reports the growth accounting results in di¤erent groups of income levels
and growth rates as classi…ed before. Each time-series growth rate is obtained for
each country; average within each subgroup and for the entire sample (overall) are
subsequently computed. The third to …fth columns report the subgroup and overall
average of the growth rates of income and factor inputs relative to the U.S. The last four
columns report the contribution to the relative income growth rates due respectively
to: (i) physical capital accumulation, (ii) human capital accumulation, (iii) changes in
factor input-technology mismatch, and (iv) changes in the (unexplained) TFP residual.
These contributions correspond to the four terms in (22).
    The growth accounting based to the Cobb-Douglas model rely entirely on the con-
tribution from factor accumulation, leading to a large TFP residual component and
failing to capture the development proces facing poor and low-growth countries that
locate in the left tail of the distribution. For example, for countries in the lowest


                                           24
growth subgroup, the Cobb-Douglas model predicts that there would have been pos-
itive income growth relative to the U.S., contradicting the data (-1.74). As a result,
the Cobb-Douglas model contributes a negligible -3.18% (obtained from summing up
the contributions from the accumulation of the two capitals), failing explain the lack
of growth and hence leaving all the explanatory power to the Solow residual.
      Turning now to the assimilation model, we are able to account for more than 60%
of the Solow residual in the Cobb-Douglas alternative. Overall, changes in the factor
input-technology mismatch contribute to 40% of relative income growth, even more
important than the contribution of physical capital accumulation (about one-third)
and TFP residual changes (about a quarter). Most dramatically, for the 47 moderately
fast growing countries (with growth rates exceeding the U.S. but no more than double),
TFP residual changes become inessential whereas the accumulation of each capital and
the mismatch all have comparable contributions.
      For initially low-income countries (no more than a quarter of the U.S. income in
1960), the consideration of technology assimilation lowers the contribution of the TFP
residual (from the Cobb-Douglas counterpart of 64.78%) to 14.85%. Such large reduc-
tions in the unexplained component also arise in currently low-income countries (no
more than a quarter of the U.S. income in 2010) and in the fastest growing economies
(growing at a speed more than doubling the U.S.). In all these countries, the factor
input-technology mismatch plays a key role, accounting for half (or more) of their
economic growth. By focusing on initial development stage and development speed,
human capital accumulation is important only in those subgroups with countries hav-
ing initially high relative income (more than three quarters of the U.S.) or growing at
least as fast as the U.S.

6.1      Traps and Miracles
Because our assimilation model is more powerful than the Cobb-Douglas in explain-
ing the income stagnation observed in many development trapped countries and the
miraculous development process of fast growing countries. To gain more insight, we
conduct in-depth study of some representative countries from these two subgroups.
      With regard to trapped countries, we select 18 with relatively longer time series and
divergent movements. We depict the data and the predicted income dynamics by the
Cobb-Douglas model and by our assimilation model in Figure 7. The average M SE
of our assimilation model is 0.61 over this subsample, far lower than the counterpart
in the Cobb-Douglas model (2.04).16 Among them, our model only fails to track the
 16
      The variation is huge with the maximum at 1.60 (Niger) and the minimum at 0.01 (Burundi)


                                              25
             Burundi                    Benin             Central African Rep.             Côte d'Ivoire          D.R. of the Congo
  0.03                        0.1                      0.05                      0.14                       0.2

                                                                                 0.12
 0.025                       0.08                      0.04                                                0.15
                                                                                  0.1
  0.02                       0.06                      0.03                                                 0.1
                                                                                 0.08
             Data
 0.015       Assimilation    0.04                      0.02                                                0.05
                                                                                 0.06
             Cobb-Douglas
  0.01                       0.02                      0.01                      0.04                        0
     1960    1980     2000      1960   1980     2000      1960   1980     2000      1960     1980   2000     1960      1980   2000

             Ghana                     Gambia                     Kenya                     Cambodia                 Madagascar
   0.2                       0.12                      0.14                      0.07                      0.08

                                                       0.12                      0.06
                              0.1                                                                          0.06
  0.15
                                                        0.1                      0.05
                             0.08                                                                          0.04
                                                       0.08                      0.04
   0.1
                             0.06                                                                          0.02
                                                       0.06                      0.03

  0.05                       0.04                      0.04                      0.02                        0
     1960    1980     2000      1960   1980     2000      1960   1980     2000      1960     1980   2000     1960      1980   2000

            Mauritania                 Malawi                     Niger                      Senegal                 Sierra Leone
  0.25                       0.07                       0.1                       0.2                      0.07

                             0.06                      0.08                                                0.06
   0.2                                                                           0.15
                             0.05                      0.06                                                0.05

                             0.04                      0.04                                                0.04
  0.15                                                                            0.1
                             0.03                      0.02                                                0.03

   0.1                       0.02                        0                       0.05                      0.02
     1960    1980     2000      1960   1980     2000     1960    1980     2000      1960     1980   2000      1960     1980   2000

              Togo                     Tanzania                  Zimbabwe
  0.08                       0.08                       0.2


                                                       0.15
  0.06                       0.06

                                                        0.1

  0.04                       0.04
                                                       0.05


  0.02                       0.02                        0
     1960    1980     2000      1960   1980     2000     1960    1980     2000




              Figure 7: Income time-series for the development-trapped countries.

income dynamics of Gambia prior to 1990, but the Cobb-Douglas model misses many
episodes of such movements in most of these countries.
   For most of the time these trapped countries typically have less than 5% of the
U.S. income and their income gaps are widening. While human capital is improving
for most of the trapped countries (on average 0.41 percentage points faster than the
U.S.), physical capital is common to see negative growth. The latter (former) is the
(dis)advantageous factor, as reported in the third and fourth columns of Table 4. The
fact that physical (human) capital is decumulating (accumulating) over time widens
the factor input-technology mismatch.17 Thus, from Proposition 5, this mismatch
channel is translated to lower growth. Our quantitative results indicate that this new
channel is signi…cant in explaining the data observation: it explains on average 94%
in the assimilation model. For the Cobb-Douglas model, the variation is similarly large with the
maximum at 3.71 (Central African) and the minimum at 0.40 (Mauritania).
  17
     The only exception is Senegal, but it also has factor advantage reversal.


                                                                    26
                     Relative growth(pp)     Growth contribution(%)                    Fitness
                                    Human                      Human
                  Income Capital            Mismatch Capital              zj    zjCD     MSEj    MSECD
                                                                                                    j
                                    capital                    capital
Burundi            -1.58   -1.37     0.30    69.13     28.95    -12.49   1.00   0.19      0.01    2.77
Benin              -1.55   -2.35     1.04    116.55    50.59    -44.85   0.43   0.24      0.74    2.18
Central African    -3.33   -3.23     0.58    67.30     33.26    -11.62   0.32   0.15      1.31    3.71
Côte d’Ivoire      -0.23   -2.15     0.22    438.35    311.38   -64.39   0.41   0.32      0.84    1.32
Congo D.R.         -2.30   -1.30     0.14    40.67     18.82     -4.08   1.76   0.44      0.83    1.41
Ghana              -1.35   -2.50     0.74    91.53     61.60    -36.39   0.44   0.28      0.68    1.69
Gambia             -1.34    0.33     0.70     15.97     -8.11   -34.62   0.86   0.41      0.09    0.84
Kenya              -0.54   -1.78     0.48    212.50    108.59   -58.73   0.55   0.31      0.38    1.39
Cambodia           -0.80   -0.68     0.54     93.17     28.31   -44.80   0.64   0.21      0.25    2.54
Madagascar         -1.52   -2.42     0.01     98.41     53.17    -0.30   0.57   0.20      0.36    2.69
Mauritania         -1.08   -0.08     0.51     17.80     2.56    -31.42   0.71   0.54      0.13    0.40
Malawi             -1.14   -0.47    0.02      26.84     13.67    -1.02   0.48   0.19      0.69    2.75
Niger              -2.51   -3.58    -0.27     55.46     47.57    7.22    0.28   0.20      1.60    2.72
Senegal            -2.01   -3.36     0.11    48.09     55.71     -3.50   0.47   0.36      0.58    1.08
Sierra Leone       -1.32   -1.75     0.63    107.48    44.30    -31.68   0.64   0.26      0.22    1.83
Togo               -2.78   -3.04     0.70     78.23     36.38   -16.85   0.50   0.20      0.50    2.66
Tanzania           -0.43   -0.45    -0.15     36.42     34.23    22.52   0.33   0.20      1.25    2.62
Zimbabwe           -3.07   -3.40     1.16     83.57     36.92   -25.28   0.63   0.28      0.45    2.05
Average            -1.60   -1.87    0.41      94.25    53.22    -21.79   0.61   0.28      0.61    2.04

    Table 4: Growth accounting for the development-trapped countries up to 2014.

of the widening income gap from the U.S., whereas the Cobb-Douglas model only
accounts for 31%. Also, upon consideration technology assimilation, the unexplained
income gap is reduced (on average) to 39% (from 72% in the Cobb-Douglas alternative).
The detailed accounting results are reported in Table 4. Interestingly, in all but one
country (Senegal), the mismatch component contributes more (mostly much more)
than physical capital in their subpar development experiences.
    We turn now to an in-depth study on how miracles happened. As shown in Figure
8, our assimilation model tracks the data quite well. Notably, although incomes in
these countries were on average less than 15% of the U.S. income in the 1960s, they
have maintained a prolong period of strong growth. By 2014 the relative income has
been more than triple in Hong Kong, four times in Taiwan, …ve times in Singapore
and six times in Korea. Overall, factor accumulation can explain 64% of the growth
performance for these ten miracle countries. The disadvantageous factor – physical
capital – has been growing much faster than the advantageous one – human capital:
the average growth rate of the former is 2.5% faster than the U.S. whereas the latter
is only 0.8%. The factor input-technology mismatch has therefore been improving
over time and technology assimilation can account for another 30% of their prolonged
growth. As a result, the TFP residual only accounts for 6%.
   Our assimilation story is highly plausible in countries that are importing foreign
technology based on their export-led growth policy, for instance, Korea and Taiwan.


                                                  27
             Botswana                              China                          Hong Kong                             India                        South Korea
  0.35                               0.35                                 1                               0.13                               0.7
             Data
                                                                         0.9                              0.12
             Assimilation             0.3                                                                                                    0.6
   0.3       Cobb-Douglas
                                                                                                          0.11
                                                                         0.8
                                     0.25                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                         0.7
  0.25
                                      0.2                                                                 0.09                               0.4
                                                                         0.6
                                     0.15                                                                 0.08                               0.3
   0.2
                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                          0.07
                                      0.1                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                         0.4
  0.15                                                                                                    0.06
                                     0.05                                0.3                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                          0.05

   0.1                                 0                                 0.2                             0.04                                 0
     1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010       1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
              Malaysia                          Singapore                           Thailand                           Taiwan                          Viet Nam
   0.5                                 1                                0.25                               0.9                              0.14

                                      0.9                                                                  0.8
  0.45                                                                                                                                      0.12
                                      0.8                                0.2
                                                                                                           0.7
   0.4
                                      0.7                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                        0.15
  0.35                                0.6
                                                                                                           0.5                              0.08
   0.3                                0.5
                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                           0.4
                                      0.4                                                                                                   0.06
  0.25
                                                                                                           0.3
                                      0.3                               0.05
   0.2                                                                                                                                      0.04
                                      0.2                                                                  0.2

  0.15                                0.1                                 0                                0.1                             0.02
     1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010     1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010      1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010    1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                               Figure 8: Income time-series for the miracle countries

Assimilation is important for Korea and Taiwan to catch up with the frontier, which
contributes to 47% and 27%, respectively, to growth via narrowing the factor input-
technology mismatch. It translates to extra 1.49% and 0.81% annual growth rates in
Korea and Taiwan respectively. Similar conclusion can be apply to the ASEAN coun-
tries such as Malaysia and Thailand too, with the factor input-technology mismatch
accounts for 18% and 31%. respectively.
       Narrowing the mismatch is less important in some miracle countries. In Hong Kong
there is a reversal in relative factor disadvantage such that phyiscal capital eventually
becomes the advantageous factor: a phenomenon detailed in the next subsection.18 In
Botswana and India, although the factor input-technology mismatch channel does not
contribute much to their growth, the assimilation model still performs much better
than the Cobb-Douglas model (with the M SEs being reduced by at least 30%), and
the assimilation model captures most of the important income dynamics, as illustrated
in Figure 8. In Singapore, our assimilation model is largely indistinguishable from the
Cobb-Douglas counterpart. The assimilation model becomes more distinguishable once
we allow for alternative sources and early stop of assimilation when the local economy
becomes highly advanced, shown in Section 8.
   Finally, for China and Vietnam, factor accumulation alone has already accounted
for 100% and 81% of their growth performance respectively, so our assimilation is
  18
   As to be shown later, such a reversal also occurred in Taiwan but in a more moderate manner
toward the end of the sample period, thereby not dampening much of the assimilation channel.



                                                                                       28
               Relative growth(pp)     Growth contribution(%)                      Fitness
                              Human                      Human
            Income Capital            Mismatch Capital                zj    zjCD     MSEj    MSECD
                                                                                                j
                              capital                    capital
Hong Kong    1.83     2.13    0.50       2.59        38.67   18.15   0.79   0.78      0.09    0.10
Korea        3.18     4.17    0.53      46.73        43.79   11.22   0.79   0.52      0.07    0.51
Singapore    2.95     2.01    1.05      -0.80        22.82   23.94   0.81   0.79      0.12    0.13
Taiwan       3.05     3.51    0.68      26.58        37.39   14.87   0.99   0.79      0.01    0.14
Botswana     2.48     2.27    1.82      4.04         30.56   48.99   0.59   0.53      0.29    0.42
China        1.79     4.08    0.71     101.41        76.10   26.63   0.83   0.31      0.18    1.43
India        0.97     0.37    0.36      0.19         12.62   24.97   0.44   0.26      0.68    1.84
Malaysia     1.64     1.71    0.80      17.78        34.67   32.63   0.79   0.64      0.09    0.22
Thailand     1.83     1.94    0.66      30.81        35.39   23.94   0.46   0.31      0.63    1.42
Vietnam      1.83     2.76    0.83      65.24        50.38   30.36   0.78   0.23      0.11    2.16
Average      2.15     2.50    0.80      29.46        38.33   25.55   0.73   0.52      0.23    0.84


            Table 5: Growth accounting for the miracle countries up to 2014.

doomed to overpredict their growth, as illustrated in Figure 8. Nevertheless, for these
economies, there are signi…cant reduction in the unexplained income gap compared
with the Cobb-Douglas model, from 69% to 17% for China, and from 77% to 22% for
Vietnam. Similar to the case of Singapore, the selection of the assimilated frontier
country matters as well, though rather than early stop they both face late start due to
delayed implementation of market-oriented development policy.
   In summary, the lack of assimilation is proven to prevent trapped countries from
advancing; assimilation accompanied by accumulating the disadvantageous factor can
help a country to produce miraculous development outcomes. Our …ndings echo the
conclusion that the assimilation model is better than the Cobb-Douglas model in cap-
turing the two tails of the growth distribution in the data, especially the left tail.

6.2       Factor Advantage Reversal and Middle-Income Trap
Proposition 5 states that rapid accumulation in the disadvantageous factors relative
to the advantageous factors can drive a faster growth, nevertheless, it is possible that
these disadvantageous factors may eventually become advantageous. In this circum-
stance, the factor input-technology mismatch will be reversed. Such reversal may arise
naturally as an equilibrium outcome, or as a result of active development policy.
   We have already mentioned such cases in the previous discussion, including the
miracle ones such as Hong Kong and Taiwan. In the case of Hong Kong, factor advan-
tage reversal may re‡ect the structural transformation of these countries from capital
intensive manufacturing to service. The reversal may also happen in many middle-
income countries such as Greece and Portugal, some high-income countries such as
France and some low-income countries such as Senegal. For initially middle-income


                                                29
                  Denmark                                        Spain                                       Finland                                     France
  0.9                                          0.8                                          0.8                                         0.9

 0.85        Data
                                               0.7
             Assimilation                                                                   0.7                                         0.8
  0.8        Cobb-Douglas
             Human capital
                                               0.6
 0.75         becomes disadvantage
                                                                                            0.6                                         0.7

  0.7                                          0.5

                                                                                            0.5                                         0.6
 0.65
                                               0.4
  0.6
                                                                                            0.4                                         0.5
                                               0.3
 0.55

  0.5                                          0.2                                          0.3                                         0.4
    1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010      1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010
                    Greece                                     Hong Kong                                    Portugal                                     Taiwan
  0.7                                           1                                           0.6                                          1

                                               0.9                                         0.55
  0.6                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                               0.8                                          0.5

                                               0.7                                         0.45
  0.5                                                                                                                                   0.6

                                               0.6                                          0.4

  0.4                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                               0.5                                         0.35

                                               0.4                                          0.3
  0.3                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                               0.3                                         0.25

  0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2                                          0
    1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010      1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010    1960    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




           Figure 9: Income time-series for the countries with disadvantage reversal.

countries including development miracles, after the reversal has taken place, the factor
input-technology mismatch will be working in the reverse direction. So the country’s
income will be bottlenecked at the middle level unless the once-advantageous factors
keep up to the growing pace of the once-disadvantageous factors. Figure 9 highlights
some of the countries that experience the relative factor advantage reversal.
    In most of the countries experiencing reversal, the mismatch channel of the assim-
ilation model does not contribute much in growth accounting. This is not di¢ cult to
understand because the contribution to growth accounting of the relative factor ad-
vantage is reversed after the reversal has taken place. For the eight countries depicted
in Figure 9, the mismatch contributes to growth for only 9.4%. The detailed growth
accounting results are reported in Table 6. After the reversal has taken place, almost all
of the countries have their mismatch contribution turned negative. The only exception
is Taiwan whose mismatch contribution falls but still remains positive (from 26.61% to
0.09%). This is likely due to the fact that the reversal has taken place three times in
a relatively moderate manner only toward the last decade of the sample period, thus
having less impact on the contribution of mismatch.
    To better understand the mismatch contribution for the reversal countries, we com-
pute the counterfactual increase in growth had the reversal been absent. Speci…cally,
the growth di¤erential is computed as the di¤erence in the incremental growth caused
by the mismatch component before and after the reversal. Such growth di¤erentials,


                                                                                           30
                            Relative growth(pp)         Growth contribution(%)
                                           Human                     Human     growth
                         Income Capital            Mismatch Capital
                                           capital                   capital (pp)
 Denmark- overall     0.54         1.26      -0.24      26.28        77.26     -29.71     0.39
      before reversal 0.50         2.06      -0.85      74.65        137.01    -113.16
       after reversal 0.56         0.60      0.18       -2.74        35.91     21.65
 Spain- overall         2.01       2.47      0.10       7.96         41.08     3.45       0.76
        before reversal 3.63       3.50      -0.38      17.76        32.13     -6.90
         after reversal 0.95       1.80      0.39       -12.25       63.19     27.47
 Finland- overall       1.26       1.71      0.17       10.65        45.08     9.08       0.40
       before reversal 2.00        2.67      -0.098     18.75        44.56     -3.26
         after reversal 0.85       0.95      0.35       -2.52        37.04     27.09
 France- overall        1.11       1.54      -0.0072    5.53         46.46     -0.43      0.35
       before reversal 2.36        2.35      -0.56      12.86        33.11     -15.74
         after reversal 0.49       1.13      0.25       -10.25       76.28     33.34
 Greece- overall        1.53       1.43      0.51       -0.81        31.26     22.22      0.09
       before reversal 3.56        1.70      0.72       1.26         15.88     13.53
         after reversal 0.44       1.13      0.42       -9.19        86.56     64.86
 Hong Kong- overall 1.83           2.13      0.50       2.59         38.67     18.15      0.26
      before reversal 2.72         2.46      0.32       7.11         30.14     7.79
       after reversal 1.16         1.79      0.69       -5.46        51.52     34.64
 Portugal- overall     1.62        1.67      0.47       -3.63        34.42     19.58      0.14
       before reversal 2.05        1.05      -0.23      2.17         17.03     -7.59
        after reversal 1.53        1.82      0.71       -6.03        39.63     31.17
 Taiwan- overall       3.05        3.51      0.68       26.58        37.39     14.87      1.09
       before reversal 4.09        4.35      0.63       26.61        35.50     10.20
        after reversal 0.11        0.85      0.85       0.09         257.26    512.40

          Table 6: Growth accounting for the countries with disadvantage reversal

reported in the last column of Table 6 ( growth), can be large if the di¤erences in the
mismatch contribution and in income growth caused by the reversal are sizable. For
example, in the case of Denmark, the di¤erence in the mismatch contribution is large
but the di¤erence in income growth is negligible, whereas both di¤erences in Spain are
large. This explains why the growth di¤erential is larger in Spain than in Denmark
(0.76 pp vs. 0.39 pp). Similar to Spain, di¤erences in both the growth rates and in
the mismatch contribution are large in Taiwan, leading to a large growth drop (by 1.09
pp). However, mismatch does not play much role after the reversal. Its sharp decline
in growth is mainly associated with the widening of the TFP residual, despite decent
factor accumulation.19
       To close the section, we would like to point out that the mechanism of factor
  19
    This can be explained by the fact that the relative factor advantage reversal of Taiwan is not
signi…cant in 2010. The relative k and relative h in 2010 are 0.84 and 0.83 respectively so that the
relative ratio of k=h is 1.01 which is the lowest in the group.


                                                31
    Country      Chow’s test Eichengreen et. al. (2014)                  This paper
    Denmark          1969                 1968-70, 1973                   1977
    Spain            1975              1966, 1969, 1972-7                1974
    Finland          1974                1974-5, 2002-3                  1976
    France           1974                    1973-4                      1971
    Greece           1972                1969-78, 2003                   1972
    Hong Kong        1993                1981-2, 1990-4                  1984
    Portugal       1974,1990           1973-4, 1977, 1990-2               1966
    Taiwan           1995                    1992-7                 1999, 2011, 2012

 Table 7: Timing for the midde-income traps and for the factor advantage reversal.

advantage reversal can serve as a plausible explanation for the middle-income traps
that features a signi…cant slowdown of once fast-growing economies in the midst of its
development. Speci…cally, Eichengreen et al. (2014) identify empirically the timing of
middle-income trap with the following three criteria: (i) before the trap year the seven-
year moving averages of the income growth rate are at least 3.5%; (ii) since the trap year
the seven-year averages of the income growth rate decrease by at least 2 percentage
points; and, (iii) at the trap year the per capita real GDP is at least USD10,000
at 2005 international PPP. Table 7 compares the middle-income traps identi…ed by
Eichengreen et al. (2014) to that based on that identi…ed by factor advantage reversals.
For robustness we also report the middle-income traps identi…ed as the structural break
by the Chow’s test. For easy comparison we have boldfaced the matches with no more
than two years apart from the …nding of Eichengreen et al. (2014). For most countries
in Table 7, it is found that the timing of the factor advantage reversal matches quite
well the empirical timing of the middle-income trap. Thus, the mechanism of factor
advantage reversal can be regarded as an empirically plausible cause of the slowdown
of the middle-income traps experienced by these once fast-growing economies.


7    Country-Speci…c Assimilation and Counterfactual
So far we have assumed that all countries have the common ability to assimilate the
frontier technology. In this section we allow for country-speci…c   j,   which will allocate
more explanation power to the assimilation mechanism by estimating             j   that mini-
mizes the M SEj for each country j. In general, allowing country-speci…c assimilation
signi…cantly improves the …tness in all income groups (especially the lowest), by reduc-
ing the overall M SE from 0.44 to 0.15. The unexplained income gap falls from 30%
to 14% (see Table 8 below for details).

                                           32
                 Success rate                                                Top-bottom 10% ratio                                     Success rate (weighed)
 1.5                                                             1.5                                                          1.5




  1                                                               1                                                            1




 0.5                                                             0.5                                                          0.5



                           Assimilation: country-common
                           Assimilation: country-specific

  0                                                               0                                                            0
  1960    1970    1980       1990          2000       2010        1960       1970   1980    1990        2000       2010        1960   1970       1980       1990   2000           2010
         1960 log relative income                                           2010 log relative income                            Relative income growth rate(%)
 25                                                              35                                                           40
                 Assimilation: country-common
                 Assimilation: country-specific
                                                                 30                                                           35
                 Data
 20
                                                                                                                              30
                                                                 25

                                                                                                                              25
 15
                                                                 20
                                                                                                                              20
                                                                 15
 10
                                                                                                                              15

                                                                 10
                                                                                                                              10
  5
                                                                  5                                                            5

  0                                                               0                                                            0
   -5     -4     -3        -2         -1          0          1     -5        -4     -3     -2      -1          0          1     -2    -1     0          1     2    3          4          5




           Figure 10: Development accounting with country-speci…c assimilation.

       The upper panel of Figure 10 compares the success rates after applying the country-
speci…c estimates. Allowing country-speci…c assimilation improves all three success
rates starting from the 1990s. But before 1990, the comparison yields mixed outcomes:
the weighted success rate is lower under country-speci…c than country-common assim-
ilation, whereas the outcomes are reversed for the two other measures of success rates,
which are always higher under country-speci…c assimilation. Notice that                                                                                                   j   is esti-
mated to maximize the average …tness of the entire sample period for each country, so
the success rates can be lower under country-speci…c assimilation in some subsample
period. On average, the three success rates yield close to 100% under country-speci…c
assimilation, compared with 87% under country-common assimilation.
       The lower panel of Figure 10 compares the predicted distribution, which are ex-
amined in di¤erent subgroups of countries in Table 8. In most countries, the country-
specifc assimilation ability is much lower than the common value of = 0:42. Notice
that the mismatch term under country-speci…c j becomes
                 "                           #1 1=(1 j )
                                  1 1= j
                      kj;t hU S;t                         kj;t hU S;t
      Mj;t ( j )                         +1                                                                                                                        :                 (24)
                     kU S;t hj;t                         kU S;t hj;t

By allowing country-speci…c                                            j,   the contribution to growth from the change in mis-

                                                                                           33
                                                     Country-common         Country-speci…c
                     Relative income            Mismatch con-          Mismatch con-
               #                         j                      zj MSE                 zj   MSE
                      growth (pp)                tribution(%)           tribution(%)
Fraction of U.S. income in 1960
   25%         39           0.66        0.11        49.93       0.62   0.60     61.02    0.82   0.22
 (25%; 50%]    16           0.97        0.09        10.21       0.74   0.20     22.09    0.86   0.11
( 50%; 75%]    10           0.21        0.11         4.56       0.83   0.11     49.11    0.89   0.06
 > 75%         3            0.01        0.00        -1.95       0.87   0.03    -78.61    0.93   0.02
 Fraction of U.S. income   in 2010
  25%         56            -0.15       0.13        60.63       0.63   0.67    89.08     0.85   0.22
(25%; 50%]    21            1.16        0.18        23.79       0.75   0.27    34.44     0.88   0.11
(50%; 75%]    16            1.33        0.12        19.70       0.81   0.17    30.61     0.88   0.06
> 75%         13            1.32        0.03         6.31       0.78   0.10    19.01     0.87   0.06
Fraction of U.S. growth    rate
  50%          23          -1.74        0.18        51.24       0.66   0.56     69.89    0.81   0.14
(50%; 100%]    17          -0.28        0.07        55.36       0.63   0.44    133.59    0.86   0.15
(100%; 200%]   47          0.96         0.09        36.13       0.70   0.34     44.08    0.85   0.15
> 200%         19          2.84         0.18        24.96       0.81   0.57     26.21    0.85   0.19
Overall        106          0.51        0.12        40.49       0.70   0.44    60.83     0.86   0.15

                Table 8: Country-speci…c assimilation in di¤erent groups.

match increases from 40% to 61% on average (except the subgroup with three initially
rich countries). As a result, Proposition 3 implies that the overshooting in the upper
tail of the distribution under the country-common assimilation can now be corrected
under the country-speci…c assimilation. Also, Proposition 5 signi…es the factor input-
technology mismatch so that the two tails of the country distribution in income growth
are thickened. This increases the spread of the distribution as shown in Figure 10.

7.1       Revisiting Traps and Miracles
Table 9 summarizes the accounting results of the trapped countries based on the
country-speci…c      j.   The average     j    for the trapped countries is 0.13, much lower than
                                         20
the country-common level of 0.42. As a result, the lower ability of assimilation of this
trapped group magni…es its signi…cance in mitigating the factor input-technology mis-
match, leading to a large contribution to growth from widening mismatch (more than
120%). This is consistent with Proposition 5. However, such a correction turns out
to be overdone in some countries like Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Senegal, where
the accounting outcome appears to overstate the contribution of mismatch. In these
countries the estimated country-speci…c              j   is at the zero lower bound - the complete
in‡exibility in adjusting the factor input ratio to the frontier technology may in‡ate the
  20
    The only exception is Congo whose is 0.58 which is higher than the world average. As a result,
growth contribution owing to the mismatch diminishes in the country-speci…c assimilation model.
However, its …tness is the worst in the group with the highest MSE of 0.56.


                                                    34
                         Mismatch contribution(%)         MSE                 zj
                       Country- Country-     growth Country- Country- Country- Country-
                  j
                       common    speci…c     (pp)   common    speci…c common     speci…c
Burundi         0.42    69.13     69.15      0.00       0.01       0.01        1.00       1.00
Benin           0.00    116.55    146.03     0.46       0.74       0.08        0.43       0.86
C. African      0.00    67.30     78.15      0.36       1.31       0.19        0.32       0.65
Côte d’Ivoire   0.00    438.35    687.14     0.57       0.84       0.23        0.41       0.66
Congo D.R.      0.58    40.67     32.78     -0.18       0.83       0.56        1.76       1.06
Ghana           0.00    91.53     159.60     0.92       0.68       0.10        0.44       0.79
Gambia          0.35     15.97     17.41     0.02       0.09       0.08        0.86       1.00
Kenya           0.06    212.50    275.92     0.35       0.38       0.06        0.55       1.00
Cambodia        0.22     93.17    101.37    0.07        0.25       0.06        0.64       1.00
Madagascar      0.14     98.41    106.65     0.13       0.36       0.04        0.57       1.00
Mauritania      0.17     17.80     35.51     0.19       0.13       0.01        0.71       1.00
Malawi          0.00     26.84     28.36     0.02       0.69       0.16        0.48       0.99
Niger           0.00     55.46     87.92     0.81       1.60       0.50        0.28       0.50
Senegal         0.00    48.09     108.37     1.21       0.58       0.14        0.47       0.76
Sierra Leone    0.21    107.48    120.21     0.17       0.22       0.03        0.64       1.00
Togo            0.03     78.23     89.61     0.32       0.50       0.02        0.50       1.00
Tanzania        0.00     36.42     45.94     0.04       1.25       0.24        0.33       0.65
Zimbabwe        0.18    83.57      99.02     0.47       0.45       0.21        0.63       1.00
Average         0.13    94.25     127.17     0.33       0.61       0.15        0.61       0.88

Table 9: Growth accounting for the development-trapped countries, with country-
speci…c assimilation.

role of mismatch in growth accounting.21 Nevertheless, country-speci…c assimilation
signi…cantly improves the …tness, largely reducing the M SE (from 0.61 to 0.15) and
the unexplained income gap (from 39% to 12%).
       We also perform the following counterfactual exercise: how much would growth
have changed if we remove all the country-speci…c heterogeneity in assimilation abil-
ity? The results are reported in the …fth column of Table 9. Cross-country variations
in assimilation ability lead to, on average, 0.33 percentage points di¤erence in growth.
This indicates that inability to assimilate can further explain growth stagnation by
one-third a percentage point, which is a nonnegligible …gure to the trapped countries
and greatly raises the contribution of mismatch. Of course the counterfactual exercise
is preliminary in the sense that it abstracts from the endogenous e¤ect on factor ac-
cumulation after the change in assimilation ability. Nevertheless, these results suggest
that the widening of mismatch is the key to understand the development trap.
   Table 10 summarize the results obtained from the miracle countries. Without
repeating, allowing for country-speci…c assimilation ability generates better …t (lowers
M SEs from 0.23 to 0.06), reduces unexplained income gap (from 27% to 8%), raises
  21
    It should be noted, however, that having a lower bound estimate of the assimilation parameter
does not always lead to over-correction (for example, in Central Africa, Malawi and Tanzania).


                                               35
                     Mismatch contribution(%)         MSE                 zj
                   Country- Country-     growth Country- Country- Country- Country-
              j
                   common    speci…c     (pp)   common    speci…c common     speci…c
Hong Kong   0.00      2.59    22.80     -0.37        0.09     0.04       0.79      0.88
Korea       0.32     46.73     57.67    -0.35        0.07     0.05       0.79      0.88
Singapore   0.00     -0.80     -0.02    -0.02        0.12     0.07       0.81      0.91
Taiwan      0.39     26.58    28.95     -0.07        0.01     0.01       0.99      1.01
Botswana    0.00     4.04      12.14    -0.20        0.29     0.03       0.59      0.90
China       0.36    101.41    111.33    -0.18        0.18     0.16       0.83      0.95
India       0.00     0.19      0.27     -0.00        0.68     0.04       0.44      0.87
Malaysia    0.24     17.78     31.28    -0.22        0.09     0.06       0.79      0.95
Thailand    0.00     30.81     46.84    -0.29        0.63     0.06       0.46      0.83
Vietnam     0.32     65.24    69.55     -0.08        0.11     0.05       0.78      1.00
Average     0.16    29.46     38.08     -0.18        0.23     0.06       0.73      0.92

Table 10: Growth accounting for the miracle countries, with country-speci…c assimila-
tion.

the contribution of the mismatch component in growth accounting (from 29% to 38%),
and explains an additional 0.18 percentage points of income growth in these countries.
Of particular interest, mismatch countribution rises signi…cantly in the case of Hong
Kong (from a negligible impact to more than one-…fth); nonetheless, it does not help
much for the cases of Singapore, Taiwan, India and Vietnam. While the case of Taiwan
is easier to understand as the country-speci…c   j   of 0.39 is close to the common value
of 0.42, the other three cases worth further investigation in the Appendix.

7.2    Taking Stock
In the baseline exercisees before Section 7, we …rst restrict to the country-common,
time-invariant assimilation but allow for ‡exible, country-speci…c processes of TFP
residual. While these exercises are designed to be conservative, the results have il-
lustrated the signi…cant role of mismatch on the growth performance. By introducing
country-speci…c assimilation in Section 7, we further explore the e¤ects of countries’as-
similation abilities. Imperfect assimilation of mismatch explains for 61% of the growth
gap in the data. In sum, technology assimilation in‡uences growth in two aspects. On
the one hand, imperfect assimilation ability (low ) yields a lower income level via
its direct negative e¤ect from limiting production ‡exibility. On the other hand, it
interacts with the country’s mismatch to yield an indirect e¤ect on income growth via
amplifying the growth e¤ect from the disadvantageous factors. The outcomes of the
success rates shown in Figure 10 illustrate these two opposing forces are at work.
   Back to our theme question, which are the main forces widening the growth gap?
In our assimilation model, it can be due to di¤erences in relative factor advantage or

                                           36
                                                  Mismatch contribution from country-speci…c assimilation
                                                        Country-speci…c Country-speci…c Country-common
                      Relative income           Overall
                #                         j               assimilation    relative factor    assimilation
                       growth (pp)               (%)
                                                           ability(%)     advantage(%)        ability(%)
Fraction of U.S. income in 1960
   25%         39         0.66          0.11     61.02          11.08          49.43                0.50
 (25%; 50%]    16         0.97          0.09     22.09          11.87          11.54               -1.33
 (50%; 75%]    10         0.21          0.11     49.11          44.55          2.29                2.26
 > 75%         3          0.01          0.00     -78.61        -76.65          18.84              -20.79
Fraction of U.S. income in 2010
   25%         56         -0.15         0.13     89.08         28.45           63.29               -2.66
 (25%; 50%]    21         1.16          0.18     34.44         10.65           21.64                2.14
 (50%; 75%]    16         1.33          0.12     30.61         10.92           18.53                1.17
 > 75%         13         1.32          0.03     19.01         12.70           6.13                0.18
Fraction of U.S. growth rate
   50%          23         -1.74        0.18     69.89         18.65           54.29               -3.04
 (50%; 100%]    17         -0.28        0.07    133.59         78.24           78.22              -22.86
 (100%; 200%]   47         0.96         0.09    44.08          7.95            28.78               7.35
 > 200%         19         2.84         0.18    26.21          1.25            23.38               1.58
Overall         106        0.51         0.12     60.83         20.34           41.27               -0.78

                                   Table 11: Mismatch decomposition

in assimilation ability. To gain further insight, Table 11 reports the decomposition of
the log di¤erence of factor input-technology mismatch, M  ^ j;t ( j ) of equation (24), into
three components:

    M^ ( )             =    M^ ( j)            ^ j;t +
                                               M                  M^     M^            +           ^t
                                                                                                   M
    | j;t{z j}              | j;t {z              }               | j;t{z }t                      |{z}
 country-speci…c             country-speci…c                   country-speci…c              country-common
    mismatch               assimilation ability           relative factor advantage        assimilation ability
                                                                                                           (25)
           ^ jt and M
where both M        ^ t are both measured under the same                       = 0:42: while the former
is the log di¤erence of the mismatch terms associated with country-speci…c kj;t and
hj;t the latter is associated with the cross-country averages of kj;t and hj;t . Thus, the
last term on the right side of (25) captures the global e¤ect of assimilation ability;
the middle term measures the e¤ect of a country’s relative factor advantage over the
world trend but controlling the heterogeneity in assimilation ability; the …rst term
measures the e¤ect of a country’s assimilation ability controlling the heterogeneity in
relative factor advantage. Notice that the sum of the middle and last terms gives us
the mismatch contribution to growth in Section 6 captured by M   ^ jt .
   Overall, cross-country heterogeneity in assimilation ability accounts for one-third of
the mismatch countribution (41% out of 61%), whereas cross-country heterogeneity in
relative factor advantage trend accounts for the remaining two-third of the mismatch
countribution (20% out 61%). For initially and currently poor countries and coun-
tries growing slower than the U.S., the contribution of country-speci…c relative factor

                                                          37
advantage is even greater, becoming the most important driver for relative income
growth. In the absence of cross-country heterogeneities in relative factor advantage
and assimilation ability, mismatch becomes inconsequential, implying that there is not
much global trend in the factor input-technology mismatch.


8    Extensions
So far we have assumed that countries assimilate the frontier technology from the
U.S. throughout the entire sample period. In reality, countries at di¤erent stages of
development may look for alternative assimilable targets, and they may either start
assimilating late or stop it early to suit their speci…c economic backgrounds. We then
compare these alternative “tailor-made”assimilation schemes to selected countries with
those of our country-speci…c assimilation model to see whether alternative assimilation
schemes may make a di¤erence.
    For brevity, we only summarize new insights below while relegating the detailed
discussion to Appendix C: (i) alternative targets (e.g., Thailand assimilating Hong
Kong; Malaysia assimilating Singapore; China and Vietnam assimilating Taiwan), (ii)
early stop (e.g., Singapore, stopping assimilation in 1990), (iii) late start (e.g., In-
dia, starting assimilation from 1985) and (iv) middle-income laggards (e.g., Colombia,
Fiji, and Nicaragua, where mismatch contributes to more than half of relative income
growth with human capital contributing negatively due to over-accumulation of the
advantageous factor).


9    Concluding Remarks
Adopting frontier technology does not improve income without successfully assimilat-
ing the associated mismatch between technology and factor inputs. The goal of this
paper is to develop a useful accounting framework based on this idea to explain world
income disparities, subsequently setting forth a …rst but crucial step before model-
ing the assimilation process in a fully ‡eged dynamic general equilibrium model. Our
technology assimilation framework highlights the factor input-technology mismatch
generated from the interaction between production ‡exibility associated with assimi-
lation ability and the relative factor advantage owing to factor input ratio gap from
the assimilated leader. By performing development and growth accounting exercises,
we have shown that our assimilation model outperforms the standard models, particu-
larly in trapped countries having consistently low income ratios throughout the sample


                                          38
period and in miracle countries experiencing fast growth. That is, we have identi-
…ed the successful assimilation of the frontier technology as the key to understand the
widening gap between fast-growing miracles and poverty-trapped economies. We have
further established the possibility of relative factor advantage reversal and explained
how such reversal may lead to middle-income traps of countries having fast growth in
their disadvantageous factor.
   The main implication is clear: to pull a poor country out of the trap or to prevent
a developing country from falling into the middle-income trap, it requires an adequate
provision of correct incentives and institutional settings. These factors are crucial for
domestic …rms to assimilate relevant frontier technologies in a way that is suitable for
the country’s own development stages. For instance, in the earlier stages of develop-
ment where the assimilation ability of a labor-intensive country is low, policies should
be focused on providing incentives for adequate accumulation of the disadvantageous
factor. In the later stages of development when the disadvantageous capital accumu-
lation becomes satiated so that the levels of factor inputs relative to the frontier are
stable, then one has to avoid overaccumulation (factor input reversal) and the correct
incentives should be to enhance the assimilation ability while maintaining the right bal-
ance of relative factor input ratios. As a country becomes more advanced, assimilation
may stop and innovation should take the center of the stage. Notably, the establish-
ment of science parks can be rewarding, because with the clustering of high-tech …rms,
local learning about speci…c needs can greatly enhance the e¤ectiveness of technology
assimilation. Moreover, better platforms to encourage the acquisition of know-how
and tacit knowledge are essential as well for technology assimilation. Both science
parks and knowledge exchange platforms can further ensure technological innovation
and sustain economic growth. Unfortunately, we have also observed various barriers to
capital accumulation, learning and knowledge ‡ows in developing (and even developed)
countries. Such barriers may result from incorrect incentives/institutions, protection-
ism, blocks by incumbents, and any other forms of frictions in …nancial, labor and
international trade markets. These frictions would lead to factor-input misallocation
and cause a country failing to mitigate the factor input-technology mismatch, thereby
slowing down its development process.
   Along these lines are several interesting avenues for future studies, but for brevity,
we shall discuss only two. The …rst is to evaluate various human capital, industrial,
and trade policies for their e¤ectiveness in promoting growth through the technology
assimilation channel. Speci…cally, our framework of technology assimilation may be
incorporated with that of Jovanovic (2009) to explain the interdependence of vintage


                                           39
technology and human capital distribution. As a consequence, directional human cap-
ital policies may possibly a¤ect cross-industry human capital distributions as well as
encourage the development of techniques, industry-speci…c assimilation, and vintage
technology. Moreover, the promotion of key industries in some developing countries
may possibly be harmful to growth because of the lack of proper and e¢ cient assimi-
lation. Furthermore, the reluctance to further reduce tari¤s associated with imported
technology may have di¤erential e¤ects on the development processes depending on the
e¤ectiveness in the assimilation of world technologies. The second avenue for future
study is to apply our framework to a country-by-country analysis across sub-industries.
As …rms in di¤erent industries can be expected to have di¤erent frontier technologies
and di¤erent assimilation processes, this allows us to have a better understanding of
the growth contribution of the aggregate factor input-technology mismatch from the
micro-level …rm assimilation process.




                                          40
References
Acemoglu, D. and Guerrieri, V. (2008). Capital deepening and nonbalanced economic
  growth. Journal of Political Economy, 116(3), 467–498.
Acemoglu, D. and Zilibotti, F. (2001). Productivity di¤erences. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 116(2), 563–606.
Antras, P. (2004). Is the us aggregate production function cobb-douglas? new estimates
 of the elasticity of substitution. Contributions to Macroeconomics, 4(1), 1161.
Arthur, W. B. (1989). Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by
  historical events. The economic journal, 99(394), 116–131.
Atkinson, A. B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1969). A new view of technological change. The
  Economic Journal, 79(315), 573–578.
Barro, R. J. and Lee, J. W. (1996). International measures of schooling years and
  schooling quality. The American Economic Review, 86(2), 218–223.
Basu, S. and Weil, D. N. (1998). Appropriate technology and growth. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1025–1054.
Baumol, W. J., Blackman, S. A. B., and Wol¤, E. N. (1991). Productivity and American
  leadership. MIT press Cambridge, MA.
Caselli, F. (1999). Technological revolutions. The American Economic Review, (pp.
  78–102).
Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for income di¤erences across countries. Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Ch. 9, Vol. 1A. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds.
Caselli, F. and Coleman, W. J. (2006). The world technology frontier. The American
  Economic Review, 96(3), 499–522.
Chen, B.-L., Mo, J.-P., and Wang, P. (2012). Two-sided micro-matching with technical
  progress. Economic Theory, 50(2), 445–462.
Chirinko, R. S. (2008). : The long and short of it. Journal of Macroeconomics, 30(2),
  671–686.
Dahlman, C. J., Ross-Larson, B., and Westphal, L. E. (1987). Managing technological
 development: lessons from the newly industrializing countries. World development,
 15(6), 759–775.
David, P. A. (1985). Clio and the economics of qwerty. The American Economic
  Review, 75(2), 332–337.
Diamond, P., McFadden, D., and Rodriguez, M. (1978). Measurement of the elasticity
  of factor substitution and bias of technical change. In Contributions to economic
  analysis, volume 2 (pp. 125–147). Elsevier.

                                         41
Eichengreen, B., Park, D., and Shin, K. (2014). Growth slowdowns redux. Japan and
  the World Economy, 32, 65–84.
Feenstra, R. C., Inklaar, R., and Timmer, M. P. (2015). The next generation of the
  penn world table. The American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150–3182.
Hall, R. E. and Jones, C. I. (1999). Why do some countries produce so much more
  output per worker than others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83–
  116.
Houthakker, H. S. (1955). The pareto distribution and the cobb-douglas production
  function in activity analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, 23(1), 27–31.
Johnson, S., Larson, W., Papageorgiou, C., and Subramanian, A. (2013). Is newer
  better? penn world table revisions and their impact on growth estimates. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 60(2), 255–274.
Jones, C. I. (2005). The shape of production functions and the direction of technical
  change. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 517–549.
Jovanovic, B. (2009). The technology cycle and inequality. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 76(2), 707–729.
Karabarbounis, L. and Neiman, B. (2014). The global decline of the labor share. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.
Klump, R. and de La Grandville, O. (2000). Economic growth and the elasticity of
  substitution: Two theorems and some suggestions. The American Economic Review,
  90(1), 282–291.
Kortum, S. S. (1997). Research, patenting, and technological change. Econometrica,
 (pp. 1389–1419).
Krusell, P., Ohanian, L. E., Ríos-Rull, J.-V., and Violante, G. L. (2000). Capital-skill
  complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis. Econometrica, 68(5),
  1029–1053.
Lagos, R. (2006). A model of tfp. The Review of Economic Studies, 73(4), 983–1007.
Lawrence, R. Z. (2015). Recent declines in labor’s share in US income: A preliminary
  neoclassical account. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
León-Ledesma, M. A., McAdam, P., and Willman, A. (2010). Identifying the elastic-
  ity of substitution with biased technical change. The American Economic Review,
  100(4), 1330–1357.
León-Ledesma, M. A. and Satchi, M. (2017). Appropriate technology and balanced
  growth. The Review of Economic Studies.
Lucas, R. E. J. (1993). Making a miracle. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society, (pp. 251–272).

                                          42
Nelson, R. R. and Pack, H. (1999). The asian miracle and modern growth theory. The
  Economic Journal, 109(457), 416–436.
Ober…eld, E. and Raval, D. (2014). Micro data and macro technology. Technical report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Parente, S. L. and Prescott, E. C. (1994). Barriers to technology adoption and devel-
  opment. Journal of Political Economy, 102(2), 298–321.
Rosenberg, N. (1994). Exploring the black box: Technology, economics, and history.
  Cambridge University Press.
Wan, H. Y. J. (2011). Economic Development in a Globalized Environment: East Asian
 Evidences. Springer Science and Business Media.
Wong, T.-N. and Yip, C. K. (2014). A model of technology assimilation.




                                         43
                                            Appendix
                           (Not Intended for Publication)
    The Appendix contains mathematical details, detailed discussion on global EOS
and detailed results of extensions.


A     Appendix A: Mathematical Details
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Proposition 1 is proved by the following steps. We focus on N                                        2 as the case of
N = 1 is obvious. First we show that, instead of choosing a 2 P, the global production
function can be transformed to choosing any a 2 RN 1
                                                 ++ such that

                                      f (n) = max f (n; B (a ));
                                                  a

where a = fa1 ; :::; aN   1 g,   A (a ) is on the di¤erentiable envelope of P and

                             B (a )          fa1 ; a2 ; :::aN        1 ; A (a      )g:

Second, we show that the …rst-order condition implies that A (a) is in power form.
It implies the global production function is Cobb-Douglas. Finally, we show that the
…rst-order approach is valid if 2 [0; 1].
    Step 1. We want to show f (n)                         maxa f (n; B (a )). First we show f (n)
maxa f (n; B (a )). Since P is compact, the solution to (5) exists, denoted as a? .
Thus, we have

                                  f (n) = f (n; a? );
                                                  f (n; B (a? )               );
                                                  max f (n; B (a )):
                                                      a

On the other hand, we want to show f (n)                             maxa f (n; B (a )). Suppose a? =
arg maxa f (n; B (a )). Thus there exist some ai such that ai                                        a? and ai;N =
A a? . Then we have
                                  "                                       1                            1   #
                                         X                     nm                           nN
                                                                                                               1

      max f (n; B (a )) =                             m                       +        N                           ;
       a
                                      m=1;:::;N 1
                                                               a?m                         A (a? )
                                  "                                   1   #
                                        X                  nm
                                                                               1

                                                  m                                ;
                                      m=1;:::;N
                                                           am
                                  f (n):

                                                           i
     Step 2. From the envelope theorem, we have
                                        1
                             f m (n) =    fm (n; B (a )):                                               (A3)
                                       am
Suppose the …rst-order approach is valid. The …rst-order condition of maxa f (n; B (a ))
with respect to am , m = 1; :::; N 1, is given by
                     nN                              nm
                         2 fN (n; B (a ))Am (a ) =         fm (n; B (a ));          (A4)
                  A (a )                            (am )2
                                                    hP                i =( 1)
                                                                ( 1)=
where Am (a ) @A (a ) =@am , and fm (n; a) = @          m m m                 =@ m . Us-
ing (A3) from the envelope theorem, we have
                                 am Am (a ) nN f N (n)   nm f m (n)
                                                       =            :
                                   A (a )     f (n)        f (n)
Since f (n) is Cobb-Douglas if and only if nm f m (n)=f (n = m for all n, the …rst-order
condition implies that f (n) is Cobb-Douglas if and only if A solves the following partial
di¤erential equation (PDE):
                                     A (a )
                                         m
                         Am (a ) =          , for m = 1; :::; N 1.                                      (A5)
                                   N   am
Clearly, the solution to the above PDE has the following closed-form solution
                                             Y               m
                          A (a ) = z 1= N           (am ) N ;
                                                   m=1;:::;N 1

where z is a positive constant. Substituting the above solution of A into (A4) we have
a? (n) / n.
    On the other hand, given that the …rst-order approach is valid, the optimal tech-
nique satis…es a? (n) / n if and only if that a? (n) = k (n) n, where k : RN
                                                                           + ! R+ , is
a solution to (A4). By using the funtional form (4), it implies that A solves the PDE
(A5). Thus, if the …rst-order approach is valid, then the global production function is
Cobb-Douglas if and only if a? (n) / n.
     Step 3. Suppose that          2 [0; 1]. The second-order condition evaluated at a = n=k
is
         fN m (n; n=k) m nN nm fN N (n; n=k) m n2N Am (a ) fN (n; n=k) m nN
                            3                                  2                      Am (a )
           A (a )        N am          A (a )      N am A (a )       A2 (a )     N am

         fN (n; n=k) m nN      2nm                   n2m                  nm nN                Am (a )
                            +      3 f m (n; n=k) +      4 fmm (n; n=k) +      2 fN m (n; n=k)         ;
           A (a )        2
                      N am    (am )                 (am )                 (am )                A (a )2
                             2                                   2                              2
                          mk                            mk                            m
     =   fN m (n; n=k)       2
                                 + fN N (n; n=k)                     + fN (n; n=k)                  k
                          N am                          N am                         N am

                          mk                      2k     k2                          k2
                                                                                            m
         fN (n; n=k)            + fm (n; n=k)         +       fmm (n; n=k)                      fN m (n; n=k) ;
                            2
                         N am                   (am )2 (am )2                        a2m    N


                                                   ii
                                       2                                                    2                        2
                               1    mk                                   1        mk                           m
    =       m       N ( k)             2          N (1        N ) ( k)                          +     N                  k
                                    N am                                          N am                        N am

                     mk          2k               k2                                1       k2        m                  1
            N              + m                          m (1           m) (   k)                          m   N   ( k)       ;
                       2
                    N am       (am )2           (am )2                                      a2m       N
        "                                       #
                                    2                                                   2
                           m               m      k      mk                   m
    =           N                             2      +        +                             N k;
                       N am              (am )         (am )2                N am

         k m           m                      1
    =                      +1           1           ;
        (am )2         N
        0;

                                                              1
where fmm (n; n=k) =                m   (1        m) (   k)       and fN m (n; n=k) =             m   N   ( k) 1 .


A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 1 so we only highlight the key steps.
From the envelope theorem, we have the condition similar to (A3). The …rst-order
condition of 7 with respect to am , m = 1; :::; N , is given by
                                                           nm
                                             Cm (a) =            fm (n; a):                                              (A6)
                                                          (am )2

Thus, similar to the proof of Proposition 1, f (n) is Cobb-Douglas if and only if
nm f m (n)=f (n) =         m       for all n, then the …rst-order condition implies that f (n) is
Cobb-Douglas if and only if C has the power form, which is equivalent to a? (n) / n.




                                                              iii
A.3     Proof of Proposition 3
To prove @Z(n; ns ; )=@   0, notice that
                                       "                                                                        1   #
     @                        1           X                                              nm
       log Z(n; ns ; ) =           log                                         m
    @                    (     1)2       m=1;:::;N
                                                                                         ns;m
                                                          P                               nm
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  nm
                                               1              m=1;:::;N         m        ns;m
                                                                                                                 log             ns;m
                                  +                                                                                                          ;
                                           (         1)             P                                nm
                                                                                                                             1

                                                                       m=1;:::;N          m         ns;m
                                                     2                                                                                                   3
                                                                             P                              nm
                                                                                                                                         1


                                                 6    log        m=1;:::;N                              m ns;m
                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                 6                                                        "                                          #   7
                                                 6 P                 nm
                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  nm
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                         7
                                           1     6   m=1;:::;N m ns;m         log                                        m       ns;m                    7
                                                 6 +                                                                                                     7
                          =                      6            P                                                                  1                       7;
                                  (          1)2 6
                                                 6
                                                                               nm
                                                                m=1;:::;N m ns;m
                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                 6       P                 nm
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                 4           m=1;:::;N m ns;m                                                log     m                   5
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                             P                           nm
                                                                                 m=1;:::;N      m       ns;m
                                                     "                                              #
                                           1               X                              m
                          =                                              m   log                        ;
                                  (            1)2       m=1;:::;N
                                                                                          m
                                                     "                                              #
                                            1              X                         m
                                                                         m                  1               ;
                                  (          1)2         m=1;:::;N
                                                                                     m

                          = 0;

where the last inequality follows the fact that log (x)                                                         (1=x                 1) and the last
                              P                  P
eqaulity follows the fact that m=1;:::;N m = 1 = m=1;:::;N                                                  m           and
                                                                                 1
                                                                     nm
                                                           m        ns;m
                                  m                                                             :
                                               P                              nm0
                                                                                           1

                                                   m0 =1;:::;N       m       ns;m0

   To prove the rest of Proposition 3, notice that
                                        2                                                                       1                        3
                                                                                          nm
              @                       m 6                                                ns;m                                            7
                  log Z(n; ns ; ) =      41                                                                                              5:
            @ns;m                   ns;m                              P                                      nm0
                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                             m0 =1;:::;N        m           ns;m0


Also notice that since nmd =ns;md                  nma =ns;ma and                    2 [0; 1], we have
                                       1                                                                            1
                         nmd                                                              nma
                        ns;md                                                            ns;ma
                                                               1                                                                         :
              P                        n m0
                                                      1
                                                                       P                                         nm0
                                                                                                                                     1

                m0 =1;:::;N   m       ns;m0                                  m0 =1;:::;N        m               ns;m0


                                                               iv
Hence we have
                                   @                                                     @
                                        log Z(n; ns ; )                       0               log Z(n; ns ; ):
                                 @ns;md                                                @ns;ma
Finally, since @ log Z(n; ns ; )=@ns;m is strictly increasing in nm =ns;m , using the inter-
mediate value theorem there exists                                  y   2 [nmd =ns;md ; nma =ns;ma ] such that @ log Z(n; ns ; )=@ns;m
0 if and only if nm =ns;m                             y.




A.4           Proof of Propositon 4
Notice that
                                                  2                                                        h                                                i 3
                                                      P                                nm0
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                             nm                      nm0
                                              1
                                                  6        m0 =1;:::;N      m0        ns;m0
                                                                                                               log          ns;m
                                                                                                                                           log      ns;m0     7
     @    m        m        nm                    6                                                                                                           7
              =                                   6                                                                                      2                    7
      @            2        ns;m                  4                         P                                     nm0
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                  m0 =1;:::;N          m0        ns;m0

Since nmd =ns;md                  nma =ns;ma , we have
                                                       @ md         @ ma
                                                                0        :
                                                        @            @
Finally, since @                m =@       is strictly increasing in nm =ns;m , using the intermediate value
theorem there exists                      g   2 [nmd =ns;md ; nma =ns;ma ] such that @                                       m =@             0 if and only if
nm =ns;m   g.
                                                                                                                                     @
   To show g                      y   , recall from the proof of Proposition 3 that                                                @ns;m
                                                                                                                                             log Z(n; ns ; ) =
                                                                                                                               @
 m
ns;m
          1       m
                  m
                           . Consider any m such that                         m            m       and hence                 @ns;m
                                                                                                                                        log Z(n; ns ; )           0.
Then Proposition 3 implies that nm =ns;m                                              y.   Notice that @                        m =@         can be rewritten
as
                                      2                         2                                                                                                       33
                                                                               nm
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                     P                                 nm0
                                                                                                                                                                1


@                                  6 X                          6 log         ns;m
                                                                                                           log               m0 =1;:::;N       m0     ns;m0             77
     m
          =
                            m      6                       m0
                                                                6                                                                                                       77 ;
                                1) 4                            4                                                           P                                           55
                                                                                                   1                                                                1
 @                     (                                                           nm0                                                                   nm0
                                          m0 =1;:::;N              log            ns;m0
                                                                                                       + log                    m0 =1;:::;N      m0     ns;m0
                                      "                                                                    #
                            m                         m
                                                                        X                              m0
          =                               log               +                     m0    log                             ;
                       (1        )                    m
                                                                m0 =1;:::;N
                                                                                                       m0

                  0;
                                                                                       P                                                m0
where the last inequality follows the fact that                                               m0 =1;:::;N            m0     log                     0 (shown in
                                                                                                                                        m0
the proof of Proposition 1) and the premise that                                               m               m.       Thus, the proof of the …rst
part of Proposition 4 we have nm =ns;m                                            g    and hence                    g              y.    Actually the weak
                                                                            P                                                m0
inequality becomes equality if and only if                                        m0 =1;:::;N          m0      log                      = 0, which happens
                                                                                                                             m0
when          =    m       for all m. But we have                         =       m   if and only if either                              = 1 or n / ns .


                                                                              v
B      Appendix B: Discussion on the Global EOS Es-
       timation
The following speci…cation of the production function is usually maintained in the
empirical literature:
                                  h                         1                                 1
                                                                                                  i   1
                        Yt =           (AK;t Kt )               + (1       ) (AL;t Lt )                   :

After some manipulation, the …rm’s FOC with respect to capital service can be ex-
pressed as the following speci…cations

                                 Yt
                       log                 =       1   + log Rt + (1            ) log AK;t + "1;t ;
                                 Kt

                        Rt Kt
                 log                  =        2   + (1         ) log Rt      (1     ) log AK;t + "2;t ;          (A7)
                         Yt
where Rt is the rental rate of the capital service and Rt Kt =Yt is the capital income share.
We can obtain similar speci…cations from the FOC with respect to labor service. The
empirical literature basically estimates di¤erent combinations of these speci…cations,
with di¤erent treatment on factor compensations and di¤erent estimation methods. In
spite of that,    < 1 is found in general.
   Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) study a monopolistic competition model in …nal
goods, which implies that Rt Kt =Yt = 1      st and R ^ t = ^t around the steady state,
where 2 [0; 1] is the markup, st 2 [0; 1] is the labor income share, R  ^ t is the growth
rate of the rental rate and ^ is the growth rate of the relative price of the investment
                                       t
goods. Log-linearizing (A7) and averaging the log di¤erences across time for each
country, the cross-section observations of the labor shares are given by
                                 sj
                                           s^j =        3   (1         ) ^j     A^K;j + "3;j ;                    (A8)
                             1        sj

The data since 1980 documents global declines in the labor income share and in the
relative price of the investment goods, i.e. s^j < 0 and ^j < 0 in most of the countries.
The decline in the labor income share tends to be stronger in countries with a stronger
decline in the relative price of the investment goods. Ignoring the e¤ect from AK , which
is maintained in most of the paper, a regression on (A8) …nds that ~ = 1:25. When AK
is not negligible, the bias is given by ~   = (1     ) cov ^j ; A^K;j =var ^j . Avoiding
direct identi…cation of A^K;j , Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) use TFP estimates from
Conference Board as a proxy to ^ K;j , and …nd that cov ^ ; A^K;j =var ^ = 0:25           j                   j
and    = 1:20.

                                                                 vi
    To reconcile why our estimate of     is di¤erent from Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2014), …rst notice that given the biased estimate ~ > 1 in their model, a unbiased
estimate < 1 is possible if a direct identi…cation of A^K;j …nds that cov ^j ; A^K;j >
var ^j . For example, an increase in AK;j induces the demand for investment and
pushes up j . This mechanism can give a strong correlation between ^j and A^K;j such
that cov ^j ; A^K;j   > var ^j . Second, we are estimating di¤erent equations with
di¤erent data. We estimate      directly from the NCES production function with the
time series of output, capital and human capital. Instead, Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2014) estimate from the …rm’s FOC, (A8), with the time series of the labor income
share and the relative price of the investment goods. Our choice of data is in line
with the goal to explain the international income di¤erence with the factor inputs and
technology. Our speci…cation is closest to Klump et al (2007), which found a slightly
higher , despite that we are using a panel of time series from 110 countries instead of
only the U.S.
    Klump et al (2007) and León-Ledesma et al (2010) are recent examples of directly
estimating the NCES production function. Compared with an indirect estimation of
through the …rm’s FOCs, it has the following advantages. First, it does not require the
data on factor prices, which avoid some classi…cation problems like how to treat the
compensation of the self-employed pointed out by Gollin (2003). The compensation
data also tends to be noisy especially in the less developed countries. Second, to make
use of the information on the factor prices and shares, we need to assume no distortion
and perfect competition in the factor markets, which seems at odd with recent studies in
development accounting like Hsieh and Klenow (2004) that emphasize the importance
of the factor wedges. By estimating the production function directly, we do not need to
take a stance on how factors are compensated. Finally, since factor prices tends to be
endogenous to the innovation terms, using factor prices or shares as regressors likely
results in biasedness. On the other hand, the upside of estimating the …rm’s FOC
is the resulting linear equations relating factor demands to factor prices, which are
straightforward to estimate. Of course, the computation cost of non-linear estimation
is less relevant nowadays.



C      Appendix C: Details of Extensions
To illustrative purposes, we begin by focusing on the miracle and trapped countries.
We then investigate what alternative assimilation can do for better understanding the


                                          vii
development process of the two Asian giants: China and India. In another extension, we
will examine a group of countries which we call “middle-income laggards,”characterized
by two criteria: (i) the initial relative income is reasonable high, and (ii) the average
growth rate of relative income is very low if not negative. We like to examine the
applicability of our assimilation model these medium-income but low-growth countries
that have lagged behind over time.

Best-Alternative Assimilation

   In the 1960s and the 1970s, large ‡ows of Japanese FDI entered Taiwan and then
to South Korea and Hong Kong; in late 1970s, Japanese …rms have also expanded
production facilities to Singapore. Learning from the success of their neighbor, the
Asian Tigers followed the Japanese footsteps and realized that export expansion was
the main momentum to growth. Weiss (2005) notes a wave of Asian countries after
Japan that illustrates the successful application of export-led growth: (i) …rst tier of
Asian Miracle countries, namely, the four Asian tigers, whose takeo¤ began in the
1960s, (ii) second tier, namely, all the remaining miracles, whose takeo¤ began in the
mid 1980s. These Asian growth experiences exhibit the Flying Geese Pattern (FGP)
of economic development, as documented by Akamatsu (1962).
   To capture this FGP development process, we consider an alternative assimilation
scheme, with Japan assimilating the U.S. frontier and the early birds Asian Tigers
subsequently assimilating their regional leader, Japan. So, ak;t = kJAP;t =yJAP;t and
ah;t = hJAP;t =yJAP;t , and the relative income growth can be written as:

    data
  q^j;t      alt
         = q^j;t +           alt
                             j;t   =          k^j;t      k^U S;t + (1                  ^ j;t
                                                                                     ) h         ^ U S;t + M
                                                                                                 h         ^ j;t
                                                                                                             alt
                                                                                                                 +                        alt
                                                                                                                                          j;t ,              (26)

where
                         "                                   a lt                                           a lt
                                                                                                                   #1   1=(1   a lt
                                                                                                                                      )
                                                      1 1=                                       1 1=                          j
      alt     yJAP;t                   kj;t                  j
                                                                                       hj;t                 j
     qj;t   =                                                       + (1         )                                                        ;                  (27)
              yU S;t               kJAP;t                                             hJAP;t

                 "                                             # ,"                                     #
     alt                      yJAP;t                                                yU S;t
    Mj;t                                                                                                                                                     (28)
                     (kJAP;t ) (hJAP;t )1                                  (kU S;t ) (hU S;t )1
                 |                                                  {z                                      }
                               ratio of bridging TFP to frontier TFP
                                                             "                                       a lt
                                                                                                                         #1    1=(1           a lt
                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                              1 1=                                            j
                          kj;t hJAP;t                                     kj;t hJAP;t                j
                                                                                                            +1                                           :
                         kJAP;t hj;t                                     kJAP;t hj;t
                     |                                                          {z                                                                   }
                                              mismatch from using the bridging technology

                                                                          viii
The alternatives serve like a bridge with the frontier technology. Now the factor input-
technology mismatch is reduced because the “bridging” technology is less demanding
than the frontier technology as a result of a narrower factor input gap (i.e., aJAP;k =
kJAP =yJAP < aU S;k = kU S =yU S and aJAP;h = hJAP =yJAP < aU S;h = hU S =yU S ). The
trade-o¤ is that this bridging technology of Japan is also less productive, as yJAP =yU S <
1. Because of the rapid advancement of the tigers, we set the assimilation process to
have an early stop in 1990. Further, we allow other latecomers in Asian to also target
their neigboring Tigers based on stronger FDI ties. All such subsequent assimilation
is assumed to take place with a late start from mid-1980s to present (2014). We have
also considered switching targets from one (say, Japan) to another (say, the U.S.). But
the improvement in …tness is negligible.
   The results for the alternative assimilation scheme with the best-performing tar-
gets are reported in Table 12. Overall, the above results are consistent with the FGP.
Aamong the Asian tigers, having Japan as the assimilation target greatly improves
the …tness for Hong Kong and Singapore, where the unexplained income gaps reduce
to almost zero. The corresponding increases in the growth di¤erential gain, from the
country-speci…c assimilation to assimilating Japan, are also large, at 1.42 and 2.30 per-
centage points, respectively. Taiwan also improve by having almost zero unexplained
income gap with a nonnegligible growth di¤erential gain of 0.93 percentage point. In
these tigers the mismatch contribution to growth greatly increases to more than 50%.
Korea is the only exception where the MSE and the unexplained income gap worsens,
thus indicating the FGP may not be applicable. For the latecomers, switching the
assimilation target from the U.S. to the Asian tigers performs better in reducing in
the unexplained income gaps to alomost zero. Of particular interest, having Vietnam
assimilating Taiwan instead of the U.S.not only improves …tness signi…cantly (by re-
ducing the MSE essentially to zero), but also corrects the overprediction of assimiation
when targeting the U.S. (see the country-common assimilation case illustrated in Fig-
ure 8 and note from Table 10 that overprediction in mismatch contribution could not
be …xed even with country-speci…c assimilation ability).
   We next move to re-account the economic performance of the African trapped coun-
tries. The alternative targets are set among the choices of (i) the most technologically
advanced large economy close to Africa (Germany), (ii) their continent leader (South
Africa), and (iii) their colonial origins (e.g., France, the U.K.). Again we report the
results from the best performing alternative targets in Table 13. It turns out that in
14 of these 17 countries, the alternative targets are more in line with the FGP rather
than the colonial origins. Overall, in all but two countries, the …tness improves (at


                                            ix
                                                       Mismatch contribution(%)        MSE              zj
              Best alternative        alt              Country- Alter-    growth Country- Alter- Country- Alter-
                                      j        j
                assimiltion                             speci…c native    (pp)    speci…c native speci…c native
Hong Kong   Japan,1960-1990          0.59    0.00        22.80    76.08     1.42   0.04    0.01    0.88    0.97
Korea       Japan,1960-1990          0.00    0.32       57.67     41.23    -0.77   0.05    0.29    0.88    0.61
Singapore   Japan,1960-1990          0.68    0.00        -0.02    52.38     2.30   0.07    0.03    0.91    1.06
Taiwan      Japan,1960-1990          0.33    0.39        28.95    50.77     0.93   0.01    0.01    1.01    1.01
China      Taiwan,1985-2014          0.06    0.36       111.33    66.92    -0.90   0.16    0.01    0.95    1.00
India     Singapore,1985-2014        0.26    0.00         0.27    35.18     0.44   0.04    0.03    0.87    1.00
Malaysia  Singapore,1985-2014        0.41    0.24        31.28    51.27     0.23   0.06    0.02    0.95    1.00
Thailand  HongKong,1985-2014         0.04    0.00        46.84    29.45    -0.34   0.06    0.02    0.83    1.00
Vietnam    Taiwan,1985-2014          0.24    0.32        69.55    42.67    -1.41   0.05    0.00    1.00    1.00


Table 12: Growth accounting for the miracle countries, with alternative periods and
assimilation targets.
                                                       Mismatch contribution(%)        MSE              zj
                  Best alternative     alt             Country- Alter-    growth Country- Alter- Country- Alter-
                                       j           j
                    assimiltion                         speci…c native    (pp)    speci…c native speci…c native
Burundi              Belgium         0.56    0.42         69.15    73.24   -0.06   0.01    0.01    1.00    1.00
Benin                S. Africa       0.00    0.00        146.03   148.98   -0.04   0.08    0.03    0.86    0.95
Central African       France         0.00    0.00         78.15    94.62   -0.55   0.19    0.01    0.65    0.97
Côte d’Ivoire        Germany         0.00    0.00        687.14   753.42   -0.15   0.23    0.01    0.66    0.97
Congo D.R.           S. Africa       0.61    0.58         32.78    39.21   -0.15   0.56    0.52    1.06    1.11
Ghana                Germany         0.11    0.00        159.60    78.59    1.10   0.10    0.02    0.79    0.97
Gambia               S. Africa       0.45    0.35         17.41    45.58   -0.38   0.08    0.08    1.00    0.94
Kenya                Germany         0.33    0.06        275.92   132.06   0.79    0.06    0.05    1.00    0.91
Madagascar           Germany         0.31    0.14        106.65   117.25   -0.16   0.04    0.06    1.00    0.99
Mauritania           S. Africa       0.27    0.17         35.51   53.46    -0.19   0.01    0.01    1.00    0.99
Malawi               S. Africa       0.02    0.00         28.36   56.29    -0.32   0.16    0.09    0.99    1.00
Niger                Germany         0.00    0.00         87.92   77.19     0.27   0.50    0.17    0.50    0.68
Senegal              Germany         0.14    0.00        108.37    39.02    1.39   0.14    0.04    0.76    0.95
Sierra Leone         Germany         0.37    0.21        120.21   83.69     0.48   0.03    0.02    1.00    1.00
Togo                 S. Africa       0.11    0.03         89.61   91.25    -0.05   0.02    0.01    1.00    1.00
Tanzania                UK           0.00    0.00         45.94    36.36    0.04   0.24    0.05    0.65    0.95
Zimbabwe             Germany         0.34    0.18        99.02     79.25    0.61   0.21    0.25    1.00    1.03


Table 13: Growth accounting for the development-trapped countries with alternative
assimilation targets.

least weakly). By switching the heterogeneous assimilation from the U.S. to the al-
ternative, the unexplained income gap reduces from 12% to 4%, whereas the M SE
is lowered from 0.15 to 0.09. The growth di¤erential from the counterfactual yields a
bonus of 0.15 percentage point, indicating that inability to assimilate can further ex-
plain growth stagnation by one-sixth a percentage point. Of particular interest, among
the four trapped countries where the accounting outcome overstate the contribution of
mismatch (Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Senegal, as shown in Table 9), two, Ghana
and Senegal, have the problem corrected under the alternative target of Germany, with
mismatch contribution dropped from over 100% to 79% and 39%, respectively.

The Asian Giants: China and India

   In studying the economic performance of the two Asian giants, China and India, we
…rst describe what the Cobb-Douglas model tell us from the accounting exercises. In

                                                                  x
China, both factor inputs are growing rapidly at an average rate of 4.08% for relative
physical capital and 0.71% for relative human capital. As a result, relative physical
capital increases by eight times and relative human capital increases by 1.4 times over
the sample period. Given the rapid growth in capitals, factor accumulation of the Cobb-
Douglas model accounts for more than 100% of the income growth with a residual of
only -2.74%. But owing to the fact that physical capital is the disadvantageous factor
in the assimilation model, the factor input-technology mismatch alone also account
for 101.41% of the growth performance. Nevertheless, the country-speci…c assimilation
model seems informative to understand the China growth because it has a much lower
MSE than the Cobb-Douglas model (0.16 vs 1.43). Another support of the country-
speci…c assimilation model is that it has an unexplained income gap of only 5% which
is far lower than the Cobb-Douglas counterpart (69%). By switching the assimilation
target from the U.S. to Taiwan, as proposed by the FGP, the MSE further reduces
from 0.16 to less than 0.01 and the unexplained income gap from 5% to 0.6%. More
interestingly, the overprediction of mismatch contribution to growth is corrected: falling
from 111% to 67%. Thus, having China assimilating Taiwan seems to best capture its
rapidly development process after 1980s.
   For the case India, the situation is di¤erent. Relative factor growth of the two
capitals are around 0.36%, so that relative physical capital increases by 1.4 times and
relative human capital increases by 1.3 times over the sample period. As a result, factor
accumulation of the Cobb-Douglas model accounts only for 37% of the income growth.
But balanced growth in the two relative factors also implies little change in the factor
input-technology mismatch, so the country-speci…c assimilation channel only accounts
for 0.27% of the growth performance. It is no longer the case when India assimilate
alternative technologies. By switching the assimilation target from the U.S. to the
best tied Asian tiger, Singapore, the growth contribution of factor input-technology
mismatch raises from essentially a negligible 0.27% to 35%, which successfully corrects
the underprediction with U.S. as the target (see Figure 8 and 10).

Middle-Income Laggards

   To the end, we shift our focus to a group of middle-income laggards. We have
already discussed the connection between relative factor advantage reversal and middle-
income trap. In this subsection, we study the development process of countries with
decent initial relative income but very low average growth rate. We have selected
six countries for this laggard group, where the average initial income is 0:32 and the



                                            xi
               Relative growth(pp)        Growth contribution(%)                                    Fitness
                              Human      Country-              Human
             Income Capital                           Capital                    j     zj    zjCD     MSEj    MSECD
                                                                                                                 j
                              capital common /speci…c          capital
Colombia      -0.30   -0.61   0.28     84.67 / 196.36         67.59   -61.18   0.00   0.64   0.57      0.22    0.36
Costa Rica    -0.25   -0.04   0.19      35.27 / 43.82          4.91   -49.59   0.35   0.94   0.74      0.03    0.13
Fiji          -1.45   -1.12   0.61      49.94 / 78.80         25.64   -28.15   0.17   0.69   0.49      0.15    0.54
Honduras      -0.83   -0.99   0.50     80.65 / 119.19         39.71   -39.78   0.00   0.50   0.37      0.49    1.03
Mexico        -0.38   -0.27   0.30      24.61 / 96.68         23.35   -52.32   0.08   0.87   0.84      0.07    0.10
Nicaragua     -3.37   -2.58   0.71      37.64 / 65.00         25.51   -13.98   0.00   0.54   0.41      0.44    0.91
Average       -1.10   -0.94   0.43      52.13 / 99.96         31.11   -40.83   0.10 0.70     0.57      0.23    0.51


             Table 14: Growth accounting for the laggard countries up to 2014.

average relative income growth rate is              1:10%. Their accounting results are given in
Table 14.
   Our assimilation model again outperforms the Cobb-Douglas model, reducing the
unexplained income gap from 43% to 30% and lowering the MSE by more than half
(from 0.51 to 0.23). In these countries, despite that physical capital is the disadvantage
factor, their accumulation of physical capital fell behind the U.S. whereas human cap-
ital outgrew the U.S. Widening factor input-technology mismatch thereby results in
growth stagnation, which accounts for about half of the relative income decline under
common assimilation. With country-speci…c assimilation, the accounting results im-
prove further, though in two of the six cases overprediction occurs. From Proposition 3,
we learn that the predicted income levels are low because the average country-speci…c
  is far below the country-common level (0.01 vs. 0.42). Proposition 5 points out that
the low country-speci…c          signi…es the factor input-technology mismatch. As a result,
we have larger contributions of the country-speci…c assimilation for the laggards than
the trapped countries. Nonetheless, in Colombia and Honduras, the country-speci…c
parameters are at its lower bound (zero); as a result, mismatch turns out to overpredict
their negative growth outcomes.




                                                        xii
