                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 AUTHORITARIAN ELITES

                                        Adlai Newson
                                       Francesco Trebbi

                                      Working Paper 24966
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24966


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




Adlai Newson is a doctoral candidate at the Vancouver School of Economics and Francesco
Trebbi is professor of economics at the Vancouver School of Economics at the University of
British Columbia and fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Trebbi delivered
the Innis Lecture at the 2018 Canadian Economics Association meetings based on this paper.
Many of the ideas included in the paper originated from repeated and insightful discussions with
Patrick Francois, for which we are extremely grateful. The authors would also like to thank Siwan
Anderson, Dan Bernhardt, Matilde Bombardini, Matthew Courchene, Tímea Laura
Molnar, participants to the 2018 meeting of the Canadian Economics Association, and
seminar participants at Stanford University for comments and useful feedback. Trebbi
acknowledges financial support from CIFAR and SSHRC. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Adlai Newson and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Authoritarian Elites
Adlai Newson and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 24966
August 2018
JEL No. P16,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the role of ruling elites in autocratic regimes and provide an assessment of tools
useful to clarify the structure of opaque political environments. We first showcase the importance
of analyzing autocratic regimes as non-unitary actors by discussing extant work on
nondemocracies in Sub-Saharan Africa and China, where the prevailing view of winner-take-all
contests can be clearly rejected. We show how specific biographical information about powerful
cadres helps shed light upon the composition of the inner circles that empower autocrats. We
further provide an application of these methods to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK), one of the most personalistic, opaque, and data-poor political regimes in the world
today. Employing information from DPRK state media on participants at official state events, we
are able to trace the evolution and consolidation of Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un around the
transition period following the death of his father, Kim Jong Il. The internal factional divisions of
the DPRK are explored during and after this transition. Final general considerations for the future
study of the political economy of development are presented.


Adlai Newson
Vancouver School of Economics
adlai.newson@gmail.com

Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
and CIFAR
and also NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
1     Introduction

The fields of development and political economy have come to understand that the study
of incentives and organization of individuals controlling the levers of power and the arms of
repression is paramount for the phenomena associated with massive loss of welfare (North
et al., 2009). These include intra- and inter-state violent conflict, expropriation risk, factor
misallocation, and the appropriation of international aid and humanitarian efforts. As a
step in understanding the political systems that lead to these outcomes, this paper offers
an empirical perspective to the analysis of the internal organization of autocratic regimes,
focusing on the study of ruling elites in nondemocracies.
    Our principal aim is to challenge the widely-held perception of authoritarian regimes as
‘winner-take-all’ contests. Rather, we characterize autocracy as ‘winner-take-more’ contests,
with a premium for the leader but substantial power distributed fairly broadly across internal
factions and individuals, and varying across different institutional settings. The theoretical
argument is that providing sufficient enticements to these subgroups reduces their incentives
to oppose the leader and initiate a coup. Our empirical analysis establishes evidence of
these distributed allocations both in authoritarian regimes where elites are organized along
ethnic cleavages (Sub-Saharan Africa), and ones organized along personal and factional lines
(China, North Korea).
    To a first approximation, the patronage allocations used to co-opt elites in Sub-Saharan
Africa are proportionately allocated to different ethnic groups according to the share of that
ethnic group in the country population at large. A more refined approximation is that smaller
ethnic groups get a somewhat higher share on average (but with substantial variation), and
large ethnic groups get notably smaller shares. For the case of China, we discuss how detailed
biographical information about political cadres allows to trace profiles of factional balance
that reject unitary views of the Chinese Communist Party. Similarly, in North Korea, we
use the appearances of elites at state events around the transition to Kim Jong Un’s regime


                                               2
to document the prevalence of both observed and latent factionalism, and the importance of
personal ties.
   The focus on authoritarian elites and the various factions or groups they constitute is
justified on the simple empirical basis that it is from within the elite that true stability
emerges for despots (Egorov and Sonin, 2011). The main threats to autocratic leadership
survival originate from within their inner circle (Besley and Kudamatsu, 2008; Roessler, 2011;
Francois et al., 2015). Rather than open revolts, which are relatively rare, it is coups d’ètat
from within the palace that are responsible for 70% of extra-constitutional authoritarian
regime transitions (Svolik, 2012). Their prevention through coup-proofing is thus paramount
to a leader’s survival.
   Our emphasis on authoritarian elites is a decidedly partial approach to understanding
the problems outlined in the introductory paragraph. We focus exclusively on the political
economy of development at the top, i.e., the inner circle around a country’s leader. Our
approach differs from other works in the area of the economic analysis of dictatorship and
democracy, which typically focuses on demands from the people for political reform. For
instance, Boix (2003) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2001, 2006) are concerned with bottom-
up forces driving political transition and stability, typically originating from redistributive
motivations à la Meltzer and Richard (1981). Following extant research in political science
(e.g. Geddes, 2003; de Mesquita et al., 2005; de Mesquita and Smith, 2012) and a long
tradition within political economy (Tullock, 1971, 1987; Olson, 1993), we uncover the latent
organizational structures of these regimes in specific contexts, and empirically validate that,
in the words of de Mesquita and Smith (2012), “no leader, no matter how august or how
revered, no matter how cruel or vindictive, ever stands alone.”
   Our intention is not to contribute to the well-developed theoretical literature on the
internal organization of authoritarian regimes, but rather to highlight new tools and non-
traditional empirical information useful to the study of these internal organizing principles.
Examples of this kind of information presented in this article include cabinet allocations


                                               3
in Sub-Saharan African autocracies, biographic information on Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) members, and press releases from North Korean state media. The first two of these
are based on extant work (Francois et al., 2015, 2016, 2017) and are discussed in Section
3, while the latter is an empirical exercise original to this article. We provide background
and context to each empirical case study, as the rich taxonomy of authoritarian regimes
necessitates one invest in understanding the finer institutional details of each regime as a
prerequisite to accurate analysis.
   An analysis on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) is presented as a
tentative proof of concept in a particularly hard-to-penetrate environment. The DPRK is
one of the most opaque, personalistic, and data-scarce political regimes in the world today.
We use information collected from DPRK state media on participation by regime elites in
official state events to trace the evolution and consolidation of supreme leader Kim Jong Un
around the transitionary period following the death of his father in 2011, and the diffusion of
the internal threat offered by Kim Jong Un’s uncle and mentor, Jang Song Thaek. We first
present an example of the importance of personalist ties in the regime, then assign elites to
either the military or party faction and track the importance of these factions between the
transition period and Kim Jong Un’s early reign. We compare these constructed factions with
the derived group structure uncovered by an unsupervised learning algorithm applied to the
network constructed from event co-appearances, and discuss the implications of congruence
between these factional definitions.
   In terms of related research, perhaps the broadest and conceptually rich investigation of
elite dynamics in autocratic regimes can be ascribed to North et al. (2009). This seminal book
offers a complete analysis of the roles of violence and elite bargaining in the ‘natural state.’
In this state, which the authors define as a social order where access to political power is
limited or outright closed, economic and political ring-fencing guarantee stability and prevent
costly conflict. Group identity, personal ties, and elite status determine the allocation of
rents and guide self-enforcing political equilibria. Yet by constraining opportunity and entry


                                               4
in the political arena, North et al. (2009) note that natural state forgoes the benefit of
elite accountability, equality of opportunity, and crucially, open competition in political and
economic markets. Ultimately, the authors argue that under these constraints, personal ties
and identities are of paramount importance and instrumental in defining who is and who
is not entitled to political rents. We apply this emphasis to guide our empirical analyses
accordingly.
       The empirical literature on authoritarian elites is vast and we only offer an extremely
partial review.1 The systematic study of the top echelons of autocracy dates back to Machi-
avelli’s Il Principe, yet only in the last part of the twentieth century has it gained a more
distinctively empirical orientation. During the Cold War and its immediate aftermath, anal-
ysis of autocracy ranged from the study of cabinet allocations by fascist rulers2 to a literature
on the internal organization of the Soviet state,3 to post-colonial African autocracies.4 Latin
American dictatorships have also received substantial attention.5
       In modern empirical applications, the study of authoritarian elites includes a large number
of heterogeneous contributions, of which the recent studies described below (Francois et al.,
2016, 2015, 2017) are only a small part. These contributions originate from disparate areas,
ranging from political science to economics to political sociology, but they share a common
focus on the role of the politically powerful. The view that the preferences of a restricted
subset of society drives political outcomes in democratic and autocratic regimes alike is a
classic one, formalized by de Mesquita et al. (2005) as an enfranchised ‘selectorate,’ a subset
of the population from which the regime leadership emerges. The authors provide empirical
substance to this concept, but rely on more aggregate measures than those employed by
the studies that we discuss below. For instance, Martinez-Bravo (2014) and Martinez-Bravo
   1
     See Egorov and Sonin (2011) for additional relevant references.
   2
     for Portugal, see Lewis (1978), and for comparative reviews including Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and
German fascists see de Almeida et al. (2005) or Pinto (2009).
   3
     Among the many, see Moore Jr (1950), Moore (1944), and Harasymiw (1984). For a comprehensive
review of the large literature on Joseph Stalin’s dictatorship alone see Gregory and Harrison (2005)
   4
     Joseph (1991) and more recently van de Walle (2013).
   5
     See Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) for a recent review.



                                                    5
et al. (2017) focus on micro evidence on the entrenchment of Indonesian political elites post-
Soeharto. Acemoglu et al. (2014) explore African elites in the context of Sierra Leone, and
observe empirical patterns suggestive of restrictive political competition at the top, driving
lower levels of economic wellbeing and higher rent extraction. This literature also relates to
the one on the empirical study of entrenched elites in China (for recent reviews see Shih,
2016; Li, 2016). Analyses of nondemocratic elite control include North Korea (Ishiyama,
2014; Haggard et al., 2018; Mahdavi and Ishiyama, 2017), post-Soviet Russia (Schleiter,
2013; Buckley and Reuter, 2015), Tunisia (Buehler and Ayari, 2018), and Haiti (Naidu
et al., 2016). Factional politics in consolidating democracies, like Mexico, is discussed in
Persico et al. (2011).
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the theory behind the organization
of the inner circle, a literature which provides useful context to the empirical studies that
follow, and Section 3 presents examples from Sub-Saharan Africa and the People’s Republic
of China. Section 4 introduces new evidence on the organization of autocratic elites in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Section 5 concludes.



2         Authoritarian Elites: Overview of the Theory

Research on techniques of elite management and incentives in autocracy makes for an in-
teresting counterpoint to models of voting and democracy. We do not provide a full review
of the theory of the internal organization of autocratic regimes.6 Rather, we offer a brief
conceptual overview on how to think about autocratic elites and autocracy. We broadly
classify these theoretical approaches into models of legislative bargaining, models of career
concerns, and models of elite monitoring.
        Nonlegislative intra-elite bargaining models are a natural point of departure in environ-
ments where heterogeneous collective units of different strengths compete for leadership or
joust to remain in control. Such collective units, rather than the individuals that comprise
    6
        The interested reader is better served by specialized surveys, such as Gehlbach et al. (2016).

                                                         6
them, represent the players, which are otherwise homogeneous within groups. Examples
include cohesive political units such as ethnic groups, religious castes, or military units (for
examples see Acemoglu et al. (2008) or Francois et al. (2015)). This theoretical approach
typically relies on non-cooperative concepts (which seem apt in environments pervaded by
violence), and focuses on the dynamic incentives supporting specific equilibria.
   The reader well versed in the political economy literature will find this modeling per-
spective close in spirit to multilateral bargaining approaches within legislative bodies, in
particular, the legislative bargaining environments that build on Baron and Ferejohn (1989).
The key difference lies in the absence of constraints emerging from legislative institutions
(e.g. a majority or quorum requirement to pass bills, or recognition protocols determining
the agenda-setter) and instead on the focus on violent elimination of opposing coalitions.
Consider, for instance, the model of Acemoglu et al. (2008). The authors explore the con-
cept of coalition stability in an environment where an alliance among groups is designed to
kill (or exile or otherwise eliminate) the groups excluded from the coalition. The problem
is made interesting by the players’ realization that once the first round of eliminations is
completed, members of the surviving coalition may find themselves next on the chopping
block as another round of coalition formation and eliminations begins. The forward-looking
decision of a group requires understanding this path of sequential purging. Some a priori
intuitive alliances may be thus avoided at the outset. For example, a powerful group may be
excluded from a stable coalition and purged at the outset to prevent it from dominating in
later rounds when faced with the residual set of survivors. As an example of these forward-
looking considerations the authors offer the purge of the powerful Soviet Union security tsar,
Lavrentiy Beria, by other members of the Politburo shortly following Stalin’s death.
   Similar dynamic incentives operate in the Francois et al. (2015). In this model, insider
groups are left indifferent between remaining loyal and deposing the leader to become leaders
themselves. The value of leadership reflects the realization by each aspiring traitor that once
in power, they will have to solve an optimization problem similar to that faced by the leader


                                               7
they aim to depose. This introduces a recursive structure to the leader’s problem, whose fixed
point identifies the equilibrium transfer necessary for incentive compatibility in remaining
loyal that ensures the stability of the coalition.
   A second class of models of autocratic elites borrows from organizational economics and
personnel economics. The large economics literature on individual incentives and behavior
within hierarchies may not appear immediately germane to a discussion of autocracy, but in
fact, many nondemocracies are ruled by large organizations that operate similarly in terms of
internal competition, promotions and factional separation to the large corporate structures
discussed and studied in Lazear and Rosen (1981), Green and Stokey (1983), Lazear (1991),
Prendergast and Topel (1996) or Gibbons and Waldman (1999). This approach specifically
takes an organizational economics view of the internal promotions of authoritarian cadres
and focuses on individual career incentives of politicians (not on collective units, differently
from the bargaining approach above).
   These organizational structures serve as a necessary substitute for elections to induce
selection on political agents, but require sufficient institutional stability to accommodate
a relatively permanent hierarchy and promotion structure. Thus, this class of models is
particularly useful to the analysis of single-party or military regimes. Both regime types are
historically common: examples include the Falange in Spain, the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union in USSR, FRELIMO in Mozambique, KANU in Kenya, the Ba’ath Party in
Syria and Iraq, the National Liberation Front in Algeria, and the National Fascist Party in
Italy. In the next two sections we will refer specifically to two other instances: the Chinese
Communist Party and the Kim dynasty of the DPRK.
   Career concerns and tournament competition within organizations are especially relevant
when one examines the incentives of individuals to reach the top of the pyramid of power
(see Francois et al., 2017; Persico et al., 2011) and mirror findings from the literature on
internal labor markets (Baker et al., 1994). The key theoretical ingredient in both literatures
is the presence of a (typically pyramidal) hierarchy. This hierarchical structure is taken


                                                8
as predetermined, and agents throughout the hierarchy attempt to signal their ability to
superiors or otherwise succeed in costly competition for promotion up the ranks.
   A third and final class of models of autocratic elites builds on a more traditional principal-
agent framework (see Besley and Kudamatsu, 2008; Egorov and Sonin, 2011, 2005; Svolik,
2012). As with the organizational economic approach described above, these models retain a
contract-theoretic perspective, but any hierarchical depth is excluded. Under this theoretical
approach, one operates closer to models of political accountability in political economy (see
Persson and Tabellini, 2000, for a review of the theory on democracy). While less conceptu-
ally distinct, this setup still allows for the tractable exploration of interesting trade-offs, for
example, the loyalty-versus-competence trade-off faced by an autocrat in Egorov and Sonin
(2011). In their model an autocrat appoints subordinates of varying degrees of competence to
defend his regime. A competent vizier offers both better insight on possible external threats
and, being a formidable opponent herself, she dissuades external attacks. However, as in
Francois et al. (2015), offering the palace keys to a powerful insider is a risky proposition.
A competent vizier is also more likely to successfully depose her leader, were she inclined to
make the attempt. Egorov and Sonin (2011) present both a static and dynamic discussion
of this trade off.
   More parsimoniously, even absent exogenous heterogeneity in competence, the mere pos-
sibility of internal sedition constrains a leader. Francois et al. (2016) show, with evidence
from African autocracies, how even the simple passing of time inside the palace (with a
consequent accumulation of experience and knowledge of the levers of power) produces a
dynamic trade off for a leader between retention and dismissal of his subordinates. As
time passes, the risk of a coup grows as the insider accumulates valuable experience. The
theoretically-derived hazard profiles of exit for the members of the dictator’s inner circle
thus slope upward as time spent in office accumulates. The job security of subordinates
begins to increase over time (and their hazard profile to decline) only once the leader has
accumulated sufficient experience relative to any potential replacement, so the value for a


                                                9
profitable betrayal eventually falls below the value of remaining a loyal subordinate.7



3         Authoritarian Elites: Evidence from Sub-Saharan

          Africa and China

3.1        Cabinet Allocations in Sub-Saharan Africa

We begin by showing how detailed information on elites may be useful in rejecting certain
claims on the internal operation of autocracies. To do this, we consider ethnic power-sharing
within Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
        Much debate in the literature on how the ethnic patronage system works in Africa shares
a common prior: such regimes are personalistic and centered around complete appropriation
of the political spoils by the ethnic group of the paramount leader (the “Big Man”). A
winner-take-all logic pervades much of the discussion (see Horowitz, 1985) and less attention
has been traditionally dedicated to the crafting of coalitions among elites supporting the
leadership and their power-sharing arrangements.
        Francois et al. (2015) empirically demonstrate the relevance of these latter considerations;
in particular, the nature of the balance autocratic leaders must strike with elites who threaten
regime stability through their control of sizable population blocs. The authors focus on
valuable executive branch ministerial posts,8 which correspond to pools of patronage and
excludable club goods that ministers distribute to their supporters.9 To this end, Francois
    7
      A reader interested in duration models in labour economics may find here an interesting parallel with
models of screening and selection of employees and their implied termination hazard function for workers.
Once again this highlights a connection with economic theory originally not focused on autocracy, but with
a conceptual bearing on these problems. For a more complete discussion of these points see Francois et al.
(2016).
    8
      The focus on the executive branch is justified by its importance in autocratic regimes - legislative
and judiciary branches are typically rubber stamping agencies in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The focus on
ethnicity is justified by its crucial importance in African politics. This is specific to the regimes under
consideration and in order to transpose this approach to other settings, the appropriate political cleavages
relevant to each new case must be carefully identified.
    9
      This is a logic that aligns with both North et al. (2009) and de Mesquita et al. (2005).



                                                    10
et al. (2015) collect and validate with local experts data on the ethnicity of all cabinet
ministers between 1960-2004 in fifteen SSA countries and assess the degree of inclusivity of
African cabinets in terms of ethnic allocations. The authors obtain complete data on the
ethnicity of each national minister since independence to 2004 for Benin, Cameroon, Cote
d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, Republic
of Congo, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, Kenya, and Uganda. These fifteen SSA countries
comprise a total population of 492 million, representing roughly 45 percent of the continent.
The authors identify the disaggregated ethnic affiliation of over 90 percent of ministers in
the sample.10
       To discuss their findings, we focus here on two simple metrics: inclusiveness of African
cabinets and their degree of proportionality. Figure 2, a reproduction from Francois et al.
(2015), reports the population shares of ethnic groups with no coethnic minister in the
cabinet, in that year (i.e. the size of the groups left outside the government). Winning
coalitions in African countries appear inclusive, often in the 80 percent range, with an average
of only 23 percent of the population excluded outright from the government, as reported in
Table 1. Because in none of the sample countries does an ethnicity represent more than 40
percent of the population and in no country does any leader’s group represents more than 30
percent of the population, Figure 2 implies that at least some members of non-leader ethnic
groups are always included in government. In summary, in this sample it is exceedingly rare
that a large ethnic group is excluded from the cabinet, irrespective of the leader’s ethnicity.
Francois et al. (2015) note that this finding alone, emerging from simple raw frequencies,
appears to reject the “Big Man” hypothesis.
       To draw a parallel with parliamentary democracies, the share of the population not
represented in the cabinet by any minister can be similarly traced.11 The size of coalitions
  10
     For details on the protocol and construction of ethnicity and ministerial data, as well as qualitative
discussion on the importance of the executive branch in African politics, see Rainer and Trebbi (2012).
  11
     We can benchmark Francois et al. (2015)’s estimates from the African sample to the sample of parlia-
mentary democracies of Ansolabehere et al. (2005) and Snyder et al. (2005). This sample includes Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, and Sweden, and is restricted to the same time period (1960-2004) as the African sample. This


                                                    11
in strictly majoritarian settings should be quite close to fifty percent of the voting members
if the minimum winning coalition logic of, for instance, Ansolabehere et al. (2005) (or of any
majoritarian voting game) applies. Figure 2 and Table 1 report shares of total electoral votes
without party representation in the cabinet (i.e. share of the electorate with representatives
left out of the winning coalition). They are in a tight neighborhood of fifty percent, much
higher than in African cabinets. Obviously, there are many institutional differences driving
these results, but one of them must be that the risk of coups and revolt is lower in liberal
democracies, so organization by exclusion within these political regimes is possible.
   Distinct from inclusiveness is proportionality, a dimension we can also address. Figure
1 reports the raw population shares of every SSA ethnic group against its cabinet seat
shares allocated to that group and traces a nonparametric fit (reproduced from Figure 2 in
Francois et al. (2015)). This figure reveals that ethnic representation in African cabinets
are remarkably close to proportional. The concave profile that emerges from the picture is
exploited by the authors in the original paper to further discipline their model of coalition
formation.
   Finally, one can also construct country-level proportionality time-series measures analo-
gous to Figure 2. Consider a country with its population divided in distinct ethnic groups
g = 1, ..., M . Let pg be the population share of ethnic group g, and let yg be the share of the
cabinet ministers belonging to ethnic group g. A perfectly proportionally allocated cabinet
is one for which pg = yg holds. Governments, particularly in autocracies, are often thought
to have substantial over-weighting (pg  yg ) of favoured groups (typically the leaders’ own
group, according to the winner-take-all logic). As Gallagher (1991) discusses, deviations
|pg − yg | can be weighted in different ways, with more weight given to large deviations or
attention paid to relative versus absolute deviations. Following Gallagher’s discussion of dif-
ferent measures, as a metric of disproportionality in the government we use the least squares
degree of disproportionality given at time t by πtLSq = [ 21 M                        2 1/2
                                                                                            . πtLSq
                                                            P
                                                              g=1 (100 ∗ (yg,t − pg )) ]

benchmarking allows the reader to draw some parallelisms with the vast political economy literature on
coalition formation, which largely focuses on established parliamentary democracies.


                                                 12
is minimal when a country’s cabinet allocations are perfectly proportional to ethnic group
shares.12 Notice further that by replacing (yg,t − pg ) with (yi,t − si,t ) for every party i in par-
liament with seat shares si,t , one can compute disproportionality measures for democracies
as well.
       Figure 4 shows that πtLSq captures well-known features of the data; for instance, the
political monopoly of the Liberian-American minority in Liberia until the early 1980’s. Note
also that the volatility of the disproportionality index increases around transitions. For
example, in Guinea the shift in power between Malinke and Susu in 1984 at the death of
Ahmed Sekou Toure, a Malinke, produced a visible drop in over-weighting of that group and a
jump in representation for the Susu ethnicity. Similar dynamics occur between Kalenjin and
Kikuyu under Arap Moi in Kenya. Francois et al. (2015) establish the presence of such shifts
due to positive, but not quantitatively large premia for a leader’s own ethnic group. The time
series for other non-leader ethnic groups are largely stable.13 The within-country averages
in Table 2 further show that the degree of disproportionality is low in African countries.
Importantly, this low degree of disproportionality also holds for top cabinet appointments
(defense, finance, interior, natural resources, etc.).
       Francois et al. (2015) offer an explanation for these proportional cabinet allocations, in-
terpreting them as patronage allocations used to co-opt elites. In their model, a leader must
face two sources of threat: the internal threat from insiders and the violent conflict threat
from outsiders (see also Roessler, 2011; Svolik, 2012). These threats involve different tech-
nologies. Disgruntled outsider groups excluded from government can engage in large-scale
political violence against insiders’ forces. Regime insiders are also potentially dangerous to a
leader’s survival as they can stage palace coups. Unlike the large-scale military threat from
outside group rebellion, coup d’ètat technology does not depend on groups size, but rather
  12
     The reader familiar with the civil and voting rights literature on representation in the United States will
notice an analogy between some of these measures and those commonly employed to assess the degree of
racial proportionality of city councils in U.S. municipalities. See Amy (2002) for a discussion.
  13
     Available from the authors is also a benchmark π LSq for our sample of democracies. There are some
large fluctuations in the π LSq measure mostly determined by large parties being left out of the winning
coalition (weighted more by least squares than small deviations).


                                                      13
on chance opportunity. A leader thus includes multiple groups to dissuade revolutions by
outsiders, but must also ensure that they remain loyal to avoid a coup once they are brought
inside the regime. Equilibrium decisions aimed at assuaging external threats potentially
affect the opportunity to stage a coup, and vice versa. The authors develop and estimate a
model built around these trade-offs and characterize stable outcomes, which typically involve
inclusive and proportionally allocated coalitions.


3.2      Elites and Factionalism in Chinese Politics

We now turn to the study of highly hierarchical and formally organized authoritarian systems.
Such systems are typically opaque to outsiders, making predictions about short-term political
change difficult. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Democratic Republic of North
Korea (DPRK) offer two such examples. We discuss briefly here how the study of CCP elites
provides insight into possible political change in China, as a precursor to our more detailed
discussion of North Korea in the following section.
      Within the People’s Republic of China (PRC) Leninist state architecture, the CCP plays
a paramount role. Indeed, the CCP represents the linchpin of both political and economic
activity in world’s most populous state and second largest economy.
      Francois et al. (2017) show how the internal promotion mechanics and factional arrange-
ments of the CCP can be systematically studied by tracing specific biographical traits of
members of the CCP’s central elite (cadres at the level of the Central Committee, the
broader executive body of the CCP, or higher, at the Politburo and Standing Committee
of the Politburo level). Such biographical traits are available for Chinese elites due to a
large information collection effort led by leading scholars in China Studies. The authors use
two biographical databases of Chinese politicians: China Vitae14 , which includes detailed
rèsumès for 4,494 Chinese elites in the post-Deng ‘collective leadership’ period since 1992,
and Shih et al. (2008), which covers all Central Committee and Alternate Central Committee
 14
      http://www.chinavitae.com


                                              14
members since 1921 (the year of the founding of the CCP).
   Transparent information on the internal deliberations of the CCP is absent, so no clear
assessment of the strategic political interactions among party insiders is immediately avail-
able. Francois et al. (2017) show how four affiliation indicators for each communist elite
can be recovered from these biographies. They use these indicators to retrace the strategic
and systematic positioning of each cadre within the complex CCP hierarchy, and document
systematic factional arrangements. The authors first document a cadre of elites associated
with prominent families and military rank. Besides these, the authors find patterns of pro-
motion throughout the CCP hierarchy for affiliates of the Communist Youth League of China
(CYLC) and Shanghai Gang, factional associations indicative of affiliation with former Gen-
eral Secretary Hu Jintao and former General Secretary Jiang Zemin, respectively.
   As we perform a similar exercise for North Korea, we do not present here a full discus-
sion of why the factional affiliation and group membership that can be recovered from such
biographies matter for the subtle equilibria and power transitions within the Chinese gov-
ernment. Instead, we simply highlight how these factional arrangements and their balance
have implications for relevant questions in the political economy of China, such as whether
the current General Secretary Xi Jinping is becoming a personalistic autocrat in the style of
Mao Zedong, or whether instead the CCP institutionalization initiated under Deng Xiaop-
ing remains stable. By fitting a structural model of career concerns and factional dynamics
to CCP personnel data, Francois et al. (2017) show that strong out of sample predictions
concerning Chinese political equilibria can be produced.
   These predictive exercises include a forecast of the factional composition of the Chinese
Politburo one year in advance of the 19th Party Congress which occurred in October 2017.
The model predictions, made public almost one year in advance, were remarkably accurate.
Contrary to some popular commentary leading up to the Party Congress, the analysis did
not indicate a radical break from previous political equilibria. For instance, consistent with
the paper’s predictions, the popularly anticipated exclusion of the CYLC faction from the


                                             15
Standing Committee of the Politburo did not materialize.



4     DPRK Elites: A Case Study

We conclude with an empirical study of authoritarian elites in an information-scarce environ-
ment. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) is an anachronism in the modern
world. Access to the country is tightly controlled, and data on the regime is extremely scarce.
Guesswork is involved in everything, from GDP to the exact age of its Supreme Leader. De-
spite the challenge in studying such a regime, there are good reasons to make the attempt.
First, the DPRK is a belligerent nuclear powered state with the capacity to destabilize the
region and inflict massive casualties on its southern neighbour. The welfare implications for
anticipating DPRK actions are high. Second, the DPRK is a case study in personalist regime
dynamics. Authority in these regimes is derived from personal relationships rather than for-
mal institutional arrangements, which requires recognizing a larger degree of heterogeneity
within the elite than exists in our previous two case studies. Using data from DPRK state
media we characterize the regime elite, provide an example of the importance of personal
connections, then turn to the detection of factionalism in this complex environment.


4.1    Institutional Background

The DPRK was formed after World War II as the Soviet apportionment of the Korean
peninsula. In 1955, its founder, Kim Il Sung, instituted the Juche ideology, a departure
from Marxist-Lenninism and adoption of a totalitarian Stalinist structure centered on Kim.
As in Stalinism, Kim’s dictates formed policy for the party apparatus situated below him,
and in turn, the party oversaw the military and executive bureaucracy. Kim’s authority was
further entrenched by the constitutional reform of 1972. This reform imbued Kim with more
de jure personal authority than that enjoyed by even Stalin or Mao, making the DPRK per-
haps the single-most concentrated regime of the twentieth-century communist experiments


                                              16
(Mceachern, 2008). Kim Il Sung began to secure the succession of his son, Kim Jong Il, dur-
ing the 1970s, elevating him to party leadership by 1980, well before the eventual transition
of power in 1994. Shortly after Kim Jong Il’s succession the new leader consolidated his
position by significantly downgrading the importance of the Korean Workers Party (KWP),
vesting authority instead with the National Defense Council, a committee of senior military
officials. Though there is general agreement that the power of the military increased under
Kim Jong Il, the significance of this increase is in dispute. For some scholars, this change
marked a rebalancing of the military as a peer organization to the KWP (Mceachern, 2008),
while others believe that under Kim the military supplanted the party entirely in ruling the
country (Gause, 2006). By reducing the importance of the KWP, Kim Jong Il diminished
threats to his position from powerful party apparatchiks without having to move against
individual party elites (Woo, 2014).
   Kim Jong Un’s transition to leader was considerably more problematic than his fathers’.
Kim Jong Nam, Kim Jong Un’s elder brother and original heir-apparent, fell into disgrace
in 2001 after being apprehended by Japanese authorities while attempting to sneak into
Tokyo’s Disneyland in the trunk of a car. It is believed that this prompted a split within
the regime, with Kim Jong Il and several party insiders supporting Kim Jong Un, and the
military supporting Kim Jong Un’s elder brother, Kim Jong Chul. Kim Jong Il may have
decided on his youngest son as late as March 2009, leaving little time for the elder Kim to
secure a smooth transition of power to his son, as his father had done for him. During these
transition years, Jang Song Thaek, Kim Jong Un’s uncle by marriage, is believed to have
been the de facto second-in-command after Kim Jong Il, and interim leader between Kim’s
stroke in 2008 and death in 2011.
   Two years after the death of his father, in a move widely seen as a bid to secure his
position, Kim Jong Un executed Jang and members of his family, and purged his uncle’s
associates from office. The purge of Jang Song Thaek is seen as the most significant com-
ponent of a wider purge of the military that South Korean intelligence reports has claimed


                                             17
hundreds of government officials.15 Since 2013 there have been few outward signs of internal
regime instability and it appears that Kim’s position as leader has been secured.


4.2       Data Description

The use of propaganda events by scholars to study DPRK regime structure is not new (Gause,
2006; Mahdavi and Ishiyama, 2017; Ishiyama, 2014). These events began as spontaneous
field inspections of farms, factories, and military units under Kim Il Sung, but evolved
under Kim Jong Il into far more coordinated, prestigious affairs, used to signal regime
policy priorities (Ishiyama, 2014). The Korean Central News Agency (KCNA), the DPRK
state media organ, subsequently announces these events in press releases, which list notable
attendees. These releases are subsequently collected and translated by NK News, a private
news organization based in South Korea. NK News combines original reporting on the DPRK
with a subscription service for in-house data visualization and analysis. In the process of
providing these services, NK News collects and translates KCNA press releases. NK News
provided these data on request for the period July 1994 to January 2017. Official copies of
KCNA press releases (in Korean) are available through the DPRK website based in Japan,
but the web hosting used by the DPRK is poor quality, making consistent access to KCNA
reports directly from the DPRK government is difficult. In addition, there are reports that
the DPRK has modified past press releases to remove names of disgraced regime officials,
creating problematic selection for retrospective data collection.
       Our data consists of 2,853 unique events and 430 unique elites spanning the quarter
century from 1994 to 2017. This sample period includes both regime transitions since the
founding of the DPRK: the first, in 1994, from Kim Il Sung to Kim Jong Il, and the second,
in December 2011, from Kim Jong Il to Kim Jong Un. When listing attendees the KCNA
additionally reports a selection of roles for each elite, including military rank and position
  15
     Since 2012 the number of disappearances has increased dramatically, with an estimated 340 offi-
cials purged by 2015. See https://www.upi.com/top news/world-news/2016/12/28/kim-jong-un-has-purged-
executed-more-than-300-people-spy-agency-says/7071482971899/



                                                18
on government and party committees. Besides the aforementioned announcement of roles,
our data include no other information on elite attendees.
      Of our case studies, the focus on individual regime elites to understand regime dynamics
is most important in North Korea. The regime functions primarily though informal person-
alist dynamics rather than formal institutions, which are considered weak (Haggard et al.,
2018). This reliance on personal connections for authority over constitutional mandates
means that individual elites may hold a bewildering array of conflicting institutional titles
as their relationship with the leadership waxes or wanes. Powerful individuals may simulta-
neously hold senior positions in the military, party, and government. In such an environment
knowledge of the current hierarchy of power relationships between elites may be difficult to
maintain not only for outside observers, but also for regime elites themselves. In addition to
being assigned institutional roles, attending high profile events can serve as a public signal of
favour, and hence rank. For example, the standing or sitting order of elites with respect to
the leader are carefully coordinated and a source of prestige for proximal elites. Therefore,
in addition to institutional assignments (which are not released publicly by the regime), ap-
pearances at events alongside powerful regime officials is widely seen to indicate prominence.
Similarly, we interpret these event appearances as signals of access to regime patronage, and
hence, a proxy for the importance of the individual.


4.3       Stylized Facts

As a preliminary analysis we plot various time series over the sample period. Figure 5 shows
the series for events per year, average number of elites per event, and average number of
event appearances per elite. From this we observe distinct sections of our data correspond-
ing to events in recent DPRK history. In the early period we observe few events, with high
attendance by a small core of regime military elites.16 This is consistent with increasing im-
portance of the military during Kim Jong Il’s early tenure and constitutional reform in 1998.
 16
      We discuss our method to identify elites as military or party below



                                                      19
The number of events reported on by the KCNA have increased steadily since the inaugura-
tion of Kim Jong Il, which reflects the increasing importance of state events as an internal
signaling device and indicator of regime policy since the Kim Il Sung regime (Ishiyama,
2014). The jump in events over the 2000-2002 period is due to a flurry of diplomatic and
economic engagement with the Republic of Korea. This is the period of the Sunshine Pol-
icy, an attempted rapprochement between North and South Korea, including the first ever
meeting of the two heads of state, and engagement with the outgoing Clinton administra-
tion. This outreach ended with the DPRK’s inclusion on the Bush administration’s “Axis
of Evil” in January 2002, leading to a suspension of the Sunshine Policy and draw-down of
diplomatic engagement with the West.
   In 2009, the number of events rose dramatically, with a corresponding increase in the
number of elites, average number of event attendees, and average number of events attended
per elite. This transition period following Kim Jong Il’s stroke in August 2008 began with
the appointment of Kim Jong Un to the National Defence Council, which is broadly viewed
as confirmation of his father’s favour as successor. A sick dictator is a dangerous prospect,
as their supporters see the imminent end of their patronage and look for a leader who can
guarantee their position. “Dead leaders cannot deliver rewards to their coalition,” remark
de Mesquita and Smith (2012), and “dying leaders face almost as grave a problem.” The
young Kim Jong Un was relatively unknown to regime elites in this period, unable to credibly
commit to patronizing key supporters, and dependent on regime insiders and his increasingly
infirm father to secure his succession. Panels b) and c) of Figure 5 show that during this
period the number of elite attendees at events increased dramatically, and elites attended
more events.
   Following Kim Jong Un’s succession to leadership in December 2012, we observe some
retrenchment from the volatility of the transition period. Both the number of events and
average events per elite fall considerably, with the average number of attendees falling back
to pre-transition levels. This is the period of violent consolidation by Kim Jong Un, marked


                                             20
by reshuffling of key government and military positions, and a bloody purge of regime elites;
most notably Kim’s uncle, Jang Song Thaek.
   One interpretation of the change in these series during the transition period is as a re-
sponse by elites to an increase in the probability of success for a leadership bid: the expected
value of a coup attempt increases as the ability of the regime to guarantee patronage flows
to loyal supporters falters. Elites may either begin a bid of their own for leadership, or
support a co-elite’s bid. Because during the transition the regime cannot guarantee contin-
ued patronage flows, event appearances can no longer be a signal of continued patronage,
but instead should be thought of as a signal of potential patronage flows. For example, a
general that supports a military bid for leadership knows that unless the bid is successful (or
possibly successfully co-opted), then the prominence she attains by appearing alongside her
prospective patron is not a meaningful predictor of her status. Under this interpretation the
increase in event appearances during this period reflects the multiplicity of possible future
patronage allocations, depending on the outcome of the succession.
   To further explore the transitionary period we contrast it with late Kim Jong Il regime
preceding it, and Kim Jong Un regime in the years afterwards. We follow Haggard et al.
(2018) in defining the late Kim Jong Il regime from 2005 to his stroke in 2008, the transition
period from 2009 to 2011, and the Kim Jong Un regime from 2012 through 2015. The
transition period thus covers the year Kim Jong Un was appointed to the National Defense
Council in 2009, spans the death of Kim Jong Il in 2011, and ends December 2011 with the
announcement of Kim Jong Un as Supreme Leader.
   Figure 6 shows the distribution of event appearances across elites, our signal for patronage
flows and thus proxy for elite importance, by event sector. The classification of events into
sectors comes from the event description and location (not attendees). The striking overlap
across sectors of these distributions during each of the three regimes suggests that event type
is not a significant predictor of the importance of attendees: a consistent core of important
elites appear at events of all types. The single exception is the relative unimportance of


                                              21
WPK event attendees during the Kim Jong Il era, consistent with the emphasis on the
military throughout his tenure. Figure 7 compares the distributions of elite importance
across the three periods. The figure reveals that relative to the Kim Jong Il and Kim
Jong Un periods, the transitionary period exhibits a higher mean and greater variance. In
addition to the interpretation of the higher mean attendance presented above, the higher
variance across elites suggests that the distribution of power was less asymmetric during this
transition period.17 We turn next to the personalist and factional mechanisms underlying
these aggregate trends.


4.4       Network Analysis

Social networks are a natural model for understanding the importance of personalist ties in
authoritarian regimes. We construct a graph where DPRK elites are represented by nodes
and co-appearance at an event is represented by an edge between the co-appearing elites.
Graph edges between two elites are weighted by the sum of their co-appearances during
the period. We construct one such graph for the transition period, from 2009 to 2011, and
one for the early Kim Jong Un regime, from 2012 to 2015. We use the Fruchterman and
Reingold (1991) algorithm for graph layout, and the size of node i represents the number
elites i co-appears with during the period. After a brief description of the key features of
these networks, we will use them to describe the importance of personalist connections and
factions within the regime.
       Both networks are dense. During the Kim Jong Un period, for example, each elite co-
appears with forty other elites on average. Key regime figures attend close to all events.
This density reflects the identities of the elites in our data. These are typically not factory
managers or farmers but key regime figures who function effectively as a regime court.
       Both networks are also highly centralized around the regime leaders, especially under the
  17
   Note that due to the possible change in interpretation of event appearances during the transition, elites
may have become more or less powerful as a group during this period relative to their status under Kim
Jong Il or Kim Jong Un.



                                                    22
Kim Jong Un regime. In both graphs the leader assumes a central position of prominence. If
edge weights are correlated with patronage flows, such a highly asymmetric network structure
suggests universal dependence on the leadership for distribution of patronage. This universal
dependence is a desirable feature for an established leader; de Mesquita and Smith (2012)
argue that engendering a state of dependence among viziers is a key requirement to regime
stability.
    As a case study in the relevance of personal connections, consider the marked nodes in
Figure 8. On November 30, 2013, Kim Jong Un attended a series of events at Samjiyon
Mountain, a base for Kim Il Sung’s revolutionary forces that has subsequently attained
mythological significance in regime propaganda. North Korean regime watchers speculate
that the decision to execute Jang Song Thaek and his associates was made at this meeting
among Kim and eight attending elites, known in ROK as the Samjiyon Eight.18 Four days
after this meeting, Jang Song Thaek was dismissed, and was executed shortly thereafter on
December 13th. The elites in attendance appeared to have little in common besides their
attendance at this meeting: the military, party, and state bureaucracy are all represented
among the conspirators. Many of the attendees were complete unknowns before 2012: only
six appeared at any previous events during the transition years, and from the left panel of
Figure 8 we observe two of those six are relegated to the network periphery. Since Kim
Jong Un’s succession these elites have been promoted to high levels within the regime,
including vice-chairman of the KWP and two promotions to the National Defence Council.19
In addition to their institutional titles, the right panel of Figure 8 shows the dramatic increase
in visibility of these elites. Though we can only speculate about the reason these particular
elites were in attendance on Samjiyon, one consequence of their council is visible in our data
as their greatly increased prominence in the regime post-2012. The relative obscurity of these
plotters during the regime transition (and relative prominence afterwards) thus highlights
  18
     In spite of this name we find there to be 10 attendees at the Samjiyon event excluding Kim, and broaden
our definition accordingly. See http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?aid=3000168
  19
     Vice Marshal Hwang Pyong So, currently considered second in command under the Kim Jong Un regime,
and Vice Marshal Choe Ryong-hae were appointed to the NDC.


                                                    23
the importance of access to the leader beyond institutional or factional association.
       Besides the importance of individual elite relationships with the leadership we can address
the prevalence of factionalism within the regime. Several possible sources of factionalism have
been suggested for the DPRK, including between civil and military elites (Gause, 2006; Woo,
2014), between military hardliners and economic reformers (Mahdavi and Ishiyama, 2017),
and between government ministers, party officials, and military elites (Mceachern, 2008;
McEachern, 2010). Although these factional dimensions clearly overlap, assigning elites
according to any particular factional division is a fraught exercise. To attempt to capture
factionalism in our data we employ a simple two way split based on the roles announced for
each elite by the KCNA at event appearances. We assign elites to the military faction if
they are announced with a military rank, and we assign elites to the party faction if they
are members of a state or party organ but hold no military rank. Thus elites that hold
both military and government positions are assigned to the military faction.20 While this
assignment rule is imperfect21 and lacks nuance, it has the virtue of transparency, and as we
will show, it delivers surprising insight into the regime structure.
       Figure 9 colour elites according to the affiliation with the military (green) or party (red).
During the transition period there is no clear separation between military and party elites,
nor any obvious imbalance of nodes on one side or the other. To recall Figure 7, during
the transition period dispersion in event appearance was high; the network representation
suggests one source for this dispersion is the intermixing of military and party elites. Indeed,
on the basis of event appearances no factional divide between the military and party is
apparent. Conversely, during the Kim Jong Un period there is a clear separation between
party and military officials that roughly partitions the graph into halves, with Kim himself
sitting between the groups. Military elites appear to have gained in prominence, although
notably, even with our inclusive definition of military elites, party elites play a prominent
  20
     Generally, top military elites hold membership in the WPK, and often sit on the Supreme People’s
Assembly.
  21
     O Kuk Ryol, for example, a prominent DPRK general and long-time NDC member, is classified as
neither military nor party using this method


                                                  24
role in the network, supporting a balanced view of institutional importance. A diminished
Jang Song Thaek, who is executed in the middle of the period, sits slightly on the WPK side
of the divide. This is suggestive that the military and party factions, while a meaningful
division of elites during Kim’s reign, was not a salient division of elites during the transition
period. We turn next to an alternative method for uncovering factional structure.
       To compare with our definitions of the party-military factions we perform a spectral
community detection exercise on our network. The objective of community detection is the
unsupervised recovery of latent groups from network structure. Two popular community
detection methods are spectral partitioning, in which nodes are assigned to a predetermined
number of groups22 to minimize the sum of between-group edges23 , and modularity maxi-
mization, which attempts to minimize between-group edges while maximizing within-group
edges (Newman, 2010).
       Comparing the solutions of the graph modularity maximization problem with our elite
assignment to party or military factions, we observe that under the Kim Jong Un regime, the
community assignment highly correlates with the military and party factions. This validates
our observation above that this institutional separation appears highly relevant during the
Kim Jong Un regime. During the transition, however, the overlap between the party-military
assignment and latent group assignment is less clear, and the solution number of communities
increases from two to three. Notably, one of the factions during the transition period includes
Kim Jong Il, Jang Song Thaek, and Jang’s wife General Kim Kyong Hui, who disappeared
from the public eye after her husband’s execution. Other notable central members of this
faction include General Ri Myong Su, who was investigated in connection with the purge of
Jang Song Thaek in 2013, and Marshal Hyon Chol-hae, a former National Defence Council
member who retired in 2013. Also notable is the absence of Kim Jong Un from this faction,
  22
     For an example on estimating the number of latent groups on an unweighted network, see Trebbi and
Weese (2018)
  23
     This partition is performed by a ‘cutting’ edges between nodes, and the number of edges cut to partition
the network is the ‘cut size.’ In our case, the size of the cut is the sum of edge-weights between partitioned
groups.



                                                     25
who appears on the periphery of the inner circle of regime elites. We speculate that this
latent faction represent the powerful remnants of the Kim Jong Il regime that is coopted by
Jang Song Thaek after Kim Jong Il’s death, and ultimately viewed as a threat by the young
Kim.
    We believe this evidence demonstrates that subtle internal dynamics are observable within
the highest echelons of the DPRK, despite the particularly opaque institutional environment.
Around the leader clearly separable clusters of authoritarian elites appear empirically de-
tectable and arguably are positioned by strategic considerations. We observe the importance
of personalist ties to the leadership, the emergence of strategic factional associations, and
the institutional factionalism between party and military elites. The differential intermixing
of these elite clusters appear to correlate sharply with known phases of regime transitions
and consolidations. In sum, the evidence paints a nuanced picture of internal DPRK regime
dynamics, and rejects a unitary representation of the central organization of the regime.



5      Concluding Remarks

The goal of the political economy of development is to understand the misallocation of
productive factors, the expropriation of disadvantaged groups in developing countries, and
the potential for humanitarian crises. We argue that because authoritarian elites play key
roles in driving these phenomena, it is critical to develop frameworks for understanding how
authoritarian regimes work in practice. Governments in developing countries play a large role
in securing property rights and appropriate economic institutions that are instrumental for
economic development (Douglass, 1990; Hall and Jones, 1999; Rodrik et al., 2004). Beneath
an occasional veneer of electoral competition, the internal functioning of these governments
is largely nondemocratic, and driven by the interaction of a small group of regime elites.
    This paper offers methodological considerations for the empirical analysis of the powerful
players that operate within such governments. It is typically hard to produce systematic



                                              26
evidence on the internal operations of political systems that lack the transparency and ac-
countability found in liberal democracies. These regimes do not rely on transparent electoral
procedures to assign power to political actors, nor on a free media and hold them accountable.
The contribution of this paper is to show how progress can be made in these environments
and a key insight that we wish to convey is how authoritarian regimes operate differently
than winner-take-all contests, a commonly held view in the scholarship of autocracy.
   We supply a brief review of results focused on the organization of authoritarian elites in
Africa and East Asia. Such elites, we report, are awarded resources by leaders for cooptation
and balance in a fairly broad and predictable fashion. We augment the discussion of these
results with some new findings from a particularly impervious case study: North Korea.
Here we show how the evolution of co-appearances in official public events broadcast by
the state propaganda agency depicts surprisingly clear factional jousting that evolves as the
regime of Kim Jong Un consolidates.
   Future research should take on the task of rejecting oversimplification of autocratic gov-
ernments as homogeneous and unitary. Rather, it should focus on collecting hard data
on the internal organizations of these regimes. We advocate the use of detailed archival
data collection efforts focused on dimensions of direct impact for internal organization of
elites. Though the institutional details of each case vary, and deciding which information to
target may require extensive background research, the examples we have presented from Sub-
Saharan Africa, China, and North Korea should convince the reader that such information,
albeit non-standard, is often available in surprising detail, and can bear fruitful insights.




                                              27
References

Acemoglu, D., Egorov, G., and Sonin, K. (2008). Coalition formation in non-democracies.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 75(4):987–1009.

Acemoglu, D., Reed, T., and Robinson, J. A. (2014). Chiefs: Economic Development and
  Elite Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone. Journal of Political Economy, 122(2):319–
  368.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2001). A theory of political transitions. American
  Economic Review, 91(4):938–963.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Amy, D. J. (2002). Real choices/New Voices: how proportional representation elections could
  revitalize American democracy. Columbia University Press.

Ansolabehere, S., Snyder, J. M., Strauss, A. B., and Ting, M. M. (2005). Voting weights
  and formateur advantages in the formation of coalition governments. American Journal
  of Political Science, 49(3):550–563.

Baker, G., Gibbs, M., and Holmstrom, B. (1994). The internal economics of the firm:
  evidence from personnel data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4):881–919.

Baron, D. P. and Ferejohn, J. A. (1989). Bargaining in Legislatures. The American Political
  Science Review, 83(4):1181–1206.

Besley, T. and Kudamatsu, M. (2008). Making Autocracy Work. Institutions and Economic
  Performance, (020):452–510.

Boix, C. (2003). Democracy and redistribution. Cambridge University Press.



                                            28
Buckley, N. and Reuter, O. J. (2015). Performance Incentives under Autocracy: Evidence
  from Russia’s Regions. Working Paper, (November).

Buehler, M. and Ayari, M. (2018). The Autocrat’s Advisors: Opening the Black Box of Rul-
  ing Coalitions in Tunisia’s Authoritarian Regime. Political Research Quarterly, 71(2):330–
  346.

de Almeida, P. T., Bermeo, N., and Pinto, A. C. (2005). Who Governs Southern Europe?
  Regime Changing and Ministerial Recruitment (1850-2000). Routledge.

de Mesquita, B. B. and Smith, A. (2012). The Dictator’s Handbook: Why Bad Behavior is
  Almost Always Good Politics. Public Affairs.

de Mesquita, B. B., Smith, A., Morrow, J. D., and Siverson, R. M. (2005). The logic of
  political survival. MIT press.

Douglass, C. N. (1990). A Transaction Cost Theory of Politics. Journal of Theoretical
  Politics, 24(4):355–367.

Egorov, G. and Sonin, K. (2005). The killing game: Reputation and knowledge in non-
  democratic succession.

Egorov, G. and Sonin, K. (2011). Dictators and their viziers: Endogenizing the loyalty-
  competence trade-off. Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(5):903–930.

Francois, P., Rainer, I., and Trebbi, F. (2015). How Is Power Shared in Africa? Econometrica,
  83(2):465–503.

Francois, P., Rainer, I., and Trebbi, F. (2016). The Dictator’s Inner Circle.

Francois, P., Trebbi, F., and Xiao, K. (2017). Factions in Nondemocracies: Theory and
  Evidence from the Chinese Communist Party. 10027.




                                             29
Fruchterman, T. M. and Reingold, E. M. (1991). Graph drawing by force-directed placement.
  Software: Practice and experience, 21(11):1129–1164.

Gallagher, M. (1991). Proportionality, disproportionality and electoral systems. Electoral
  Studies, 10(1):33–51.

Gause, K. E. (2006). North Korean Civil-Military Trends: Military-First Politics To A Point.
  Technical Report September, Strategic Studies Institute.

Geddes, B. (2003). Paradigms and Sand Castles Theory Building and Research Design in
  Comparative Politics. University of Michigan Press.

Gehlbach, S., Sonin, K., and Svolik, M. W. (2016). Formal Models of Nondemocratic Politics.
  Annual Review of Political Science, 19(1):565–584.

Gibbons, R. and Waldman, M. (1999). A theory of wage and promotion dynamics inside
  firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4):1321–1358.

Green, J. R. and Stokey, N. L. (1983). A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts. Journal
  of Political Economy, 91(3):349–364.

Gregory, P. and Harrison, M. (2005). Allocation under Dictatorship: Research in Stalin’s
  Archives. Journal of Economic Literature, 43(3):721–761.

Haggard, S., Herman, L., and Ryu, J. (2018). Political Change in North Korea Mapping the
  Succession. 54(4):773–800.

Hall, R. E. and Jones, C. I. (1999). Why do Some Countries Produces So Much More Output
  Per Worker Than Others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1):83–116.

Harasymiw, B. (1984). Political Elite Recruitment in the Soviet Union. Springer.

Horowitz, D. (1985). Ethnic Groups in Conflict. Theories, Patterns, and Policies.



                                            30
Ishiyama, J. (2014). Assessing the leadership transition in North Korea: Using network anal-
  ysis of field inspections, 1997-2012. Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 47(2):137–
  146.

Joseph, R. A. (1991). Africa: The Rebirth of Political Freedom. Journal of Democracy,
  2(4):11–24.

Lazear, E. P. (1991). Labor Economics and the Psychology of Organizations. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 5(2):89–110.

Lazear, E. P. and Rosen, S. (1981). Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts.
  Journal of Political Economy, 89(5):841–864.

Lewis, P. H. (1978). Salazar’s ministerial elite, 1932-1968. The Journal of Politics, 40(3):622–
  647.

Li, C. (2016). Chinese politics in the Xi Jinping Era: Reassessing collective leadership.
  Brookings Institution Press.

Mahdavi, P. and Ishiyama, J. (2017). Dynamics of the inner elite in dictatorships :Evidence
  from North Korea.

Martinez-Bravo, M. (2014). The role of local officials in new democracies: Evidence from
  Indonesia. American Economic Review, 104(4):1244–1287.

Martinez-Bravo, M., Mukherjee, P., and Stegmann, A. (2017). The Non-Democratic Roots of
  Elite Capture: Evidence From Soeharto Mayors in Indonesia. Econometrica, 85(6):1991–
  2010.

Mceachern, P. (2008). Interest Groups in North Korean Politics. 8(2):235–258.

McEachern, P. (2010). Inside the Red Box, volume 104. Columbia University Press, New
  York Chichester, West Sussex.


                                              31
Meltzer, A. H. and Richard, S. (1981). A Rational Theory of Government. Journal of
  Political Economy, 89(5):914–927.

Moore, B. (1944). The Communist Party of the Soviet Union : 1928-1944 : A Study in Elite
  Formation and Function. American Sociological Review, 9(3):267–278.

Moore Jr, B. (1950). Soviet Politics: The Dilemma of Change. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.

Naidu, S., Robinson, J. A., and Young, L. E. (2016). Social Origins of Dictatorships: Elite
  Networks and Political Transitions in Haiti. Working paper, 31(October):1–91.

Newman, M. (2010). Networks. Oxford University Press.

North, D. C., Wallis, J. J., Weingast, B. R., and Otáhal, T. (2009). Violence and social order:
  a conceptual framework for interpreting recorded human history, volume 20. Cambridge
  University Press.

Olson, M. (1993). Dictatorship, democracy, and development. The American Political Sci-
  ence Review, 87(3):567–576.

Persico, N., Pueblita, J. C. R., and Silverman, D. (2011). Factions and Political Competition.
  Journal of Political Economy, 119(2):242–288.

Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2000). Political Economics: Explaining Public Policy.

Pinto, A. C. (2009). Single party, cabinet and political decision-making in fascist era dic-
  tatorships: comparative perspectives. Ruling elites and decision-making in fascist-era
  dictatorships, pages 353–368.

Prendergast, C. and Topel, R. H. (1996). Favoritism in organizations. Journal of Political
  Economy, 104(5):958–978.

Rainer, I. and Trebbi, F. (2012). New tools for the analysis of political power in africa.

                                              32
Rodrik, D., Subramanian, A., and Trebbi, F. (2004). Institutions rule: the primacy of
  institutions over geography and integration in economic development. Journal of economic
  growth, 9(2):131–165.

Roessler, P. (2011). The enemy within: Personal rule, coups, and civil war in Africa. World
  Politics, 63(2):300–346.

Schleiter, P. (2013). Democracy, authoritarianism, and ministerial selection in Russia: How
  presidential preferences shape technocratic cabinets. Post-Soviet Affairs, 29(1):31–55.

Shih, V. (2016). Efforts at Exterminating Factionalism Under Xi Jinping: Will Xi Jin-
  ping Dominate Chinese Politics After the 19th Party Congress? China’s Core Executive.
  Leadership Styles, Structures, and Processes Under Xi Jinping, pages 18–21.

Shih, V., Shan, W., and Liu, M. (2008). Biographical Data of Central Committee Members:
  First to Sixteenth Party Congress. Dataset]. Northwestern University.

Snyder, J. M., Ting, M. M., and Ansolabehere, S. (2005). Legislative bargaining under
  weighted voting. American Economic Review, 95(4):981–1004.

Svolik, M. W. (2012). The politics of authoritarian rule. Cambridge University Press.

Trebbi, F. and Weese, E. (2018). Insurgency and small wars: Estimation of unobserved
  coalition structures. Econometrica, Forthcoming.

Tullock, G. (1971). The paradox of revolution. Public Choice, 11(1):89–99.

Tullock, G. (1987). Autocracy. Springer Science & Business Media.

van de Walle, N. (2013). The path from neopatrimonialism: Democracy and clientelism in
  Africa today. Neopatrimonialism in Africa and Beyond, pages 111–123.




                                            33
Woo, J. (2014). Kim Jong-il’s military-first politics and beyond : Military control mech-
  anisms and the problem of power succession. Communist and Post-Communist Studies,
  47(2):117–125.




                                           34
6   Tables




             35
  Table 1: Inclusiveness in Parliamentary Democracies and Africa

         Share of Voters Not Represented in Government

                         Average 1960 to 2004
         Benin              28.2      Australia          53.2
         Cameroon           17.6      Austria            39.5
         Cote d’Ivoire      13.9      Belgium            41.1
         Congo Kinshasa     28.2      Denmark            60.2
         Gabon              13.7      Finland            40.4
         Ghana              29.8      Germany            45.7
         Guinea              7.5      Iceland            41.5
         Kenya               9.2      Ireland            52.7
         Liberia            50.4      Italy              49.1
         Nigeria            12.0      Luxembourg         41.2
         Republic of Congo 11.1       Netherlands        42.5
         Sierra Leone       15.9      Norway             60.4
         Tanzania           42.9      Portugal           64.9
         Togo               31.9      Sweden             56.4
         Uganda             27.9
         Mean               22.7      Mean               49.2


Table 2: Disproportionality in Parliamentary Democracies and Africa

                      LSq Disproportionality

                         Average 1960 to 2004
           Benin              16.6       Australia     39.4
           Cameroon           11.3       Austria       24.0
           Cote d’Ivoire      13.5       Belgium       27.9
           Congo Kinshasa     13.0       Denmark       42.2
           Gabon              15.6       Finland       29.2
           Ghana              16.4       Germany       36.3
           Guinea             16.6       Iceland       34.9
           Kenya              11.1       Ireland       40.2
           Liberia            38.0       Italy         33.0
           Nigeria            14.2       Luxembourg    22.6
           Republic of Congo 19.6        Netherlands   24.5
           Sierra Leone       17.0       Norway        41.5
           Tanzania           16.1       Portugal      37.8
           Togo               17.4       Sweden        39.6
           Uganda             14.3
           Mean               16.7       Mean          33.8


                                 36
7                         Figures

Figure 1: Relationship between Ethnic Shares and Cabinet Seat Shares in Africa


                                   .5
    Ethnic Group's Cabinet Share




                                   .4



                                   .3



                                   .2



                                   .1



                                   0
                                        0               .1                .2            .3                .4
                                                       Ethnic Group's Population Share

                                            Share of Posts to Non-leader Groups   Nonparametric Fit (Lowess)
                                            Linear Fit                            45 Degree Line




                                                                     37
          Figure 2: Population Share of Ethnicities Not Represented in Government,
                                  African Sample, 1960-2004

                                                                        Benin                 Cameroon                Congo Kinshasa                    Cote d'Ivoire
                                                          100
Pop. Share of Ethnicities Not Represented in Government




                                                          50



                                                            0

                                                                        Gabon                  Ghana                       Guinea                          Kenya
                                                          100



                                                          50



                                                            0

                                                                        Liberia                Nigeria                Republic of Congo                 Sierra Leone
                                                          100



                                                          50



                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                 1960     1980          2004


                                                                       Tanzania                 Togo                      Uganda
                                                          100



                                                          50



                                                            0
                                                                1960    1980      2004 1960    1980       2004 1960        1980           2004




                                                                                                         38
                       Figure 3: Share of Voters Not Represented in Government, Parliamentary
                                                 Democracies, 1960-2004

                                                             Australia                   Austria                   Belgium                    Denmark
                                                100


                                                50


                                                  0
Share of Voters Not Represented in Government




                                                             Finland                    Germany                     Iceland                   Ireland
                                                100


                                                50


                                                  0



                                                               Italy                   Luxembourg                 Netherlands                 Norway
                                                100


                                                50


                                                  0
                                                                                                           1960    1980         2004   1960   1980      2004



                                                             Portugal                   Sweden
                                                100


                                                50


                                                  0
                                                      1960   1980        2004   1960    1980        2004




                                                                                                    39
           Figure 4: Least Squares Disproportionality in Cabinet Allocation, African
                                      Sample, 1960-2004

                                      Benin                 Cameroon                 CongoKinshasa                    Cote d'Ivoire
                         60


                         30


                          0

                                      Gabon                  Ghana                       Guinea                          Kenya
                         60
LSq Disproportionality




                         30


                          0

                                      Liberia                Nigeria                Republic of Congo                 Sierra Leone
                         60


                         30


                          0
                                                                                                               1960      1980         2004


                                     Tanzania                 Togo                      Uganda
                         60


                         30


                          0
                              1960    1980      2004 1960    1980       2004 1960        1980           2004




                                                                       40
            0
                5
                    10
                         15
                              20
                                   25
                                        30
                                             35
                                                                                           0
                                                                                               5
                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                                                                                200




     19                                                                            19
       94                                                                             94                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                      94

     19                                                                            19
       96                                                                             96                                                           19
                                                                                                                                                      96

     19                                                                            19                                                              19
       98                                                                             98                                                              98

     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       00                                                                             00                                                              00

     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       02                                                                             02                                                              02

     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       04                                                                             04                                                              04




41
     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       06                                                                             06                                                              06


     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       08                                                                             08                                                              08
                                                                                                                                                                                      (a) Number of Events




     20                                                                            20                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5: Time Series




       10                                                                             10                                                              10




                                                  (c) Number of Events per Elite
                                                                                                                  (b) Number of Elites per Event




     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       12                                                                             12                                                              12


     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       14                                                                             14                                                              14


     20                                                                            20                                                              20
       16                                                                             16                                                              16
                                                                Figure 6: Elite Importance by Event Sector
                                   (a) Kim Jong Il                                                                                                     (b) Kim Jong Un
     kernel density




                                                                                                                  kernel density
                      3.5      4                                           4.5                    5                                3.5             4              4.5           5             5.5   6
                                      log(# event appearances)                                                                                            log(# event appearances)

                                   Military       Party                          Economy                                                               Military         Party       Economy
42




                                                                                                 (c) Transition
                                                    kernel density




                                                                     3.5                   4              4.5                              5           5.5
                                                                                                  log(# event appearances)

                                                                                               Military         Party                    Economy




                            Note: Restricted to elites with more than thirty event appearances. Kernel bandwidth 0.25.
                                      Figure 7: Elite Importance by Period
kernel density




                   3.5                4                 4.5                5                 5.5              6
                                                    log(# event appearances)

                                          Kim Jong Il         Transition       Kim Jong Un



                 Note: Restricted to elites with more than thirty event appearances. Kernel bandwidth 0.25.




                                                              43
                                                                                                              Figure 8: Samjiyon Attendees Networks
                                                                   (a) Transition                                                                                                               (b) Kim Jong Un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Chun Sam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kim Myong Guk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Choe Chun Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kang Phyo Yong
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ra Chong Il                                                                                                                         U Tong Chuk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kim Rak Gyom


                                                                        Ri Je Gang                                                                                                                                                                                               Pak Jae Gyong

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri Yong Ho

                                                                                     Pak Nam Gi                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri Yong Mu                                 Ri Ul Sol
                                                                                                                                                                                 Rim Kwang Il                 Yun Jong Rin                                   Kim Yong Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Son Chol Ju                                                                                                           Hwang Sun Hui

                                                               Pak Myong Chol                                                                                                                                                        Hyon Chol Hae
                                                                                                  Ri Jae Il                                                                                                             Ri Pyong Sam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O Kuk Ryol
                                                                                                                                                                                  Ryom Chol Song   Pak Jong Chon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ju Kyu Chang             Thae Jong Su

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kim Kyok Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kim Chol Man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kim Jong Gak            Ri Myong Su
                                                                                                                     Pak Jae Gyong                                                              Yun Tong Hyon
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jon Chang Bok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Choe Pu Il
                                                        Kim Myong GukRi    Myong Su Chol Hae
                                                                               Hyon
                                                                                                                                                          Hong Yong Chil
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ri Yong Gil                      Kim Chang Sop Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kim Kuk Thae
                                                                                                                                 Han Kwang Sang                                                                                                                             Pak To Chun


                            Choe Sang Ryo
                                            Jong Myong Do
                                                                   Kim Jong Il
                                                               Kim Won Hong                                                                                       Jang Tong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                               Jo Kyong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                      Ri Pyong Chol

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kim Yong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hyon Yong Kim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CholWon Hong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kim Yong Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Choe Yong Rim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hyon Sang Ju




                                                                        Jang Song
                                                                               Ju KyuThaek                                                                                                                                           Jang Song Thaek
44




                                                    Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kim Su Hak*
                                                                                                                                                                                   O Il Jong
                                                                                      Chang                                                                             Kim Myong Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Choe Ryong Hae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kang Sok Ju                 Kim Kyong Hui
                                                                      Kim Ki Nam
                                                                             Kim Kyong Hui                                                              Pyon In Son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                               Kim Yong Il


                                                                                                                                                                                  Kim Jong Un
                                     Ri Pyong Chol
                       Choe Pu Il
                                                                                                                                                                              Hwang Pyong So                                                                             Kim PhyongKim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HaeYang Gon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mun Kyong Dok
                                               Yun Jong RinKim Jong Gak                              Pak To Chun
                                                                                                          Kim Jong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kim Yong Dae
                                                                                                                                                                      So Hong Chan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ri Sol Ju
                                                                          Choe Ryong Hae                                                                                                              Pak Thae Song
                                                                                                                                          Pak Pong Ju                                                              Ri Jae Il
                        O Il Jong                                                       Kim Yang Gon                                                                                                                                                                                        Bok Pom GiRo Tu Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Choe ThaeKwak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kim Ki Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Su Gil                                              Jang Jong Nam
                                    Kim Yong Chol    Choe          Thae Bok            Thae Jong Su                                                                                                Han Kwang Sang
                                              Ju Sang Song           Ri Yong Ho                                                                                O Kum Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pak Pong Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jo Yon Jun              Jon Yong Nam


                   Choe Kyong Song                                         Kang Sok Ju
                                                                                Kim Yong Chun                                                                                 Kim Yo Jong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ri Jong Mu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Pyong Ho
                                                                                                                    Hong Sok Hyong
                                         Choe Yong Rim U Tong Chuk                                                                                                                                            Choe Hwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ri Ryong Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma Won Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ri Yong Su

                             Kim Yong Dae
                                                                     Kim Phyong Hae                                                                                                     Kim Yong Hun


                                                                                Mun Kyong Dok
                                                                                           Kim Yong Il                                                                                                                   Pak Myong Chol
                                               Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                            Kim Rak Hui
                                      Kim Kuk Thae
                                                                       Kim Chang Sop
                                                             Jon Pyong Ho
                                                                                                     Pak Jong Sun
                                     Paek Se Bong Kim   Yong Nam                                                       Pyon Yong Rip
                                                                                       Ri Thae Nam

                                                              O Kuk RyolRi Yong Mu
                                                                                                          Kim Chol Man


                                                                                              Ri Ul Sol




     Note: Node size represents degree. The darkly coloured nodes represent attendees at the state event on Samjiyon Mountain, November 20, 2013.
                                                                                                            Figure 9: Military v Party Factionalism
                                                                 (a) Transition                                                                                                               (b) Kim Jong Un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kim Chun Sam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Myong Guk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Choe Chun Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kang Phyo Yong
                                                                                                                                                                                              Ra Chong Il                                                                                                                         U Tong Chuk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kim Rak Gyom


                                                                      Ri Je Gang                                                                                                                                                                                               Pak Jae Gyong

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ri Yong Ho

                                                                                   Pak Nam Gi                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri Yong Mu                                 Ri Ul Sol
                                                                                                                                                                               Rim Kwang Il                 Yun Jong Rin                                   Kim Yong Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Son Chol Ju                                                                                                           Hwang Sun Hui

                                                             Pak Myong Chol                                                                                                                                                        Hyon Chol Hae
                                                                                                Ri Jae Il                                                                                                             Ri Pyong Sam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O Kuk Ryol
                                                                                                                                                                                Ryom Chol Song   Pak Jong Chon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ju Kyu Chang             Thae Jong Su

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kim Kyok Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kim Chol Man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kim Jong Gak            Ri Myong Su
                                                                                                                   Pak Jae Gyong                                                              Yun Tong Hyon
                                                                                                                                                                                Jon Chang Bok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Choe Pu Il
                                                      Kim Myong GukRi    Myong Su Chol Hae
                                                                             Hyon
                                                                                                                                                        Hong Yong Chil
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ri Yong Gil                      Kim Chang Sop Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kim Kuk Thae
                                                                                                                               Han Kwang Sang                                                                                                                             Pak To Chun


                          Choe Sang Ryo
                                          Jong Myong Do
                                                                 Kim Jong Il
                                                             Kim Won Hong                                                                                       Jang Tong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jo Kyong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                    Ri Pyong Chol

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kim Yong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hyon Yong Kim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CholWon Hong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kim Yong Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Choe Yong Rim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hyon Sang Ju




                                                                      Jang Song Thaek                                                                                                                                                       Jang Song Thaek
45




                                                  Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kim Su Hak*
                                                                                                                                                                                 O Il Jong
                                                                                      Ju Kyu Chang                                                                    Kim Myong Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Choe Ryong Hae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kang Sok Ju                 Kim Kyong Hui
                                                                    Kim Ki Nam
                                                                           Kim Kyong Hui                                                              Pyon In Son
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                               Kim Yong Il


                                                                                                                                                                                Kim Jong Un
                                   Ri Pyong Chol
                     Choe Pu Il
                                                                                                                                                                            Hwang Pyong So                                                                             Kim PhyongKim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HaeYang Gon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mun Kyong Dok
                                             Yun Jong RinKim Jong Gak                              Pak To Chun
                                                                                                        Kim Jong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Yong Dae
                                                                                                                                                                    So Hong Chan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ri Sol Ju
                                                                        Choe Ryong Hae                                                                                                              Pak Thae Song
                                                                                                                                        Pak Pong Ju                                                              Ri Jae Il
                      O Il Jong                                                       Kim Yang Gon                                                                                                                                                                                        Bok Pom GiRo Tu Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Choe ThaeKwak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kim Ki Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                    Kim Su Gil                                              Jang Jong Nam
                                  Kim Yong Chol    Choe          Thae Bok            Thae Jong Su                                                                                                Han Kwang Sang
                                            Ju Sang Song           Ri Yong Ho                                                                                O Kum Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pak Pong Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jo Yon Jun              Jon Yong Nam


                 Choe Kyong Song                                         Kang Sok
                                                                              Kim Ju
                                                                                  Yong Chun                                                                                 Kim Yo Jong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ri Jong Mu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kim Pyong Ho
                                                                                                                  Hong Sok Hyong
                                       Choe Yong Rim U Tong Chuk                                                                                                                                            Choe Hwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ri Ryong Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma Won Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ri Yong Su

                           Kim Yong Dae
                                                                   Kim Phyong Hae                                                                                                     Kim Yong Hun


                                                                              Mun Kyong Dok
                                                                                         Kim Yong Il                                                                                                                   Pak Myong Chol
                                             Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                          Kim Rak Hui
                                    Kim Kuk Thae
                                                                     Kim Chang Sop
                                                           Jon Pyong Ho
                                                                                                   Pak Jong Sun
                                   Paek Se Bong Kim   Yong Nam                                                       Pyon Yong Rip
                                                                                     Ri Thae Nam

                                                            O Kuk RyolRi Yong Mu
                                                                                                        Kim Chol Man


                                                                                            Ri Ul Sol




     Note: Node size represents degree. Red and green represent affiliation with the party and military, respectively. Gray represents no detected
                                   affiliation. Jang Song Thaek, Kim Jong Il, and Kim Jong Un are not classified
                                                                                       Figure 10: Modularity Maximization Solutions
                                                           (a) Transition                                                                                                               (b) Kim Jong Un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kim Chun Sam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kim Myong Guk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Choe Chun Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kang Phyo Yong
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ra Chong Il                                                                                                                         U Tong Chuk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kim Rak Gyom


                                                                Ri Je Gang                                                                                                                                                                                               Pak Jae Gyong

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ri Yong Ho

                                                                             Pak Nam Gi                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ri Yong Mu                                 Ri Ul Sol
                                                                                                                                                                         Rim Kwang Il                 Yun Jong Rin                                   Kim Yong Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Son Chol Ju                                                                                                           Hwang Sun Hui

                                                       Pak Myong Chol                                                                                                                                                        Hyon Chol Hae
                                                                                          Ri Jae Il                                                                                                             Ri Pyong Sam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O Kuk Ryol
                                                                                                                                                                          Ryom Chol Song   Pak Jong Chon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju Kyu Chang             Thae Jong Su

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kim Kyok Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kim Chol Man
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kim Jong Gak            Ri Myong Su
                                                                                                             Pak Jae Gyong                                                              Yun Tong Hyon
                                                                                                                                                                          Jon Chang Bok
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Choe Pu Il
                                                Kim Myong GukRi    Myong Su Chol Hae
                                                                       Hyon
                                                                                                                                                  Hong Yong Chil
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ri Yong Gil                      Kim Chang Sop Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kim Kuk Thae
                                                                                                                         Han Kwang Sang                                                                                                                             Pak To Chun


                    Choe Sang Ryo
                                    Jong Myong Do
                                                           Kim Jong Il
                                                       Kim Won Hong                                                                                       Jang Tong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jo Kyong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                              Ri Pyong Chol

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kim Yong Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hyon Yong Kim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CholWon Hong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kim Yong Nam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Choe Yong Rim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hyon Sang Ju




                                                                Jang Song
                                                                       Ju KyuThaek                                                                                                                                           Jang Song Thaek
46




                                            Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kim Su Hak*
                                                                                                                                                                           O Il Jong
                                                                              Chang                                                                             Kim Myong Sik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Choe Ryong Hae
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kang Sok Ju                 Kim Kyong Hui
                                                              Kim Ki Nam
                                                                     Kim Kyong Hui                                                              Pyon In Son
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kim Kyong Ok                                                                                               Kim Yong Il


                                                                                                                                                                          Kim Jong Un
                             Ri Pyong Chol
               Choe Pu Il
                                                                                                                                                                      Hwang Pyong So                                                                             Kim PhyongKim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HaeYang Gon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mun Kyong Dok
                                       Yun Jong RinKim Jong Gak                              Pak To Chun
                                                                                                  Kim Jong Un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kim Yong Dae
                                                                                                                                                              So Hong Chan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ri Sol Ju
                                                                  Choe Ryong Hae                                                                                                              Pak Thae Song
                                                                                                                                  Pak Pong Ju                                                              Ri Jae Il
                O Il Jong                                                       Kim Yang Gon                                                                                                                                                                                        Bok Pom GiRo Tu Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Choe ThaeKwak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kim Ki Nam
                                                                                                                                                                              Kim Su Gil                                              Jang Jong Nam
                            Kim Yong Chol    Choe          Thae Bok            Thae Jong Su                                                                                                Han Kwang Sang
                                      Ju Sang Song           Ri Yong Ho                                                                                O Kum Chol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pak Pong Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jo Yon Jun              Jon Yong Nam


           Choe Kyong Song                                         Kang Sok Ju
                                                                        Kim Yong Chun                                                                                 Kim Yo Jong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ri Jong Mu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kim Pyong Ho
                                                                                                            Hong Sok Hyong
                                 Choe Yong Rim U Tong Chuk                                                                                                                                            Choe Hwi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ri Ryong Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma Won Chun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ri Yong Su

                     Kim Yong Dae
                                                             Kim Phyong Hae                                                                                                     Kim Yong Hun


                                                                        Mun Kyong Dok
                                                                                   Kim Yong Il                                                                                                                   Pak Myong Chol
                                       Yang Hyong Sop
                                                                                                                    Kim Rak Hui
                              Kim Kuk Thae
                                                               Kim Chang Sop
                                                     Jon Pyong Ho
                                                                                             Pak Jong Sun
                             Paek Se Bong Kim   Yong Nam                                                       Pyon Yong Rip
                                                                               Ri Thae Nam

                                                      O Kuk RyolRi Yong Mu
                                                                                                  Kim Chol Man


                                                                                      Ri Ul Sol




     Note: Node size represents degree. Colors represent membership in modularity classes computed independently for each network.
