                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          TARGET SETTING AND ALLOCATIVE INEFFICIENCY IN LENDING:
                    EVIDENCE FROM TWO CHINESE BANKS

                                          Yiming Cao
                                        Raymond Fisman
                                            Hui Lin
                                        Yongxiang Wang

                                       Working Paper 24961
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24961


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Yiming Cao, Raymond Fisman, Hui Lin, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Target setting and Allocative Inefficiency in Lending: Evidence from Two Chinese Banks
Yiming Cao, Raymond Fisman, Hui Lin, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24961
August 2018
JEL No. G21,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the consequences of month-end lending incentives for Chinese bank managers. Using
data from two banks, one state-owned and the other partially privatized, we show a clear increase
in lending in the final days of each month, a result of both more loan issuance and higher value
per loan. We estimate that daily end-of-month lending is 95 percent higher in the last 5 days of
each month as a result of loan targets, with only a small amount plausibly attributable to shifting
loans forward from the following month. End-of-month loans are 2.1 percentage points (more
than 16 percent) more likely to be classified as bad in the years following issuance; a back-of-the-
envelope calculation suggests that the incremental loans made in order to hit targets are 26
percent more likely to eventually turn bad. Our work highlights the distortionary effects of target-
setting on capital allocation, in a context in which such concerns have risen to particular
prominence in recent years.

Yiming Cao                                       Hui Lin
Boston University                                School of Business , Nanjing University
Department of Economics                          22 Hankou Road
270 Bay State Road                               Nanjing
Boston, MA 02215                                 China
yiming@bu.edu                                    linhui@nju.edu.cn

Raymond Fisman                                   Yongxiang Wang
Department of Economics                          Marshall School of Business
Boston University                                University of Southern California
270 Bay State Road, 304A                         Los Angeles, CA 90089
Boston, MA 02215                                 Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu
1   Introduction

Many organizations provide performance targets to motivate workers and managers. This
leads to a classic tradeoff – performance targets yield more effort, but possibly at the expense
of distortions to the type of effort. One commonly described concern involves intertemporal
shifts in the quality and quantity of effort in order to hit period-end targets.
    While prior work has shown how target-setting by managers can distort employee effort
or productivity across time, there is no obvious notion of efficiency that one may relate to the
resultant distortion: Oyer (1998), for example, shows how year-end targets lead to differences
over the calendar cycle in the booking of sales revenues, but this does not necessarily imply
efficiency and/or welfare costs.
    In this paper, we study the loan portfolios of two large Chinese banks during the years
1997 - 2010. At the time, Chinese banks were reported to use month- and quarter-end loan
quotas to motivate branch mangers, making it an apt setting to explore the effects of target-
setting incentives on managerial decisions. Further, our focus on banking yields a natural
measure of the efficiency consequences of targeting, since we may measure (ex post) loan
quality as well as quantity.
    Our results are as follows: using two distinct data sets – one aggregated to the city
level and the other at the level of the individual loan – we show that lending increases (via
both more loans and larger loan sizes) as the final day of the month approaches, consistent
with branch managers’ need to hit month-end targets. This pattern is distinct from any
day-of-week or month-of-year effects, and is invariant to a wide range of robustness tests,
including controls for national holidays, as well as the inclusion of branch × month fixed
effects. Consistent with Oyer (1998), we also find a lower rate of lending at the beginning of
each month, though the shortfall does not come close to offsetting the end-of-period increase.
As one easily interpretable measure of the month-end effect, the probability that a branch
makes a loan in the last 5 days of the month is 65 percent higher than the loan probability
for a date in the middle of the month, while the loan probability in the first 5 days of the
month is about 25 percent lower than mid-month. We also find that loans issued in the 5
days of the month are, on average, 15 percent larger than those issued mid-month, leading
to an overall end-of-month lending increase of about 95 percent.
    This pattern suggests that branch managers may not simply be shifting loans forward
in time but rather lowering end-of-month lending standards to meet their targets. We verify
that this is the case using our loan-level data, which includes information on loan quality, to
show that a month-end loan is more than 2.1 percentage points (16 percent) more likely to
be classified eventually as a bad loan.


                                               1
    Overall, our results indicate that the loan quantity targets set by the Chinese banks we
study lead to distortions in the credit market. We present a back-of-the-envelope calculation
which suggests that the effect size is large, with month-end targets resulting in the range
of 4.5 billion dollars’ (RMB 28 billion) worth of additional loan defaults by Chinese banks
annually.
    Most directly, our paper builds on the small body of research which studies empirically
the effects of target setting in organizations. In particular, our work is related to Oyer (1998),
which looks at the consequences of sales targets on the timing of revenues (and also contract
prices) for U.S. manufacturing firms. Our work is also related to the recent work of Liebman
and Mahoney (2017) on year-end budget effects in U.S. government procurement. In a rather
distinct setting, their findings parallel our own — they find that a much larger fraction of
I.T. contracts are awarded at the end of the fiscal year, and that contracts awarded at
year’s end perform much more poorly. Our paper — which we see as complementary to
these earlier efforts — has a number of distinctive elements. In contrast to Oyer (1998),
we are better equipped to explore the efficiency consequences of period-end targeting. The
work of Liebman and Mahoney (2017) does not examine targeting as an incentive tool, but
rather the distortions resulting from “use-it-or-lose-it” budgeting. Further, their analysis is
for public sector budgeting, whereas we examine the behavioral responses of managers in a
pair of banks, one of which is partially privatized, for which profit motives should, at least
in theory, lead to efficiency-enhancing incentives.1
    More broadly, our work connects to the vast literature on the distortionary effects of
performance incentives which spans a range of social scientific disciplines. Within economics,
this work is grounded in the foundational theoretical contributions of, for example, Baker
(1992), Hölmstrom (1979), and Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), while empirical applications
have considered an array of settings in a range of organizational types. The results have
been mixed, with some papers finding that target-setting improves performance without
discernable side-effects on other dimensions of performance (e.g., Propper et al. (2010)),
while others find that incentives lead to distortions in behavior and/or reporting of results
(e.g., Gulati et al. (2016)).
    In the next section, we provide a simple model to capture the essentials of end-of-month
lending incentives faced by bank managers, to highlight the intuition behind our results: a
forward-looking branch manager who faces monthly quantity incentives will lower his lending
standards as month’s end approaches. We describe the setting and the two distinct data sets
   1 Indeed,  one might argue that to the extent that public sector procurement in the U.S. is
captured by special interests, end-of-year budgeting with minimal oversight may be in the best
interests of bidders.


                                                2
we have collected in Section 3. We then present our analysis of the monthly cycle in lending
in Section 4, both for the quantity and quality of loans. Section 5 concludes.


2    A simple model of lending quotas

We present a highly stylized model of credit provision to illustrate the intuition behind the
monthly cycle in loan quantity and quality that, as we discuss in more detail in the next
section, had been posited by the Chinese financial press as resulting from lending incentives
faced by bank managers. Our purpose in providing this model is to highlight that, within
a transparent and straightforward framework, monthly lending cycles may exist even when
the branch manager has correct beliefs about the distribution of loan applicants he will face,
and without the presence of short-sighted lending officers (as in, for example, Cadena et al.
(2011)).
    Consider a two-period model in which loan officers are compensated based on the prof-
itability of the loans they make, p(repayment) ∗ (1 + r) ∗ Loans − Loans. To focus on the
incentives that are particular to lending targets, we assume no adverse selection or moral
hazard. To further simplify our setup, we model the branch manager as receiving a single
loan application of size 1 in each of the two periods (as such, we ignore the intensive margin
of lending, which we will consider in the empirical analysis that follows). Finally, to simplify
even further, we add the assumption that the first period loan must be made on receipt (i.e.,
before observing the second period application), though we show in Appendix A that our
main results go through if the loan may be held in reserve until the second period.
    The setup allows us to add a particularly straightforward lending quota, by requiring that
the bank loan officer make at least one loan across the two periods. We assume a random
arrival of loan applicants drawn from a uniform distribution of repayment probability, [0, 1].
The bank officer knows the distribution of borrower quality, and can observe p (based, for
example, on prior credit history and the loan application).
    It is straightforward that in the absence of the lending quota the loan officer will offer
a loan if and only if p ≥ R1 (where R = 1 + r). In the last period, this will then be the
decision rule if a loan has already been made. If no loan was made in the first period, then
the decision rule is simply p ≥ 0, since the quota is binding.
    The second period expected payoffs then determine the first period decision rule. The
loan officer makes a loan in the first period if and only if πloan > πnoloan , taking into account
the implications for the second period of fulfilling the quota in the first period:
                                      Z   1                  Z   1
                           Rp − 1 +           [Rq − 1]dq >           [Rq − 1]dq
                                          1
                                          R
                                                             0


                                                    3
This simplifies to a cutoff of:
                                                     
                                       ∗  1         1
                                      p =       1−
                                          R        2R
This defines both the probability of loan provision as well as the default probability, since
the two move linearly in opposite directions in our model.
   We may now calculate the probability of a loan in the second period (and as noted, by
extension, the default probability). The probability that no loan is made is given by:
                                                     
                                                ∗    1
                                           (1 − p )
                                                     R
This may easily be compared to the first period probability that no loan is made, as follows:
                                                
                         ∗  1     1  1   1   1     1
                  (1 − p )    = 1− −       <    1−     < p∗
                            R     R 2R2 R    R     R
Thus, the probability of a loan is strictly higher in expectation in the second period (and
the probability of default also strictly higher).
    We emphasize that our objective in providing the model is to clarify how, in the absence
of naive and/or shortsighted agents, a lending quota can nonetheless lead to a lowering of
lending standards across a monthly cycle. In our setting, it is because the loan officer trades
off the option of waiting for the arrival of a higher value borrower in the second period against
the benefits of loosening the quantity constraint earlier on. For reasonable assumptions on
parameters, the benefit of waiting strictly outweighs the cost of having to lend to a low-
quality borrower as the end of the month approaches. As a result of loan officers holding
out for better borrowers by month’s end, the average quality of month-end lending declines,
while the quantity increases as loans are pushed out the door to meet the quota.
    We finally observe that the lending quota increases the probability of lending even in the
first period, relative to the no-quota benchmark. Thus, to the extent that we measure the
effect of quotas based on comparisons in loan quantity and quality across the monthly cycle,
we may underestimate the overall effect of lending quotas.


3    Background and Data

We obtained data from two large Chinese banks, one partially privatized through a public
offering and the other state-owned (referred to as the “private bank” and “state bank”
respectively hereafter).
    Both banks that we study have similar geographic structures. Within each bank, there are


                                                4
two types of branches: one main one for each city (Fen Hang, or main branch, in Chinese) and
smaller outposts located in counties within the city (Zhi Hang, or sub-branch, in Chinese).
For our private bank, all loans outstanding within a city (from both the main branch and
sub-branches) were provided to us as city-level aggregates, so that we have a measure of total
city-level lending for each day. For the state bank, we have data on individual loans, which
we aggregate to the branch-level (separately for the main branch and each sub-branch).
Thus, we will use city-level data in our analysis of the private banks lending patterns, and
branch-level data in our analysis of the state banks lending.
    For the private bank, this leads to a total of about 200 city-level aggregates of loans
outstanding updated daily over the period January 2006 – June 2010. For the state bank,
we obtained a sample of business loans made by each branch (both main and sub-branches),
which number more than 1500. We do not list the precise number of cities or branches for
each dataset as a way of shielding the banks’ identities.
    For the state bank, the loan-level sample was constructed as follows: for each branch,
all firms which obtained a loan during 1998 – 2010 were ranked by average assets over this
period, and divided into terciles (small/medium/large). Within each group, we were provided
with data on more than 20 percent of firms, selected at random (we do not provide the exact
proportion, again as a way of shielding the bank’s identity). For each selected firm, we were
given data on all loans obtained during 1998 – 2010, including information on loan size
and performance. The firms in our sample borrowed frequently from the bank – the median
number of loans by a firm during our sample period is 21, with a maximum of 1374.2
    As with loan officers worldwide, branch managers at the banks we study are assessed
based on the quality and quantity of lending. These evaluations are conducted monthly. From
the private bank we have obtained one “illustrative” evaluation formula, which incorporates
a range of considerations, including costs, revenues, as well as more subjective outcomes
such as employee evaluations. In the particular formula we were provided, “operating scale”
is given a weight of 40 percent, while “operating performance” is given a weight of 60
percent. Non-performing loan rates are given a 10 percent weight within the “operating
performance” criteria while total lending is weighted by 80 percent for “operating scale.”
While these criteria may vary over time and across regions, it indicates the potentially
offsetting incentives to increase lending while maintaining a manageable default rate, though
in this instance with greater weight on increasing lending.
    The formula described above does not explicitly account for monthly quantity targets
   2 To ensure that the large number of loans from a small number of firms at the right tail of the
distribution are not driving our results, we also ran our analysis excluding the top 1 percent of
firms by number of loans. The patterns we document are unaffected.


                                                5
(despite including some weight on quantity). However, the potential existence of such targets
(and associated month-end increases in lending) has been noted by observers in China’s
financial press.3 This issue of month-end targets did not go unnoticed by regulators – near the
end of our sample period, in late September 2009, the China Bank Regulatory Commission
(CBRC) issued a “window guidance” (effectively a recommendation without force of explicit
legal enforcement) against end-of-month lending to hit loan targets. A story reporting on
this window guidance further noted that the CBRC had become concerned in large part
because, in their pursuit of increased lending to meet targets, “credit risk has become a
secondary consideration.”4 The article went on to describe various means by which banks
can boost month-end credit: by accepting higher-risk loans, shortening review times, or even
encouraging borrowers to submit loan applications based on false information. (Given that
the press continued to discuss end-of-month spikes in lending as late as 2012, it appears that
the CBRC’s attempt at policy-via-suasion was unsuccessful.)
    Beyond managerial incentives, there also could be a regulatory rationale for end-of-month
lending. During the period we study, the CBRC had in place a deposit-to-loan ceiling of 75
percent, which was first set in its Commercial Banking Law issued in 1995, and later repealed
under revisions to the law in 2015. Prior to June 2011, the CBRC only examined end-of-
month ratios.5 Because new loans appeared at least initially as deposits at the bank, one
way of inflating the deposit-to-loan ratio in the short run was to issue loans late in the
month, so that the funds were less likely to have been spent on the last day of the month
(relative to loans issued early in the month). Note that this constraint binds at the bank
(rather than branch or sub-branch) level, so that any incentives for increased end-of-month
lending at the branch- or sub-branch-level would have to be the result of informal delegation
to branch managers. It also appears that the deposit constraint was never binding for the
private bank we consider here – across all branches, the deposit-to-loan ratio never rose
above 70 percent during our sample period (we avoid giving a specific maximum as this
would identify the bank). We will thus focus on managerial incentives rather than regulatory
   3 See, for example, “Four big banks pursue small and medium-sized enterprise loans, at the
expense of quality,” People’s Daily, September 12, 2011 (http://finance.people.com.cn/bank/
GB/16558526.html last accessed January 9, 2018), and “Banks pursue risky deposits at month’s
end,” First Financial Daily, September 28, 2012 (http://www.yicai.com/news/2114112.html last
accessed January 9, 2018); titles have been translated from Mandarin by the authors, both here
and below.
   4 “Regulators to strengthen window guidance to suppress banks’ end-of–month red credit,” Se-

curities Times, September 25, 2009 (http://business.sohu.com/20090925/n266989261.shtml
last accessed January 9, 2018)
   5 Realizing that banks may manipulate these end-of-month ratios, in 2011 the CBRC set require-

ments based on the daily average deposit-to-loan ratio within each month.


                                               6
constraints in driving end-of-month lending in our results and discussion below; in closing,
we also note that hitting end-of-month deposit-to-loan ratios has more obvious implications
for loan timing rather than loan quality; the results we present on end-of-month decline in
loan quality in Section 4 further indicate that regulatory incentives are unlikely to be the
main driver of the patterns we document.
    In the next two subsections, we provide a more detailed overview of each data set – first
the private bank’s city-level data set, followed by the state bank’s loan-level data, as well as
its aggregation to the branch level.


3.1       Branch-level data from a private bank
The private bank provided daily balance sheets aggregated to the prefecture (city) level for
the period January 2006 – June 2010. For each city-day, we observe the balance of total
cumulative loans. The outcome we employ to capture efforts at hitting loan quantity targets
is the change in the natural logarithm of cumulative loans outstanding (∆log(Loansct )),
where c indexes city and t the date.
    We present summary statistics for the city-level data in Panel A of Table 1. Over our
sample period, the mean (median) level of city-level cumulative loans outstanding is 106.19
million RMB (43.95 million RMB).6 Observe that the average rate of change in lending is
very low – of the order of 0.056 percent – though this aggregates up to a monthly average of
about 1.7 percent. Additionally, we note that for just over 30 percent of city-day observations,
loans outstanding is unchanged (17 percent if we exclude weekends and national holidays).
As we will see shortly, this rate is much higher for our loan-level data set when we aggregate
up to the branch-day level, since the loan-level data reflect lending to a subset of borrowers,
and only for business (rather than individual) customers.


3.2       Loan-level data from a state bank
The loan-level data set contains a sample of business loans issued by both its main and
sub-branches, spanning the period 1998 – 2010. For each loan contract, we observe its date
of issuance, loan value, loan type, quality classification by the bank, as well as the borrowers’
income statements. Loans with zero value (5 percent of all observations) were dropped from
the sample, which is comprised of a little more than 300,000 individual loans. We aggregated
the loan data to the branch-date level and constructed two data sets to study the loan
quantity responses to month-end incentives. The first is a balanced panel in which branch-
days with no lending are coded as 0. We will use this data set to examine the “extensive”
   6 To   obtain the approximate U.S. dollar value one may divide by 7.

                                                 7
margin of quantity responses (i.e., the probability of any lending on a given date) as well
as the overall effects (i.e., does the total amount of lending increase). The second data set
is comprised of a sub-sample of the balanced panel, restricted to branch-day observations
for which at least one new loan was issued. We use this sample to evaluate the “intensive”
margin of the month-end responses (i.e., does lending increase, via higher loan size or more
loan contracts, conditional on at least one loan being made). In both data sets, we calculated
the number of contracts and the aggregated loan amount for each branch on each date.
    We also use the second data set (branch-day level, conditional on at least one loan) to
evaluate loan quality responses to month-end incentives. Our quality measure is based on
the 5-class loan classification that the bank itself uses, which is updated over the life of the
loan. The final assessment in our data was in July, 2011. To avoid misclassifying loans that
occurred late in the period, when we examine loan quality we limit our sample to loans
issued in 2008 or earlier, to provide at least 2.5 years of repayment history (our results are
insensitive to the particular choice of cutoff). We use the bank’s own “bad loan” classification
as our measure of loan quality: in the 5-class system, any loan in the bottom three categories
– “secondary (ciji)”, “suspicious (keyi)” or “loss (sunshi)” – is classified as bad. The loan
remains as an asset on the bank’s balance sheet until it reaches the “loss” classification,
but loans that fall into the secondary and suspicious categories eventually go into default at
relatively high rates. (The two highest categories are “normal,” in which case interest and
principal repayment are up-to-date, and “special mention (guanzhu)”, which occurs if the
borrower is still able to service the loans currently, but the repayment of loans might be
adversely affected by some factors.)
    Panels B and C of Table 1 contain summary statistics for our loan-level data. In Panel
B, we present summary statistics for a balanced panel of new loans issued, aggregated to
the branch-day (bt) level. As is clear from the mean of P rob(AnyLendingbt ), most branch-
day observations include no new lending. This is in large part because, as noted previously,
our loan data represent only a fraction of the overall lending portfolio of the bank. We will
therefore need to scale up any effect size we measure to account for the fact that we are
estimating month-end effects from a subset of the overall data.
    Panel C of Table 1 shows summary statistics for all branch-day cells when at least one
new loan was issued. This is the subsample we will use to evaluate the “intensive” margin
of response to month-end incentives (i.e., does lending increase (via higher loan size or more
loan contracts), conditional on a loan being made) as well as loan quality responses.




                                               8
4     Results

4.1        End-of-month effect on loan quantity
For changes in loan value, we may utilize both our city-level and loan-level (aggregated to
the branch-level) data sets. Recall that the city-level data set has the advantage of including
all loans outstanding in a city on a given day, whereas the branch-level data set includes
detailed data on all new loans issued to a random sample of the bank’s borrowers. We will
find it reassuring in what follows that we find broadly similar patterns in the data from both
banks.
    We present first the results from our city-level data, using a pair of figures which show
how lending evolves over the monthly cycle. In these figures – and all that follow – we set
d = 0 for the final day of the month, and show in each figure the change in lending ±13
days from the last day of the month. This allows us to capture changes in lending over the
full range of a monthly cycle for months of any length.7 Figure 1a shows ∆log(Loansb,d(t) ,
averaged over all branches b on dates t that fall on the day-of-the-month d(t). The data show
an average growth in lending on the final day of the month (d = 0) that is twice as large
as any other day in the monthly cycle. In these data, we do not observe any evidence of
loan-shifting from the beginning of one month to the end of the previous one, since lending
at the beginning of the month is, if anything, slightly higher than at other times in the
monthly cycle.
    We next look at the pattern of lending over the month after netting out day-of-the-week
fixed effects, month-year fixed effects, and city fixed effects. Specifically, we run the following
regression:


                                   13
                                   X
               ∆log(Loansct ) =           βd ∗ I(d(t) = d) + dowt + ymt + cityc + ct              (1)
                                  d=−13




   The variables of interest, I(d(t) = d), are a set of dummy variables denoting that date t is
on day-of-the-month d; the other regressors include fixed effects for day-of-the-week (dowt ),
month × year (ymt ), and city (cityc ). To calculate confidence intervals on the coefficients,
we cluster at the city-level. Figure 1b plots the regression coefficients, {β−13 , . . . , β13 }, along
with 95 percent confidence intervals. The patterns are virtually identical to those in Figure
    7 It
      makes no difference for our calculation if we widen the excluded category, narrowing the figure
to have, say, ±12 days or ±11 days to estimate end-of-month and beginning-of-month effects.


                                                   9
1a.
    We next turn to a graphical depiction of the patterns in our much richer data on lending
from a state bank. Since the loan-level data provide information on new loan issuance, we
do not have a ready measure of the stock of loans outstanding at each branch to measure
a rate of change in lending. Furthermore, the data are much sparser than for the city-
level data, with 98 percent of branch-date observations taking a value of zero. We thus use
log(1 + N ewLoansbt ) to measure the overall flow of new borrowing at the branch-day level,
so that zero values are defined. (When we look at the intensive margin of lending below,
where we condition on at least one loan being made, we use log(N ewLoansbt ) to measure
borrowing, for ease of interpretation). 8
    We begin by graphing in Figure 2 the coefficients generated by a regression that follows
the form of Equation 1, using log(1 + N ewLoansbt ) as the outcome variable (and clustering
at the branch level for calculating standard errors; our standard errors are smaller in general
if we cluster at the city level).9 As before, we include day-of-the-week (dowt ) and month ×
year (ymt ) fixed effects. We include also city fixed effects.10
    We once again observe an end-of-month spike in lending, this time clearly discernable in
the last few days of the month. We also see a below average rate of lending at the beginning
of the month. In our model, this is the result of more stringent lending standards early on, as
loan officers exercise the option of waiting for higher-quality loan applicants to arrive later in
the month. It could also result from branch managers shifting loans forward in time in order
to make month-end quotas. Note, however, that the latter interpretation necessarily invokes a
very high degree of short-termism for the bank officer, as it exacerbates the target problem in
the following month. (We return to how this might affect the interpretation of our estimates
below, though with the strong caveat that it requires an assumption of extreme short-run
discounting and/or procrastination. Additionally, as we will argue shortly, the shifting of
loans from the following month is harder to reconcile with the monthly cycle in loan quality
that we document in the next section.)
    Our loan-level data allow us to distinguish, at the branch level, between the “extensive”
margin (the likelihood that a loan is made) and “intensive” margin (the size of a loan,
conditional on a loan being made) in generating the patterns we observe over the monthly
   8 The  patterns we document here are virtually identical if we use the arcsinh transformation as
in, for example, Kline et al. (2017).
    9 As with the private bank graphs above, the unconditional patterns over the month are very

similar to those based on regression coefficients. We present this graph in Appendix Figure B2.
   10 Given that quotas are plausibly assigned at the city rather than (county) branch level, we do

not include branch fixed effects in our preferred specifications. In Appendix Figure B1 we show the
monthly cycle with branch fixed effects included, and find that it is virtually identical.


                                                10
cycle. In Figure 3, Panel A, we show the extensive margin using as the outcome in equation 1
an indicator variable which denotes whether any loan was made in branch b at date t. In Panel
B we show the intensive margin, which is generated using log(N ewLoansbt |N ewLoansbt > 0),
i.e., the logarithm of the value of loans issued conditional on at least one issuance. Given that
we condition on a loan being issued in branch b at time t, there are far fewer observations
underlying the figure in Panel B (and also Panels C and D). Panels C and D disaggregate
the intensive margin into end-of-month effects on average loan size and the number of loan
contracts (again, conditional on at least one loan being issued at branch b at time t).11
     In all panels, we observe an end-of-the-month effect, indicating that branches increase
lending toward month’s end through a combination of more loan contracts and larger loan
sizes. The effect is most pronounced for the extensive margin – the month-end coefficient (at
date d = 0) is slightly above 0.02 which, given the sample average of 0.02, implies a doubling
of the probability of making a loan on the last day of the month. The specifications underlying
Panels B – D also imply large end-of-the-month effects. For example, the coefficients in Panel
B indicate that, relative to mid-month, loan issuance is about 40 percent higher (exp(0.34) −
1) on the last day of the month, with the effect coming through both higher loan sizes (Panel
C) and more loans (Panel D). The intensive margin graphs also show a substantial increase
in the size and number of loans at ±10 days (there is also an increase – albeit a relatively
small one – in the extensive margin that is discernable in Panel A). While we did not predict
this feature of the data in formulating our hypotheses, subsequent discussions with bank
employees indicate that, at least informally, managers are also evaluated on the tenth and
twentieth days of each month, which might account for these additional spikes. (Consistent
with these interim evaluations appearing on the tenth and twentieth days of each month,
the latter effect – which appears spread over two days in Panels B and C – appears more
decisively on day 20 if we examine months with 30 and 31 days separately, or adjust our
graphs to go from -5 to 22 days around the end of each month, rather than a ±13 day
window.)
     In Table 2, for both the city- and branch-level data, we present the month-end effect
in a regression framework which will allow us also to generate simple back-of-the-envelope
calculations to gauge the magnitude and potential consequences of incentives to make month-
end loans. Specifically, we focus on lending in the first and last 5 days of the month relative
to mid-month (days 13 – 17) lending:



   ∆log(Loansbt ) = β1 ∗ Last5Daysbt + β2 ∗ F irst5Daysbt + dowt + ymt + Cityc + bt         (2)
  11 We   plot the analogous figures based on the raw data in Appendix Figure B3.


                                                11
    The main variables of interest are Last5Days and F irst5Days, indicator variables which
denote the first and last 5 days of each month.12 The results from specification 2 appear in
columns (1) and (2) for the city- and branch-level data respectively. While the coefficients
for the last-5-days average effect are very similar, it is clear from visual inspection of Figures
1b and 2 that much more of the end-of-month effect in the city-level data is concentrated
on the final day of the month. For the branch-level analysis, the coefficient on F irst5Days
is negative, though only about a third the size of the estimated end-of-month effect (the
beginning-of-month effect is positive for the branch-level data though of negligible magni-
tude).
    Columns (3) – (6) show the results of specifications that take the form of Equation 2,
with our extensive margin measure (Anyloan) and intensive margin measures (log(Loans),
log(Loans/Contracts) and log(Contracts)) as outcome variables. The intensive margin re-
gressions, as noted earlier, include far fewer observations than the extensive margin analyses,
since the outcome variables are defined only for branch-days when loans disbursed are non-
zero. We observe a positive month-end coefficient on both margins, though the implied effect
size is somewhat larger for the extensive margin: the coefficient of 0.013 on Last5Days in
column (3) indicates that the probability of a loan issuance at month’s end is about 65 per-
cent greater than during the middle of the month, whereas the coefficient in the loan amount
specification of 0.17 (column (4)) implies an increase in lending (conditional on at least one
loan) of 18.5 percent (exp(0.17) − 1). When we disaggregate the intensive margin into the
effect on average loan size versus number of loans, we find an effect on both: the coefficient
on the log of average loan size implies that the average end-of-month loan is 7.8 percent
larger than a mid-month loan (column (5), since exp(0.075) − 1 = 0.078), while conditional
on at least one loan issuance, the results in column (6) indicate that the number of loans is
10 percent larger at month’s end.
    Turning to the beginning-of-month effect, for the extensive margin we find (as with the
overall effect) an effect size that is of the opposite sign and about a third of the magnitude
of the end-of-month effect. We do not find any beginning-of-month effect on the intensive
margin.
    It is straightforward to generate a rough sense of overall magnitude of the end-of-month
effect on loan quantity (relative to the sample mean) by simply adding up the extensive and
intensive margin effects in columns (3) and (4): the likelihood of loan issuance increases by 65
  12 Wenaturally generate larger point estimates for daily month-end effects if we use shorter
windows, given the patterns we observe in the figures above.


                                               12
percent (0.013/0.02), and conditional on at least one loan issuance, total lending increases by
approximately 18.5 percent, indicating an overall end-of-month lending effect of just over 95
percent. We reiterate that, in our model, the interpretation of this increase in lending comes
from a loosening of lending standards as the month progresses. The primary alternative
interpretation – that end-of-month lending increases in part through a shift in loans from
the following month – requires further assumptions of extreme short-termism on the part of
loan officers, since it shifts his problem forward (and possibly makes it worse) by a month.
In the next section, we will look at the monthly cycle in credit quality, which will further
help us to rule out the “loan-shifting” hypothesis.13
    To conclude our discussion of the end-of-month effects on credit quantity, we observe
that while there are some distinct elements to the patterns in the two data sets we employ
in this section, our overall takeaway is that both provide evidence of a robust month-end
increase in lending; from our loan-level analysis we may further conclude that this increase
comes from both extensive and intensives margins.


4.2     End-of-month effect on loan quality
There are several primary ways that a bank manager might generate higher month-end
lending. In our illustrative model, the loan officer loosens lending standards at month’s end,
making loans that, on the margin, would not be made were it not for the need to meet a
month-end target. But he may also exert more effort to attract loans at month’s end (and
exert less effort at the beginning of each month), holding lending standards constant. Finally,
as we have noted previously, he may shift the timing of already-approved loans forward, to
make loan issuance occur before month’s end.
   One natural way of distinguishing among these various mechanisms – each of which has
very different consequences for both loan profitability and capital allocation efficiency – is to
look at the monthly cycle in loan quality. We present in Figure 4 the results of a specification
that parallels that of 1, with BadLoanP ct as the outcome variable. As with our intensive
margin graphs, the results in this specification are based on a much smaller number of
  13 There  is a version of loan-shifting that may be consistent with our data thus far, even without
short-term planning, to the extent that bank managers shift loans from the following month to the
current one in order to have the option value of finding new lenders in the next month. In a variant
on the model in the Section 2, this will lead to a (perhaps slightly) lower lending standard in the
next month, which will not be picked up by our analysis of monthly lending cycles. While we cannot
fully rule out this possibility, we make a few observations on its plausibility and implications. First,
this variant on loan-shifting still does not predict an improvement in loan quality at the beginning
of each month, which we document in the next section. Second, this loan-shifting variant does lead
to a decline in lending quality, but is one that would not be discernable via a monthly lending cycle.


                                                  13
observations since our measures of loan quality are only defined for branch-day observations
in which the bank issues at least one loan (recall also that for our credit quality analysis we
limit the sample to loans issued in 2008 or earlier to allow time for a loan to go into arrears).
We show the monthly cycle of the share of bad loans, weighted by loan amount, in Figure 4.
Intriguingly, the pattern roughly parallels that of Figure 2, with an increase in the final few
days of the month in the fraction of lending that ultimately goes into default. In Appendix
Figure B4, we present a pair of alternative specifications to explore the robustness of the
month-end increase in bad loans: Panel A uses the fraction of bad loan contracts (rather
than fraction of loan amount) as the outcome variable, while Panel B shows the pattern for
the raw data rather than estimated coefficients.
    Again paralleling the presentation of results in Section 4.1, we present coefficients derived
from regressions as specified in Equation (2), with our measure of loan quality as the outcome
variable, and including city, day-of-week, and month-year fixed effects. These results appear
in column (7) of Table 2. As already suggested by the patterns in Figure 4, the ratio of bad
loans increases in the final few days of the month, roughly coinciding with the increase in
lending. The estimated beginning-of-the-month effect on credit quality is of the opposite sign
and half the magnitude of the end-of-month effect.
    Overall, the results in this section indicate a month-end decline in loan quality, consistent
with a relaxation of lending standards to make month-end loan quantity targets.


4.3        Additional analyses
4.3.1      Robustness of the main results

In Appendix Tables B2 and B3, we present analyses that demonstrate our results’ robustness
to further controls. For the sake of brevity, we show the robustness via Tables based on
Equation (2) (the patterns we show in the Figures in the previous two sections are also
unaffected by the inclusion of these controls). Table B2 includes dummy variables for each of
China’s national holidays (e.g., Chinese New Year, Labor Day, and the Dragon Boat Festival)
and weekends, a total of approximately 116 days per year.14 Finally, in Table B3 we show the
results of a saturated specification that includes fixed effects for every city × month × year
group. In both tables, still observe significant end-of-month effects for both loan quantity
and quality.
  14 104   weekend days, and 12 national holidays until 2007, and 13 after.




                                                  14
4.3.2   Heterogeneity

We explore several dimensions of heterogeneity in monthly lending cycles in our loan-level
dataset. The first two capture differences in borrower attributes: loans to those with posi-
tive versus negative borrowing history from the bank, and state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
versus non-SOEs. The second captures differences in economic conditions in the areas where
branches are located based on local growth rates.
    Focusing first on past borrower record, we split the sample of loans into those made to
borrowers with at least one previous loan that was eventually classified as bad, and those
made to borrowers who, to that point, had unblemished repayment records. In constructing
this sample, two points are of note. First, our measure of past borrower performance is
generated using our own data, so that loans made prior to 1998 are not incorporated in our
assessment. (While we only have a subset of loans from the bank, recall that for a given
borrower we have their complete loan history, so in this sense our measure of past borrower
behavior does not suffer from missing data in the post-1997 period.) Second, the number of
loans per firm is quite high – as we noted in Section 3, the median number of loans per firm
is 21 – so that the chances that a given borrower has had at least one bad loan increases
over time.15 Note, however, that this should be absorbed by our year-month fixed effects,
and in any event does not present an obvious confound to the monthly cycle that is our main
interest.
    In Figure 5 we split this sample based on whether the borrower had, to that point, had
at least one bad loan. We do this to explore whether some of the month-end decline in loan
quality results from branch managers making loans to borrowers with prior default, who
have already shown themselves to be risky based on previous behavior. In panels (A) – (D),
we present graphs paralleling Figures 2 – 4, showing the monthly cycles for each of these two
loan types. In each graph, for each borrower group, we add back the mean of the dependent
variable so that it is easy to discern whether the groups differ in their overall quantity and
quality of credit. In the quantity figures (Panels A – C), the difference between the two
groups is largely in their levels of borrowing: relatively little lending goes to borrowers with
previous bad loans. The rate of lending to those with poor credit histories is considerably
lower than the fraction of borrowers with bad loans overall — whereas nearly two thirds of
repeat borrowers have at least one loan that is classified as bad, only a quarter of lending
to past borrowers goes to this group, indicating that branch managers do screen on past
  15 Given the high rate of repeat borrowing, there are relatively few loans to first-time borrowers
in our sample. Because of their relative rarity, we omit first-time loans from our analysis, but when
they are included they show similar monthly cycles to the overall sample – an month-end increase
in lending quantity and a month-end decline in lending quality.


                                                 15
behavior in making loan decisions. Our main interest is in comparing the patterns across
the monthly cycle, which is qualitatively similar for each group – each group sees an end-
of-month increase in lending, along both the extensive (Panel B) and intensive (Panel C)
margins.
    Finally, in Panel D we look at bad loan rates for borrowers as a function of prior perfor-
mance. Unsurprisingly, borrower repayment is correlated across loans – the bad loan rate is
much higher for borrowers that had trouble repaying in the past. These patterns suggest that
past repayment is informative of future reliability, so that the relatively low rate of lending
to those with past bad loans is consistent with branch managers applying this information
in screening for loan quality. Again, our main interest is in the monthly cycle in lending,
which appears to show a month-end increase for both borrower types.
    Overall, the differences based on past borrower behavior are consistent with the end-of-
month effects coming from increases in lending to borrowers with both good and bad histories,
rather than substantial shifts across groups with large average differences in reliability.
    We next turn to examining differences in the monthly cycle for SOE versus non-SOE
borrowers. This sample split is related to the previous one in the sense that SOE borrowers
are perceived to be a poorer credit risk for the bank. However, as a state bank it is under
some obligation to provide financing to SOE enterprises. In Figure 6 we present four panels
that parallel those in the preceding figure, splitting the sample by SOE versus non-SOE
borrowers. Several patterns emerge. First, lending to SOEs is far higher than lending to non-
SOEs overall, reflecting the bank’s obligations to the state. Average loan size for non-SOEs
is much higher, since most SOEs are village cooperatives that are relatively small in size.
As anticipated, default rates are far higher for SOEs. Focusing on monthly cycles, however,
we again find no stark differences in end-of-month lending between the two groups. This
finding may be related to the patterns we observed above as a function of borrower history:
a disproportionate share of repeat borrowers with past bad loans are SOEs (96 percent,
whereas SOEs constitute 82 percent of the overall sample), and given that we found no
sharp differences in monthly lending cycles for borrowers as a function of their histories, the
similar monthly patterns for SOEs and non-SOEs is perhaps unsurprising.
    Overall, these findings suggest that, at least insofar as our two divisions of observable
borrower risk are concerned, the increase in end-of-month lending (and decrease in end-of-
month loan quality) is not driven by a disproportionate increase in lending to groups of
riskier borrowers. Rather, loan quotas affect its quality threshold for all borrower classes,
which is what we may expect if the bank has lending obligations to particular borrowers
groups (i.e., SOEs).
    In our final analysis we turn to look at whether lending patterns differ across prefectures


                                              16
with high versus low economic growth rates, by looking at cities at the top versus bottom
quartile growth over the full sample period 1997 – 2010 (data on city-level growth come from
China Cities Statistical Year Book ). This may help us assess the extent to which the bank
conditions its branch-level quotas on local economic conditions and hence credit demand. If
central management fails to adjust for local circumstances, we may expect less end-of-month
lending, since branch managers do not need to boost lending to meet their quotas. If the
requisite level of lending is branch-specific, we expect similar patterns for both high- and
low-growth cities. We show the monthly lending patterns in Figure 7, panels A – D. The data
once again show a consistency in the monthly cycle across groups: end-of-month increases in
loan quantity and the bad loan rate appear for branches in both high and low growth cities.


4.4    Estimating the overall impact of monthly lending incentives
       on loan quality and quantity
We may perform a set of simple back-of-the-envelope calculations to gauge the impact of
end-of-month targets on the quality of the bank’s loan portfolio. We begin by reiterating
that, as we noted near the end of Section 2, our estimates plausibly provide a lower bound
on the impact of targeting on loan quality. This will be the case if, as in our model, targeting
lowers loan officers’ quality thresholds even at the beginning of the month.
    Our calculation in Section 4.1 suggests that lending quotas lead to a total increase in the
quantity of lending at the end of the month of approximately 95 percent (a combination of
both the extensive and intensive margin effects), relative to the middle of the month. We
can similarly obtain an estimate of 25 percent for the decrease in lending at the beginning
of the month. If we take this latter figure as an upper bound of what lending would be in
the absence of loan targeting, we get a lower bound for the end-of-month increase in lending
from targeting of 160 percent (1.95/0.75); scaled by the end-of-month period of 5 days, this
corresponds to an extra 27 percent in lending each month.
    We may similarly estimate the decline in loan quality that comes from end-of-month
targets as the difference between the end- and beginning-of-month coefficients in column
(7) of Table 2, i.e., 0.021. Relative to the sample average of bad loans of approximately
12.9 percent, this represents a 16 percent end-of-month increase. The bad loan rate of the
incremental loans that result from lending targets is much higher than 16 percent: If we
assume that, in the absence of targets, lending quantity and quality would be the same in
the first few days of the month, then the fraction of bad loans for the incremental lending
that takes place at the end of the month, L, is defined by (1.6 ∗ L + 1 ∗ 0.129)/2.6 = 0.15, so
that L = 0.163, or more than 26 percent higher than the sample average of 0.129.


                                              17
    We may finally calculate the overall effect that end-of-month lending has on the bank’s
overall loan portfolio. Accounting for both the higher quantity of lending as well as the
higher bad loan rate at the end of the month, we obtain an overall bad loan rate (relative
to a baseline of 0.129) of (0.15 ∗ 2.6 ∗ 5 + 0.129 ∗ 1 ∗ 25)/(2.6 ∗ 5 + 1 ∗ 25) = 0.136. Thus,
end-of-month lending incentives increases the bank’s bad loan rate by 0.7 percent.
    If we account for the total loan portfolio of the bank, this multiplies up to RMB 3.5
billion in bad loans annually, given the bank’s lending volume of approximately RMB 500
billion.16 To the extent that the bank we study is representative of Chinese banks in general,
monthly lending quotas may account for an extra RMB 28 billion in bad loans (based on the
reported change in cumulative loans outstanding in China overall in 2010, which was RMB
4 trillion).
    In closing, we reiterate that our estimates in this section may be seen as a lower bound
on the impact of targets on the quantity and quality of the bank’s loan portfolio. If we
incorporate the middle-of-month increment in bad loans relative to the beginning-of-month
benchmark, our estimate will naturally be higher, and it will be higher still if we consider
the possibility that targets also lead to more lending even at the beginning of the month,
as discussed in our model section. Thus, the estimates above should be seen as a plausible
lower bound on the actual impact of targets on loan quality.


5      Conclusion

In this paper, we document a clear monthly cycle in lending at two large Chinese banks:
credit quantity increases sharply near the end of each month, and lending quality declines.
We suggest that these patterns are most easily explained by bank managers’ efforts to hit
monthly lending targets, as captured in the simple illustrative model we provide to motivate
our analysis. The effects we document are very large – a back-of-the-envelope calculation
suggests that lending is 160 percent higher in the last 5 days of each month as a result of
loan targets, and the fraction of bad loans among the incremental loans made to hit monthly
targets is more than 26 percent higher than the sample mean.
    While it is beyond the scope of our data and analysis to make any decisive welfare
calculation (we do not capture the net benefits that come from motivating Chinese banks
to issue loans at a higher rate), our results indicate that target-setting to increase loan
quantity contributes to the capital misallocation that has raised concerns about the longer-
    16 This
         figure is estimated based on average annual lending value over the period 1997 – 2010 in
the sample, which is RMB 100 billion. Given that we sample 20 percent of borrowers, we multiply
by 5 to obtain the estimated total loan portfolio of the bank.



                                               18
term sustainability of China’s economic boom. While the overall increment in bad loan
rate we calculate is small, when aggregated over banks’ total loan portfolios the resultant
misallocation runs into the billions of dollars, from this one channel alone. In doing so,
we contribute to the small body of work on the efficiency tradeoffs inherent in designing
managerial incentives.




                                            19
References
Baker, G. P. (1992). Incentive contracts and performance measurement. Journal of political
  Economy, 100 (3), 598–614.
Cadena, X., Schoar, A., Cristea, A. and Delgado-Medrano, H. M. (2011). Fight-
  ing procrastination in the workplace: An experiment. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.
Gulati, R., Raffaelli, R. and Rivkin, J. W. (2016). Does what we do make us who
  we are? organizational design and identity change at the fbi. In Academy of Management
  Proceedings, Academy of Management, vol. 2016, p. 16187.
Hölmstrom, B. (1979). Moral hazard and observability. The Bell journal of economics,
  pp. 74–91.
Holmstrom, B. and Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive
  contracts, asset ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization,
  7, 24–52.
Kline, P., Petkova, N., Williams, H. and Zidar, O. (2017). Who Profits from Patents?
  Rent-sharing at Innovative Firms. Tech. rep., IRLE Working Paper.
Liebman, J. B. and Mahoney, N. (2017). Do expiring budgets lead to wasteful year-
  end spending? evidence from federal procurement. American Economic Review, 107 (11),
  3510–49.
Oyer, P. (1998). Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The effect on business
  seasonality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1), 149–185.
Propper, C., Sutton, M., Whitnall, C. and Windmeijer, F. (2010). Incentives and
  targets in hospital care: evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Public Economics,
  94 (3), 318–335.




                                            20
6    Figures and Tables

                   Figure 1: Log Changes in Loan Value (City-level data)



                                 .0015
                   ln(change rate in loan value)
                      .0005      0      .001




                                                   -15        -10        -5             0           5       10         15
                                                                        Day (relative to the month end)


                                                                          (a) Raw plots
                                 .0015
                                 .001
                   Coefficients
                     .0005       0
                                 -.0005




                                                   -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                            Day (relative to the month end)


                                                                      (b) Coefficients plots

Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are excluded from the raw data
graph; days outside of the +/-13 day window are the omitted category in the coefficient plots,
which are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the city level.




                                                                                  21
       Figure 2: Value of New Lending Issued, Coefficients Plots (Branch-level data)


           .3
           .2
      Coefficients
        .1 0
           -.1




                     -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                              Day (relative to the month end)


Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the omitted category; coefficient
plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects; standard errors are
clustered at the branch level.




                                                    22
                                     Figure 3: Extensive and Intensive Margins of New Loan Issued




                                                                                                             .4
              .02




                                                                                                             .3
              .015




                                                                                                                 .2
     Coefficients




                                                                                                       Coefficients
   .005      .01




                                                                                                       .1
              0




                                                                                                             0
              -.005




                                                                                                             -.1
                      -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                          -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                               Day (relative to the month end)                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)



                       (a) Extensive: P rob(Anylending)                                              (b) Intensive: log(N ewLoans|N ewLoans > 0)




                                                                                                             .2
              .2




                                                                                                             .15
              .1




                                                                                                                  .1
   Coefficients




                                                                                                        Coefficients
                                                                                                       .05
              0




                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                             -.05
              -.1




                      -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                          -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                               Day (relative to the month end)                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)



                        (c) Intensive: log(AverageSize)                                                                    (d) Intensive: log(Contracts))

Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the omitted category; coefficient
plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects; standard errors are
clustered at the branch level.




                                                                                                23
                 Figure 4: Share of Bad Loans (weighted by loan amount), Coefficients Plots


                                                    .03
      Coefficients (Share of Bad Loan (Loan value))
      -.02     -.01       0       .01     .02




                                                          -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                                   Day (relative to the month end)


Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the excluded category; coefficient
plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects; standard errors are
clustered at the branch level.




                                                                                         24
                                           Figure 5: Firms with good vs bad previous history, Coefficients Plots




                                                                                                                                       .03
                      .4




                                                                                                                                                  .025
       Coefficients (Log(1+loan size))




                                                                                                                         Coefficients (Any lending)
                               .3




                                                                                                                                          .02
                     .2




                                                                                                                        .01      .015
         .1




                                                                                                                                       .005
                      0




                                         -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                           -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                   Day (relative to the month end)

                                                               Good History            Bad History                                                                               Good History            Bad History



                                                      (a) Overall Effects                                                                                            (b) Extensive Margin
                      14.8




                                                                                                                                       .25
                                                                                                                        Coefficients (Share of bad loan)
       Coefficients (Log of loan size)
                                14.6




                                                                                                                                               .2
                    14.4




                                                                                                                                .15
        14.2




                                                                                                                                       .1
                      14




                                         -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                           -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                   Day (relative to the month end)

                                                               Good History            Bad History                                                                         Good History Firms            Bad History Firms



                                                    (c) Intensive Margin                                                                                                        (d) Quality

Note: good-history firms are defined as firms with unblemished repayment records up to that
points; bad-history firms are defined as those with at least one previous loan that had been
classified as bad up to that points. Dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the
excluded category; coefficient plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed
effects; standard errors are clustered at the branch level.




                                                                                                                   25
                                                                Figure 6: SOE vs Non-SOE Firms, Coefficients Plots




                                                                                                                                          .03
                                       .4
       Coefficients (Log(1+loan size))




                                                                                                                           Coefficients (Any lending)
                             .3




                                                                                                                                              .02
                    .2




                                                                                                                             .01
        .1             0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                            -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                           -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                     Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                   Day (relative to the month end)

                                                                      SOEs             Non-SOEs                                                                                         SOEs             Non-SOEs



                                                         (a) Overall Effects                                                                                            (b) Extensive Margin
                       15.5




                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                           Coefficients (Share of bad loan)
       Coefficients (Log of loan size)




                                                                                                                                                     .15
                              15




                                                                                                                                          .1
            14.5




                                                                                                                             .05
                       14




                                                                                                                                          0




                                            -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                           -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                     Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                   Day (relative to the month end)

                                                                      SOEs             Non-SOEs                                                                                         SOEs             Non-SOEs



                                                       (c) Intensive Margin                                                                                                        (d) Quality

Note: SOE firms are defined as firms owned or controlled by the state. Dates more than +/-13
days away from the month end are the excluded category; coefficient plots are conditional on
year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects; standard errors are clustered at the branch level.




                                                                                                                      26
                                                 Figure 7: High Growth vs Low Growth Cities, Coefficients Plots

                     1




                                                                                                                                        .06
       Coefficients (log(1+loan size))




                                                                                                                                                   .05
                                  .8




                                                                                                                           Coefficients (any lending)
                                                                                                                                          .04
                       .6




                                                                                                                                 .03
          .4




                                                                                                                        .02
                     .2




                                                                                                                                        .01
                                         -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                              -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                      Day (relative to the month end)

                                                   Top quartile GDP growth           Bottom quartile GDP growth                                                         Top quartile GDP growth           Bottom quartile GDP growth



                                                       (a) Overall Effects                                                                                               (b) Extensive Margin
                     15.4




                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                        Coefficients (Share of bad loan)
                               15.2
         Coefficients (loan size)




                                                                                                                                                .08
                   15




                                                                                                                           .04        .06
       14.8




                                                                                                                                        .02
                     14.6




                                         -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13                                              -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                  Day (relative to the month end)                                                                                      Day (relative to the month end)

                                                   Top quartile GDP growth           Bottom quartile GDP growth                                                         Top quartile GDP growth           Bottom quartile GDP growth



                                                     (c) Intensive Margin                                                                                                          (d) Quality

Note: high-growth cities are defined as cities with GDP growth rates above the sample’s 75
percentile value in a given year; low-growth cities are defined as those with GDP growth rates
below the sample’s 25 percentile value in a given year; the set of high- and low-growth cities vary
across years. Dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the excluded category;
coefficient plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects; standard errors
are clustered at the branch level.




                                                                                                                   27
                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                  Mean    Median     Std        Obs
                             Panel A: City-level data
Cumulative Loan Value (million RMB)            106.19       43.95   195.00    499,346
Change Rate in Lending (%)                     0.056          0      1.13     494,241
         Panel B: Loan-level data aggregated to the branch level (balanced)
Loan Value (million RMB)                         0.13      0        6.39 10,137,096
Prob(Any Lending) (%)                            1.82      0       13.37 10,137,096
  Panel C: Loan-level data aggregated to the branch level   (unbalanced sub-sample)
Loan Value (million RMB)                         7.23       2.00     46.9     183,744
Average Loan Size (million RMB per contract) 5.60           1.50     41.1     183,744
Number of Contracts                              1.50       1.00     2.55     183,744
Share of Bad Loans (%)                          12.90         0     32.48     183,744
  Notes.
  The branch-level summary statistics in Panel A are based on city-level daily aggregates
  of loans outstanding to a partially privatized bank during the years 2006 – 2010. The
  loan-level data in Panels B and C are based on the daily new loans issued to a randomly
  selected subset of borrowers from a state bank during the years 1997 – 2010, aggregated
  to the subbranch level. In Panel B, branch-day observations in which there was no
  lending to these borrowers are coded as zeros. In Panel C branch-day observations with
  no lending are excluded. See the text for further details on the sample construction
  and detailed variable definitions.




                                          28
                                         Table 2: Loan Quantity and Quality Responses to Month End Incentives

                                                                                    Dependent Variables:
                                                                           Quantity Response                                                Quality Response
                         ∆log(Loans)         log(1 + N ewLoans)   AnyLoan       log(N ewLoans)   log(Loans/Contracts) log(Contracts)       Share of Bad Loans
                               (1)                  (2)              (3)              (4)                    (5)                (6)                 (7)
                                     ∗                 ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                     ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗
      Last 5 days            0.179                0.188            0.013           0.170                   0.075             0.095               0.014∗∗∗
                            (0.0785)             (0.00355)        (0.000247)       (0.0111)                (0.0105)         (0.00373)           (0.00276)
      First 5 days           0.000∗              -0.068∗∗∗         -0.005∗∗∗         0.005                   0.008            -0.003             -0.007∗
                          (0.0000751)            (0.00216)        (0.000151)       (0.0129)                (0.0121)         (0.00412)           (0.00307)
      R2                     0.006                 0.027             0.027           0.488                  0.557              0.144              0.315
      Observations          243175                4992658          4992658          95236                   95236             95236               82087
      Sample                   A                     B                B                C                      C                 C                   C
      City FEs                Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes
      Year-month FEs          Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes
      Day-of-week FEs         Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes
      Notes.
29




      Column (1) uses city level data (the sample from Table 1(A)), and the coefficients and standard errors have been multiplied by 1000 for ease of exposition;
     columns (2) – (3) use the balanced panel of loans aggregated to the branch level, in which days without any recorded loans are coded as zero (the sample
     from Table 1(B)); columns (4) – (7) use the sub-sample of the balanced panel that includes only branch-day observations when at least one loan was
     issued (the sample from Table 1(C)).
      The reference groups are days (the 13th – 17th ) in the middle of the month.
      OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the branch level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
A     Appendix: Modeling Delayed Lending
The model in Section 2 assumes that a branch manager cannot defer a loan application until
later, effectively removing the option value of holding a potential loan in reserve in case later
loan applications are of low quality. In this appendix, we present a model which highlights
that, as long as there is some probability that a deferred loan is no longer available at the
point at which the quality of later loan applicants is realized, we still obtain the model’s
main intuition that loan quantity increases over the month and loan quality decreases.
    We again assume a two-period model where the branch manager receives a single loan
application of size 1 in each period. We depart from the baseline model (in which lending
decisions have to be made at the time of loan application), we allow the branch manager
(if he wishes) to defer a decision on the first-period application until the next period. If the
manager choose to postpone the decision, she risks losing the application with probability
β. This may reflect, for example, the risk that a borrower switches to another lender, or
the termination of the project due to the failure to obtain funds in time. However, with
probability (1 − β), the manager will have two applicants in hand to choose from in the
second period.
    The decision rule for the second period depends on the first-period lending decision, and
also whether the first-period loan is still available. As in our baseline model, if a loan has
already been made in the first period, the manager makes a second loan if and only if p > R1 .
If no loan was made during the first period, the manager offers a loan to the higher quality
applicant if the first-period applicant is still available, and to any second-period applicant
with p > 0 if the first-period loan application is unavailable.
    In the first period, the branch manager offers a loan if and only if πloan > πnoloan :
                Z 1                  Z 1                                    Z 1
     Rp − 1 +       (Rq − 1)dq > β ·     (Rq − 1)dq + (1 − β)[(Rp − 1)p +       (Rq − 1)dq]
                1
                R
                                      0                                      p


This simplifies to
                            (1 − β)(Rp)2 − 2R(RP ) + 2R − 1 6 0
.
    We first notice that the benchmark model we presented in Section 2 is a special case of
this expression, in which β = 1, leading to the same cutoff of p∗ = R1 (1 − 2R
                                                                             1
                                                                               ) as before.
    With the option of delay in lending, the manager will set a higher cutoff p∗∗ in the first
period. To see this, we notice from the first-period decision rule that

                          0 6 (1 − β)(Rp∗∗ )2 = 2R(Rp∗∗ ) − 2R + 1
    which simplifies to
                                     1       1
                                    p∗∗ >
                                       (1 −    ) = p∗
                                     R      2R
   Now we can compare the probability of no lending in the first period (p∗∗ ) and in the
second period ((1 − p∗∗ ) R1 ):



                                               30
                                          1            1
                             (1 − p∗∗ )     6 (1 − p∗ ) < p∗ 6 p∗∗
                                          R            R
.
    Again, the probability of a loan (as well as the probability of default) is strictly higher
in expectation in the second period.




                                                31
B    Appendix Figures and Tables


           .3
           .2        Figure B1: Value of New Lending Issued with Branch Fixed Effects
      Coefficients
        .1 0
           -.1




                     -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                              Day (relative to the month end)


Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are the omitted category; coefficient
plots are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and branch fixed effects; standard errors are
clustered at the branch level.




                                                    32
                                    Figure B2: Value of New Lending Issued (Branch-level data)


                  18
      log(number of loan value)
         14       12      16




                                  -15       -10        -5             0           5     10       15
                                                      Day (relative to the month end)


Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are excluded from the raw data
graph.




                                                                33
          Figure B3: Extensive and Intensive Margins of New Loans Issued, Raw plots


                             80




                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                     log(Value of new loans per day)
       Number of branches that lend




                                                                                                                                              18.5
                           60




                                                                                                                                   18
          40




                                                                                                                      17.5
                             20




                                                                                                                                         17
                                                        -15   -10    -5             0           5     10   15                                                    -15   -10    -5             0           5     10   15
                                                                    Day (relative to the month end)                                                                          Day (relative to the month end)



                                                        (a) Extensive: P rob(anylending)                         (b) Intensive: log(N ewLoan|N ewLoan > 0)
                                                 15.4




                                                                                                                                         3.8
       log(Number of new loan contracts per day)




                                                                                                                     log(Number of new loan contracts per day)
                                        15.2




                                                                                                                                             3.4       3.6
                               15




                                                                                                                                    3.2
                    14.8




                                                                                                                           3
           14.6




                                                                                                                                         2.8
                             14.4




                                                        -15   -10    -5             0           5     10   15                                                    -15   -10    -5             0           5     10   15
                                                                    Day (relative to the month end)                                                                          Day (relative to the month end)



                                                        (c) Intensive: log(AverageSize)                                                                            (d) Intensive: Log(Contracts)

Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are excluded from the raw data
graph.




                                                                                                                34
              Figure B4: Alternative Presentations of Loan Quality Response




                                                              .03
               Coefficients (Share of Bad Loan (Contract number))
                -.02       -.01       0      .01      .02




                                                                    -13-12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
                                                                                             Day (relative to the month end)


                                                                    (a) Share of Bad Loans (unweighted), Coefficients Plots
                                       .17
               Share of Bad Loan (Loan value)
               .14        .15        .16
                                       .13




                                                                    -15        -10        -5             0           5       10         15
                                                                                         Day (relative to the month end)


                                             (b) Share of Bad Loans (weighted by loan amount),Raw Plots

Note: dates more than +/-13 days away from the month end are excluded from the raw data
graph; days outside of the +/-13 day window are the omitted category in the coefficient plots,
which are conditional on year-month, day-of-week, and city fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the branch level.



                                                                                                   35
                        Table B1: Loan Quantity and Quality Responses Relative to All Other Days of the Month

                                                                                 Dependent Variables:
                                                                        Quantity Response                                                Quality Response
                         ∆log(Loans)    log(1 + N ewLoans)     AnyLoan       log(N ewLoans)   log(Loans/Contracts) log(Contracts)       Share of Bad Loans
                              (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)                  (5)                 (6)                 (7)
                                                    ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗
      Last 5 days           0.121              0.173           0.012             0.123               0.038                0.085               0.016∗∗∗
                           (0.0694)           (0.00320)       (0.000224)        (0.00863)           (0.00800)            (0.00314)           (0.00207)
      First 5 days           0.000            -0.084∗∗∗        -0.006∗∗∗        -0.042∗∗∗            -0.026∗∗            -0.016∗∗∗             -0.005
                          (0.0000618)         (0.00186)       (0.000130)        (0.0106)            (0.00989)            (0.00329)           (0.00243)
      R2                     0.005              0.026            0.025            0.490                0.554               0.117               0.313
      Observations          494241            10131984         10131984          183744               183744              183744              158762
      Sample                   A                 B                 B                C                    C                   C                   C
      City FEs                Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
      Year-month FEs          Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
      Day-of-week FEs         Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
      Notes.
36




      Column (1) uses branch level data (the sample from Table 1(A)), and the coefficients and standard errors have been multiplied by 1000 for ease of
     exposition; columns (2) – (3) use the balanced panel of loans aggregated to the branch level, in which days without any recorded loans are coded as zero
     (the sample from Table 1(B)); columns (4) – (7) use the sub-sample of the balanced panel that includes only branch-day observations when at least one
     loan was issued (the sample from Table 1(C)).
      The reference groups are all other days not in the first or last 5 days.
      OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the branch level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                    Table B2: Loan Quantity and Quality Responses Controlling for Holidays

                                                                                  Dependent Variables:
                                                                         Quantity Response                                               Quality Response
                          ∆log(Loans)    log(1 + N ewLoans)    AnyLoan        log(N ewLoans) log(Loans/Contracts) log(Contracts)        Share of Bad Loans
                              (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)                    (5)              (6)                 (7)
                                    ∗               ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                     ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
      Last 5 days            0.188             0.189            0.013            0.168                   0.074            0.094               0.014∗∗∗
                            (0.0782)          (0.00355)        (0.000247)        (0.0111)                (0.0105)        (0.00374)           (0.00277)
      First 5 days          0.000∗∗           -0.055∗∗∗         -0.004∗∗∗         -0.001                   0.004           -0.005             -0.007∗
                          (0.0000781)         (0.00207)        (0.000144)        (0.0129)                (0.0121)        (0.00415)           (0.00308)
      R2                     0.006              0.028             0.027            0.488                  0.557             0.144              0.315
      Observations          243175             4992658          4992658           95236                   95236            95236               82087
      Sample                   A                  B                B                 C                      C                C                   C
      Holiday Indicator       Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                 Yes
      City FEs                Yes
      City FEs                Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                 Yes
      Year-month FEs          Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                 Yes
37




      Day-of-week FEs         Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes              Yes                 Yes
      Notes.
      Column (1) uses branch level data (the sample from Table 1(A)), and the coefficients and standard errors have been multiplied by 1000 for ease of
     exposition; columns (2) – (3) use the balanced panel of loans aggregated to the branch level, in which days without any recorded loans are coded as zero
     (the sample from Table 1(B)); columns (4) – (7) use the sub-sample of the balanced panel that includes only branch-day observations when at least one
     loan was issued (the sample from Table 1(C)).
      The reference groups are days (the 13th – 17th ) in the middle of the month.
      OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the branch level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                  Table B3: Loan Quantity and Quality Responses with Year-month-city FEs

                                                                                         Dependent Variables:
                                                                                Quantity Response                                         Quality Response
                                           log(1 + N ewLoans)     AnyLoan     log(N ewLoans) log(Loans/Contracts) log(Contracts)         Share of Bad Loans
                                                    (1)              (2)            (3)                  (4)                  (5)                (6)
                                                      ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗
      Last 5 days                                 0.188           0.013          0.141                 0.053                0.087               0.009∗
                                                 (0.00311)       (0.000213)      (0.0149)              (0.0136)            (0.00539)          (0.00367)
      First 5 days                               -0.068∗∗∗        -0.005∗∗∗       0.023                 0.023                -0.000             -0.007
                                                 (0.00222)       (0.000154)      (0.0176)              (0.0163)            (0.00580)          (0.00426)
      R2                                           0.060            0.059         0.673                 0.717                0.409               0.551
      Observations                                4992658         4992658         94290                 94290                94290              81334
      Sample                                        B                 B              C                    C                    C                  C
      Y ear × M onth × City(branch) FEs            Yes               Yes            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
      Day-of-week FEs                              Yes               Yes            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
      Notes.
      Columns (1) – (2) use the balanced panel of loans aggregated to the branch level, in which days without any recorded loans are coded as zero (the sample
38




     from Table 1(B)); columns (3) – (6) use the sub-sample of the balanced panel that includes only branch-day observations when at least one loan was issued
     (the sample from Table 1(C)).
      The reference groups are days (the 13th – 17th ) in the middle of the month.
      OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the branch level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
