NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN INVESTOR INCENTIVES AND CONSUMER INTERESTS DIVERGE:
PRIVATE EQUITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Charlie Eaton
Sabrina Howell
Constantine Yannelis
Working Paper 24976
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24976

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018, Revised April 2019

We are grateful to discussants Pierre Azoulay, Michael Ewens, Jonah Rockoff, and Richard
Thakor and also for comments from Raji Chakrabarti, Francesca Cornelli, David Deming,
Michael Dinerstein, Michael Ewens, Caroline Hoxby, Will Gornall, Arpit Gupta, Justine
Hastings, Steve Kaplan, Larry Katz, Theresa Kuchler, Alexander Ljungqvist, Holger Mueller,
Thomas Philippon, Larry Schmidt, Antoinette Schoar, Albert Sheen, Doug Staiger, Lesley
Turner, Jeff Wurgler, David Yermack and seminar participants at the NBER Labor Studies and
Education Summer Institute, MIT Sloan, Harvard Business School, Yale School of Management,
Berkeley Haas School of Business, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the NBER
Entrepreneurship meeting, the FMA Napa Conference, the SFS Cavalcade, and NYU Stern. We
are also grateful to Suzanne Chang, Dalya Elmalt and Katerina Nikalexi for superb research
assistance. Sabrina Howell thanks the Kauffman foundation for generous financial support, and
thanks the Stern Infrastructure Initiative for Preqin data. Constantine Yannelis thanks the Fama
Miller Center and the Becker Friedman Institute for generous financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Charlie Eaton, Sabrina Howell, and Constantine Yannelis. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When Investor Incentives and Consumer Interests Diverge: Private Equity in Higher Education
Charlie Eaton, Sabrina Howell, and Constantine Yannelis
NBER Working Paper No. 24976
August 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. G24,G38,H52,I2,J01
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how private equity buyouts create value in higher education, a sector with
opaque product quality and intense government subsidy. With novel data on 88 private equity
deals involving 994 schools, we show that buyouts lead to higher tuition and per-student debt.
Exploiting loan limit increases, we find that private equity-owned schools better capture
government aid. After buyouts, we observe lower education inputs, graduation rates, loan
repayment rates, and earnings among graduates. Neither school selection nor student body
changes fully explain the results. The results indicate that in a subsidized industry maximizing
value may not improve consumer outcomes.
Charlie Eaton
University of California, Merced
Department of Sociology
5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95348
ceaton2@ucmerced.edu

Constantine Yannelis
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
constantine.yannelis@chicagobooth.edu

Sabrina Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24976

1

Introduction

Private equity buyouts are known to increase firm value (Kaplan 1989, Boucly, Sraer, and
Thesmar 2011, Davis et al. 2014).1 How they create value may differ across industries in ways
that have important implications for target firm stakeholders. Prior work has identified at least
three mechanisms through which private equity buyouts increase firm value: 1) Reducing
financial constraints (Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar 2011); 2) Improving operational efficiency
(Davis, Haltiwanger, Handley, Jarmin, Lerner, and Miranda 2014, Bernstein and Sheen 2016);
and 3) Adopting information technology (Agrawal and Tambe 2016).2 Shleifer and Summers
(1988) identify a fourth potential mechanism in the context of hostile takeovers: the breach of
implicit contracts with stakeholders.

In competitive industries where incentives are aligned

between stakeholders, the first three mechanisms enable private equity buyouts to create value for
both consumers and equity holders, as Bernstein and Sheen (2016) and Fracassi, Previtero, and
Sheen (2017) find in the case of fast food restaurants and big box retail stores. Conversely, in
sectors with intensive government subsidy and opaque product quality, value for equity holders
may come at the expense of consumers, as a result of the fourth mechanism.
We study private equity buyouts in post-secondary education, where information frictions
combined with government loan guarantees and direct subsidies contribute to incentive
misalignment among stakeholders. We examine value creation and its consequences among three
stakeholders. Proxies for value creation from the equity holder perspective include enrollment
and profits.

Proxies for value creation for the government (taxpayers) and for consumers

(students) include graduation rates, earnings, loan burdens and repayment rates, and tuition. We
show that private equity buyouts positively affect proxies for firm value and find results consistent
with the three established mechanisms. We also show that the buyouts lead to greater capture of
government aid and deteriorating student outcomes, consistent with implicit contract violation.
1

See also Cao and Lerner (2009), Guo, Hotchkiss, and Song (2011), and Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2017).
Fund managers can increase value though operational changes because buyout contracts give them substantial
control rights over the firm. Private equity contracts are complex and state-contingent, usually giving the investor
substantial control rights (Lerner and Schoar 2005). For overviews, see Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) and Metrick
and Yasuda (2010).
2

1

We employ novel data on 88 deals in which private equity firms acquire independent, privatelyowned schools. These deals are associated with 557 school-level ownership changes, of which
218 occur after the deal through acquisitions. Private equity-owned school systems establish an
additional 437 new schools. Using regressions with school and year fixed effects as well as a
matching estimator, we confirm findings from the existing literature that private equity ownership
leads to higher profits; in our data, profits triple after a buyout. Existing literature has also found
better management among private equity-owned firms (Muscarella and Vetsuypens 1990, Bloom,
Sadun, and Van Reenen 2015, Cornelli and Karakaş 2015, and Cohn, Nestoriak, and Wardlaw
2017). In line with the aforementioned channel, we find that chief executive turnover increases
after a buyout by around 36 percent.
The higher revenue that we observe comes partly from a $1,600 increase in tuition, which
is approximately half average total tuition at community colleges. It also comes from almost
50 percent higher enrollment. Reliance on federal aid increases after private equity buyouts and
approaches the 90 percent of revenue threshold that is the statutory limit. Per-student borrowing
and per-student federal grants increase by about 12 and 14 percent of their respective means. We
exploit a 2007 student loan borrowing limit expansion to test whether private equity-owned schools
are more responsive to changes in federal loan guarantees. Relative to other institutions, private
equity-owned schools respond to the increase by raising tuition faster than other for-profit schools,
which induces higher levels of borrowing. Superior capture of government aid is thus a channel
through which high-powered incentives of private equity ownership translate to higher profits. This
is a purely rent-seeking phenomenon and is unambiguously not in students’ or taxpayers’ interest.
We find sharp declines in student graduation rates, loan repayment rates, and labor market
earnings after private equity buyouts (the declines are 13, 5.6, and 5.8 percent of their respective
means).

Enhanced recruiting and reduced instructional quality can reconcile the otherwise

puzzling combination of higher enrollment despite higher tuition and deteriorating student
outcomes. Private equity-owned schools have twice the share of employees in sales as other
for-profits. We show that education inputs, including the ratio of faculty to students, the share of

2

spending devoted to instruction, decline after the buyout. Transitions to online education could
produce declines in faculty ratios. Online education could both reduce transportation costs for
students and enable economies of scale for the school. However, we find a small effect of buyouts
on the propensity of a school to become primarily online and no effects on the share of distance
students, and the effects on student outcomes are not attenuated when online schools are omitted
from the sample.
Private equity buyouts may lead to changed operations that are detrimental to student success.
There are two obvious alternatives to this interpretation. One is a selection mechanism, in which
private equity firms are skilled at selecting targets on trajectories to the changes we observe. For
all outcomes, we show visual event studies among switcher-schools around the buyout year. These
reveal discontinuous breaks in outcomes and sharp changes to trends around the buyout year. There
are no meaningful observable pre-trends. Private equity firms clearly do not acquire schools at
random, but this visual evidence indicates that a selection mechanism is thus unlikely to fully
explain the effects.
The second alternative channel is student composition. Students who attend after the buyout
may be less prepared than those who attended before. This channel has ambiguous implications
for student welfare and depends on school value-added, which we do not directly observe. To hold
any composition effects fixed, we use partially treated cohorts. These are students in two-year
programs who are already enrolled before a buyout occurs but have at least one year at the now
private equity-owned school. For graduation and loan repayment rates, we compare the cohort
with partial treatment to the previous one with no treatment. Partially treated cohorts experience
more than half the negative effect on graduation rates, and the full effect on repayments rates, that
fully treated cohorts experience. This does not reflect the elimination of degree programs after
the buyout, a possible short term channel. We cannot rule out that the mechanism in the cohort
analysis is different from the primary longer term effect, but the cohort analysis strongly suggests
that composition does not explain our main results.
Whether additional students enrolled as a result of post-buyout expansion are better or worse

3

off depends in part on their outside option. A large literature finds that the expected labor market
returns to for-profit education are lower than the returns to non-selective community college.3 If the
source of expansion is substitution away from community colleges, the new students are unlikely
to be better off. Indeed, we find suggestive evidence that a new private equity-owned school
in a commuting zone siphons student enrollment growth from community colleges. Consistent
with this finding, Cellini, Darolia, and Turner (2017) show that community colleges and for-profit
schools are direct substitutes. Substitution towards a school with lower returns is not as surprising
as it may seem. In addition to for-profits using much more sophisticated and aggressive marketing,
college students are known to be poor forecasters of their future earnings.4
The evidence against composition and selection channels does not allow us to rule out that
mechanisms besides reduced quality (evidenced by declines in instructional support) explain the
negative effects on student outcomes. However, the results offer substantial evidence consistent
with private equity ownership leading to implicit contract violations. An important further piece
of evidence is that we find dramatic increases in law enforcement actions after buyouts, most
of which stem from accusations of recruiting rule violations, such as quotas for sales staff, and
misrepresentations of student loan terms, graduation rates, and student employment outcomes.
Our results shed light on how private equity creates value. This is an especially interesting
question in the context of private-to-private transactions, which make up over 90 percent of private
equity deal value and 99 percent of volume.5 When a private equity investor takes a public firm
private, agency conflicts decline as control becomes more tightly bound to ownership (Jensen
1989). The mechanisms may be more nuanced in a private-to-private transaction. Compared to the
pre-existing, private owners, private equity owners have higher-powered incentives to maximize
firm value because fund managers are compensated through a call option-like share of the profits,
3
See Deming et al. (2012), Liu and Belfield (2014), Cellini and Chaudhary (2014), Cellini and Turner (2016),
Deming et al. (2016) and Armona, Chakrabarti, and Lovenheim (2017).
4
For example, see Arcidiacono et al. (2014, 2016); Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2013); Wiswall and Zafar
(2014); Hastings et al. (2017). This literature has found that students from low income backgrounds are particularly
prone to overestimating the earnings of past graduates in their major and institution, and that students who are overly
optimistic about their earnings and academic ability are particularly prone to dropping out.
5
Based on Pitchbook data between 2010 and 2018; see https://pitchbook.com/news/reports/2018-annual-us-pebreakdown and https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/2017-was-an-down-year-for-take-private-buyouts.

4

employ substantial amounts of leverage, usually aim to liquidate investments within a short time
frame, and do not have existing relationships with target firm stakeholders.
Private equity is often treated as a monolith, either praised for creating value or maligned for
supposed “strip and flip” strategies. Together, the existing literature and our results suggest that
there is important heterogeneity. When incentives between investors and consumers are aligned,
quality improvements should accompany firm value creation (Hart, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997). In
contrast, for-profit colleges feature severe information frictions and misaligned incentives. There
is low price elasticity of demand, in part because tuition is not salient; students often enroll with
zero up-front costs. Education quality is extremely opaque, allowing for reducing instructional
resources while pursuing misleading marketing and recruiting strategies. The for-profit target
population is vulnerable to these approaches because it is extremely socioeconomically
disadvantaged (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012).

While dropouts may increase when

instructional resources decline, rolling admissions enable rapid enrollment of new students. The
required recruiting expenditures, especially with new sales technology adoption, may be lower
than the cost of retaining existing students.6

The sector also features intensive government

subsidy, separating revenue from the consumer. In particular, the expansion of federal student
loan programs since the early 1990s created opportunities to increase firm value through implicit
contract violations.
As a new owner, the private equity investor may be well-positioned to take advantage of these
opportunities for value creation. In order to establish the school, previous owners may have had to
commit to implicit contracts with stakeholders; in exchange for government revenue, they would
provide a valuable education.

Their inability or unwillingness to take advantage of new

opportunities is related to the reason why in settings such as healthcare and education, where
consumers depend on implicit contracts with the firm, many service providers are nonprofit
(Hansmann 1980). Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) discuss how in such settings weaker incentives to
maximize profits or increase value for investors can make nonprofit status optimal.
6

This

Reducing expenditures on instruction is a well-established cause of lower graduation rates (Bound and Turner
2007, Webber and Ehrenberg 2010).

5

mechanism requires consumers to rationally choose nonprofit firms over for-profit ones. It may be
infeasible for consumers to make this choice when subsidy separates revenue from the consumer
and quality is hard to observe. In our context, it seems likely that improved subsidy design could
better align incentives. This might be one avenue towards addressing the growth in federally
guaranteed student debt – which increased from $241 billion in 2003 to $1.6 trillion in 2019 – and
possible accompanying adverse effects, including high levels of default and reduced
entrepreneurship.7
Our paper contributes to the literature on private equity and the real effects of acquisitions,
including Brown, Gredil, and Kaplan (2013), Ewens, Rhodes-Kropf, and Strebulaev (2016), and
Ma, Ouimet, and Simintzi (2018). In addition to Bernstein and Sheen (2016), two papers offer
insights related to ours. Matsa (2011) shows that highly levered supermarket firms, which
sometimes become highly levered through private equity buyouts, experience higher inventory
stock-outs. Ljungqvist, Persson, and Tag (2016) study the misalignment between private and
social incentives in private equity-backed stock delistings. Furthermore, our findings may be
relevant to other sectors with similar characteristics that also receive large amounts of private
equity investment, such as healthcare, infrastructure, and defense.8

2

Data and Descriptive Statistics

This section first describes the for-profit higher eduction industry, and explains why it may feature
incentive misalignment (Section 2.1). We both describe private equity’s role in the industry and
also introduce our private equity deal data in Section 2.2. We summarize the data from the
Department of Education on schools and students in Section 2.3.
7

See Looney and Yannelis (2015), Bleemer et al. (2017), Krishnan and Wang (2017) and Mueller and Yannelis
(2019).
8
See Appendix Figure B1. The healthcare economics literature has examined how incentives and the ownership
of healthcare providers affects the price and quality of care, though there has been no study of private equity. While
providers do appear to respond to incentives, there are mixed results regarding ownership (Dafny et al. (2016), Duggan
(2000), Clemens and Gottlieb (2014), Adelino, Lewellen, and Sundaram (2015), Sloan et al. (2001), Hackmann and
Pohl (2018)).

6

2.1

Institutional Context

For-profit schools (“for-profits”) have existed in the U.S since the early 1900s, but enrollment grew
substantially in recent decades (left graph of Figure 1). As of 2016, about 1.2 million students
were enrolled at for-profit schools. In 2011, the last year for which two-year default rates are
available, for-profits accounted for about 40 percent of student loan defaults. For-profits attract
more socioeconomically disadvantaged students than community colleges, which are the closest
comparison (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012, Looney and Yannelis 2015).
There are well-known information frictions in post-secondary higher education. An absence
of accessible information, the difficulty of assessing returns to education, and long lags between
enrollment and job placement impede the transmission of product quality to future sales
(Bettinger et al. 2012, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2013, Wiswall and Zafar 2014). Students
are poorly informed about their own ability, their school’s quality, and expected earnings from the
program they have chosen before starting post-secondary school (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
2012, Arcidiacono et al. 2014, Wiswall and Zafar 2014, and Arcidiacono et al. 2016). For
example, Hastings et al. (2017) find that students who apply to low-earning college degree
programs overestimate earnings of recent graduates by approximately 100 percent. The school
faces a tradeoff between the potential costs to its reputation of failing to educate students, and the
direct costs of providing that education. A significant body of work suggests that the former may
be low, because students are not well-informed about which programs are optimal for them,
programs are difficult to compare to each other, and prospective students rarely have visibility
into previous cohorts’ outcomes (Lang and Weinstein 2013).
For-profits devote far more resources to recruiting than other types of schools, which
compounds these information frictions. Due to federal loan and grant programs, salespeople can
market zero upfront costs to low-income students, despite higher average tuition among
for-profits than alternatives. Figure 2 shows the share of school employees in sales (left graph)
and non-instructional activities (right graph), by school type and ownership between 2012 and
2015, the years during which data is available for this variable. While public and non-profit
7

schools have less than one percent of employees in sales, private equity-owned schools have over
seven percent of their employees in this area. Other non-private equity-owned for-profits have
four percent. Government investigations have found evidence of deceptive marketing practices
among for-profits (Senate 2012).
About 90 percent of revenue at for-profits comes from public sources (CFBP 2012, Kelchen
2017). They are incentivized to target low-income students, who qualify to pay tuition primarily
with federal grants and loans and so need not be billed regularly. Tuition is the most important
determinant of the amount of federal aid a student may receive, which incentivizes for-profits to
increase tuition above cost (Cellini and Goldin 2014). Federal revenue arrives when the student
begins school and is largely disconnected from graduation rates and labor market outcomes. The
taxpayer bears the cost of student defaults.9 Thus, government aid and loan guarantees create a
potential misalignment of incentives between for-profit school owners and consumers (see
Appendix Sections A.1-A.3 for further discussion). From a profit maximization perspective,
government loan guarantees make the school indifferent to whether a student defaults.
Most of our school characteristic and student outcome data come from the U.S. Department of
Education Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS). All schools that are Title
IV eligible must report to IPEDS, and this includes the vast majority of the higher education sector,
including at least 73 percent of for-profits (Cellini and Goldin 2014) Most variables are reported
at the school level according to a unique “UnitID” that remains constant over time and across
ownership changes. There are no UnitID mergers in our sample. We create a unique identifier,
“SystemID”, to represent the parent institution, including parent companies of for-profit college
chains. This is important because for-profit college companies often operate multiple schools.10
9
Legislation proposed in the U.S. Congress in November, 2017 would require schools to repay a portion of
defaulted student loans. A Wall Street Journal article noted that “This so called skin-in-the-game proposal has
been long fought by the powerful higher education lobby.” See https://www.wsj.com/articles/house-gop-to-proposesweeping-changes-to-higher-education-1511956800.
10
The data used for analysis are comprised of an unbalanced panel. Exit, however, is much less common among
private equity owned schools. New schools enter the data set when they become Title IV eligible. Of the 994 schools
that were ever Title IV eligible and under private equity ownership since 1987, 194 leave the dataset due to closure or
cessation of Title IV reporting prior to the last year for which data is available. Another 291 schools owned by private
equity are excluded from our analysis in years following changes in their parent company to publicly traded ownership.
Among the 7,034 for-profit schools that were ever Title IV eligible but never under private equity ownership, 4,410

8

2.2

Private Equity in Higher Education

Private equity buyouts of publicly traded firms in the 1980s were thought align managers with
investors interests in short-term profit maximization (Jensen 1989). In recent decades, however,
managers of publicly traded firms have to some degree deterred leveraged buyouts through
increased shareholder value creation, both through changes to governance and increased
profitability (Holmstrom and Kaplan 2001, Kaplan and Strömberg 2009). Parallel to this shift,
private equity investors increasingly turned to investments in smaller, privately-held companies.
Acquisitions of privately held firms made up a majority of all U.S. buyouts between 1980 and
2005 and constitute all but two of the buyouts in the for-profit college sector in the years for
which we have complete data (Davis et al. 2014).
Private equity buyouts can affect target firm operations and finances. Operationally, Bloom
et al. (2015) find that private equity owned firms have superior management than other privately
owned firms. Davis et al. (2014) show that private equity owned manufacturing firms expand
productive plants and shutter underperforming ones. Bernstein and Sheen (2016) demonstrate that
restaurant worker training and incentive alignment improve after private equity buyouts. Fracassi,
Previtero, and Sheen (2017) also find that consumers benefit from private equity buyouts of chain
retail stores. Financially, private equity buyouts are typically accomplished using debt that is
collateralized by target firm assets (Metrick and Yasuda 2010). This paper focuses on student
outcomes and does not address firm capital structure.
To collect higher education private equity deal data, we researched the parent ownership
history of every for-profit college in the U.S. from 1987 through 2016 that was eligible for federal
aid (termed “Title IV eligible”). We used a variety of sources, which was necessary for two
reasons. First, no single existing source contains comprehensive data on buyouts of for-profit
colleges. Second, commercial databases do not track the individual schools that each portfolio
firm operates. We began with a comprehensive list from IPEDS for all 7,034 Title IV schools that
ever reported for-profit ownership. We then manually researched the ownership history of each
close or cease Title IV reporting prior to the last year for which data is available.

9

school and its parent company. One way that we identified parent firm ownership was by
matching schools to firms based on the Employer ID Number reported in IPEDS. Two sources
were especially useful. First, schools have been required since 2008 to describe their ownership
history in online course catalogues, which we obtained via Internet archives.11 Second, we used
unpublished documents from the 2012 Senate HELP Committee report of for-profit colleges and
10-K statements for publicly traded firms. The next step was to identify private equity buyouts of
parent firms by searching the ThomsonOne and Preqin databases.
We identified 88 private equity buyouts of for-profit college companies before 2016. None
of the deals we use in analysis are secondary deals. In some cases, the private equity owner
exits by selling to another private equity firm. We do not examine these deals; as far as our data
are concerned, the school remains private equity owned. Of the firms involved in the deals, 35
percent have an education specialty, and the average number of education deals is 2.1 (the median
is zero). Median fund returns are roughly similar to industry benchmarks.12 Figure 1 shows the
private equity-owned share of total enrollment and defaults over time. Defaults are measured at
least three years after graduation, so we terminate both plots in 2011. We include formerly private
equity-owned publicly traded schools. Private equity-owned schools account for approximately
35 percent of total for-profit enrollment in our data on the near-universe of for-profits. Most of
the increase in the for-profit share of student loan defaults since 2000 has been among private
equity-owned schools.
Private equity investments in higher education have taken two forms. One is the purchase of
independent (small, private) colleges, usually with consolidation intent.

An example that

illustrates the broader pattern we find in the data is TA Associates’ buyout of Florida Career
College for $53 million in 2004. At the time, Florida Career College had four campuses and
2,500 students. After adding three additional campuses and expanding enrollment to 4,000
students, TA Associates sold its stake in 2007 for $192 million, almost quadrupling its
investment. Later in 2007, federal investigators found employees producing fraudulent high
11
12

We provide an example of these course catalogs in Appendix E.
Based on data from Preqin and Mitch Leventhal. 62 out of a total of 118 firms match to Preqin.

10

school diplomas for applicants and encouraging students to lie about their high school status. The
second type of deal is the buyout of an existing chain institution; the biggest have taken public
companies private. For example, in 2007 KKR and SAC Capital took Laureate Education private
for $3.8 billion. Eaton et al. (2016) provide further evidence regarding publicly traded and
privately owned schools. Other examples include Goldman Sachs taking Education Management
Corp (EDMC) private in 2006 for $3.4 billion, and various investors, including Vistria Group,
taking Apollo Education Group (University of Phoenix) private in 2017 for $1.1 billion.
Appendix Section A.4 describes the role of private equity in for-profit higher education in detail.
At the firm level, we track the 88 buyouts as a SystemID-level changes in ownership.13 It
is common for the company acquired in a buyout to own multiple schools. After the buyout,
this parent company often purchases or establishes additional schools. The 88 buyouts involved
changes in ownership for 339 schools. We observe 136 acquisitions of other for-profit companies
by private equity owned firms after a buyout, which involved 218 subsequent changes in ownership.
The bar graphs in Appendix Figure B2 Panel A plot the 88 buyouts and 557 school-level ownership
changes over time. They show that these events are not concentrated in a few years. The histograms
in Appendix Figure B2 Panel B contain the number of colleges per buyout and per acquisition.
They illustrate a range in the number of colleges involved per buyout; most involve just one school,
and the maximum is 35. In addition to the 557 college level ownership changes, firms under private
equity ownership established 437 additional schools. This gives us 994 schools, or UnitIDs, that
ever come under private equity ownership.14
13
Nearly 80 percent of the deals are known buyouts, while the other 20 percent may be minority stake purchases.
For simplicity, we use the term “buyout” in the remainder of the paper.
14
Some variables are reported at the OPEID level, which in some cases aggregates UnitIDs. There are a total of 374
switcher OPEIDs. This is smaller because OPEIDs sometimes encompass multiple UnitIDs and the data for which we
use OPEIDs (repayment rates and earnings) are available for fewer years.

11

2.3

School Characteristics and Student Outcomes

Table 1 summarizes the variables we use in our analysis.15 These descriptive statistics indicate
that other for-profits are in some ways more similar to community colleges than to private equityowned schools, suggesting that private equity-owned schools may drive many of the characteristics
generally associated with for-profits in, for example, Deming, Goldin, and Katz (2012), Cellini
and Goldin (2014), Cellini and Turner (2016), and Deming, Yuchtman, Abulafi, Goldin, and Katz
(2016). The graduation rate (fraction of students who graduate within 150 percent of normal time)
averages 48 percent for private equity-owned schools, compared to 55 percent at other for-profits.
We do not report IPEDS data on community college graduation rates because they are neither
accurate nor comparable. The average loan per borrower among full-time first year students is
$8,124 at private equity-owned schools, compared to $6,700 for other for-profits and $4,008 at
community colleges.
There are two measures of loan repayment. The first is the two-year cohort default rate
(CDR), which is default rates two years after exit-year for exiting cohorts. Students exit by either
graduating or dropping out. We use this in Figure 1 because it has the longest time series. It is,
however, known to be subject to manipulation through the use of allowable non-repayment
options like deferments and forbearances (ICAS ICAS). Comparisons between for-profits and
other types of colleges should therefore be made with caution. We use the CDR time series to
analyze potential bunching of default rates close to regulatory limits. The second measure is the
share of students in repayment. This is the fraction of borrowers from a school who have not
defaulted and have repaid at least $1 of their initial balance three years after leaving school (by
graduating or dropping out). Repayment rates are more sensitive than default rates, and capture
failure to repay through legal channels such as deferment or income-driven repayment options.
The repayment rate averages 34 percent among private equity-owned schools, 41 percent at other
15
For comprehensive descriptions, sources, and years available for all variables used in analysis, see Appendix B
Table 1. Data are presented at the school (UnitID level). The data span 1987 through 2016, but some variables are not
available until the early 1990s. A year corresponds to the spring term of the academic year, which begins on August 1
and ends July 30. For example, observations for the 2008-2009 academic year are identified as 2009.

12

for-profits, and 46 percent at community colleges.
Private equity-owned schools are larger, with mean enrollment of 747 students, compared to
387 at other for-profits. Per full-time equivalent student, tuition revenue averages $17,521 at
private equity-owned schools relative to $14,211, $3,673, and $10,996 at non-private
equity-owned for-profits, community colleges, and nonprofit/state schools, respectively.
Community colleges and other for-profits respectively have 4.4 and 4.5 full-time faculty per 100
full-time equivalent students, while private equity-owned schools have 3.6. The share of students
with federal grant aid and per-student Pell Grant revenue indicate the degree to which the student
body is low-income. They are similar at private equity-owned schools and other for-profits, while
they are much lower at community colleges. We also compiled statistics on degrees and major
types, though these are not reported for brevity. The most common degree type at a private equity
target school (in the year before acquisition) is a 1-year Communications degree (18 percent of
degrees awarded). Our online time-varying indicator variable follows Deming et al. (2012).16 We
observe 126 school switches from not-online to online.
We observe average and median earnings using data from the NSLDS College Scorecard
database. The source is a link between students and salaried (W-2) and self-employed (Schedule
SE) earnings data from Department of the Treasury tax records. Wage outcomes cover individuals
who (a) borrowed from the federal government and (b) were employees in the Social Security
system or were self-employed and filed a tax return. Average and median wages are therefore
likely higher than if graduates who are unemployed or not in the labor force were included.
Earnings are measured six years after cohort exit at the OPEID level for the 1998, 2000, 2002,
2004, 2006 and 2007 cohorts. Average earnings for graduates of private equity-owned schools are
$33,523 (in 2015 dollars). Earnings for graduates of community colleges are slightly higher,
while they are slightly lower for graduates of other for-profits.
We also use data on law enforcement actions. We observe 125 instances of a state or federal
16

The method relies on the fact that a school either has “online” in its name, or has no state constituting more than
one-third of freshman enrollment. For-profits usually draw primarily from the surrounding area.

13

agency initiating an investigation.17 Most allegations relate to misrepresentation and false claims.
For example, there are 28 cases of job placement statistic misrepresentation, 23 of credentials or
accreditation misrepresentation, and 31 of other types of false claims. Violations of sales and
recruiting regulations and fraud also feature prominently (44 allegations). We use a school-year
level indicator variable for the school experiencing its first law enforcement action. These are not
concentrated in a few school systems, nor do any particular private equity firms or private equity
firm types have disproportionate actions. The exception is the Fortis system, in which 13 unique
schools experienced first-time actions. Although private equity-owned school-years comprise just
4 percent of all school-years in our data, they are 58 percent of the first-time actions.

3

Estimation Strategies

We use three primary empirical approaches to assess how private equity ownership affects school
and student outcomes: visual event studies, within-school regressions, and a matching estimator.
In this section, we describe each in turn. While none of the three have the causal rigor of an
experiment, they are quite different approaches from an econometric perspective, so when they all
yield results with a similar economic interpretation, they provide powerful evidence of an effect.
The empirical approach is to plot outcome variable means around the year of the buyout, for
schools that are acquired by private equity groups. This exercise tests for pre-trends, which sheds
light on whether a selection mechanism most likely explains our results. It also demonstrates any
raw effect within switcher-schools. We restrict the sample to schools that existed in the year prior
to the private equity buyout, so that there is a change of ownership, and do not include schools
established by the private equity-owned school systems after the buyouts. After this restriction,
there are small variations in sample size across years as schools enter and exit. A school that is not
present in a given year for a given variable is recorded as missing.
The second empirical approach is a within-school regression, using variants of the following
17

These are described in Appendix B Table 2.
We collected data primarily from Republic Report.
https://www.republicreport.org/2014/law-enforcement-for-profit-colleges/ .

14

specification:
Yit = ↵i + ↵t +

1 P Eit

+ Xit + "it .

(1)

P Eit takes a value of one if the school is private equity-owned in year t. We include school fixed
effects (↵i ) and year fixed effects (↵t ), which respectively absorb school and time invariant
factors. Xit is a vector of controls comprising fixed effects for the highest degree that the school
offers, whether the school is selective, and whether it is publicly traded (formerly private
equity-owned schools are not identified as private equity-owned after they IPO). The sample
consists of all institutions in our data. We include non-profits because private equity firms have
occasionally purchased non-profits and transformed them into for-profits, though the results are
robust to excluding these instances. For each outcome variable we present a second model with
additional controls for the demographic composition of the student body. These include family
income (Pell grants per student in 2015 dollars) and the shares of students who are black, white,
and Hispanic. We two-way cluster standard errors by parent company (SystemID) and year in all
specifications. This captures potential correlation across schools within the largest deals. Our
results are not sensitive to alternative clustering approaches. Our main specification uses all years
of available data, but all our results are robust to excluding pre-2000 data, as there may be
concern that it is lower quality. The main results are also robust to restricting to switcher schools
and collapsing the years on either side of the buyout into single averages, as suggested in
Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004).
Our third approach is a matching estimator. To identify appropriate matching variables, we
examine buyout predictors. For this exercise, the sample is restricted to other for-profits. Further,
among the target schools, the sample is restricted to the year before the buyout. In a logit model
with year fixed effects, we tested a wide variety of observables at the school and commuting zone
(proxy for the local labor market) levels. Variables with predictive power are shown in Table 2.
Private equity firms target schools in areas with more community colleges and a larger number
of total enrolled students, but a smaller number of existing for-profits. This suggests they are
identifying areas with large target populations but few competitors. They target schools that have
15

lower recent profit growth but higher profits than the average for-profit school. They also target
schools with more students, a higher share of students who are white, and that have lower loan
repayment rates. No other variables consistently predict being a target. These include education
inputs, enrollment growth at the school and commuting zone level, the proximity of revenue to the
90 percent threshold that is the legal maximum, and other student outcomes.
We deploy the variables with predictive power in a nearest-neighbor matching (NNM)
estimator.18 Unlike propensity score matching, which uses the logit estimated probability of
treatment, NNM flexibly (i.e., with no functional form assumption) uses the distance between
covariate patterns to define the "closest" control for a given treated observation. The flexibility
requires more data, and the data required grows with each additional matched covariate.
Therefore, we match only on the variables that have some predictive power (omitting the outcome
variable if it is one of the matching covariates) and adjust for bias in matching on multiple
continuous covariates. For each private equity-owned school, we match target schools in the
pre-buyout year to other for-profits. We assess outcomes two years after the buyout in the
matched sample. Considering outcomes two years after the buyout serves as a robustness test for
the main OLS approach, which uses all years after the buyout.

It ensures that the effects

immediately follow the buyout and are not an artifact of something that occurs in later years.
Together with the differences in estimating models, this means that the NNM estimates may not
always be close in magnitude to the OLS estimates. Appendix Table B3 shows that the imbalance
decreases dramatically after the NNM procedure.
18
The variables used are number of community colleges in the commuting zone, number of pre-existing for-profits
in the commuting zone besides the target, one-year profit growth, log profits, the log number of FTE students, the
3-year loan repayment rate, and the share of students who are white. In the final specification 5 of Table 2, where all
variables are used, the sample size declines and some variables lose significance. We nonetheless match on these, as
they appear to have some predictive power.

16

4

Capturing government aid

This section provides strong evidence that private equity ownership leads to better capture of
government aid, which is a mechanism of value creation that is clearly not in the interest of
taxpayers. We first establish the greater reliance of private equity-owned schools on federal aid
(Section 4.1). We present a test with causal interpretation using loan limit increases in Section
4.2.

4.1

Reliance on government aid

Table 3 contains financial outcomes. Columns 1-2 show that tuition per student increases by over
$1,600, relative to a mean across all schools of $9,528 (note tuition at community colleges averages
just $3,673).19 The effect increases in the matching estimator, to $2,107 (column 3). The visual
event study in Figure 3 Panel A shows a striking increase immediately after the buyout. Average
loans per borrower increase by about $580 (in 2015 dollars), or about 12 percent of the mean across
all schools of $5,147 (columns 4-5). The matching model yields a larger effect of $641 (column 6).
There is an immediate large increase in borrowing in the visual analysis, in Figure 3 Panel B. Note
that less than 10 percent of loans at private equity-owned schools in our data are non-federal, and
some of these come from state government. By comparison, 24 percent of loans are non-federal at
non-profit schools. We also observe large increases in non-Pell federal grants per student (Table 3
Panel 2 columns 1-3), of about $800. Finally, Panel 2 columns 4-5 show that profits increase after
a buyout by 77 percent, an effect that increases in the matching model. Appendix Figures B3 and
B4 show visual event studies for federal grants, revenues, expenditures, and profits.
To be eligible for federal aid, a school may not receive more than 90 percent of its revenue
from Title IV programs. Appendix Figure B5 shows the share of school revenue from Title IV
sources, such as federal student loans and grants, before and after a buyout. Before the buyout,
target schools receive 60-70 percent of their revenue from Title IV programs. This fraction
19

Note that tuition and loan amounts are not directly comparable, as loans are measured for full-time first-year
students while tuition is measured across all students on a full-time equivalent basis.

17

increases to nearly 80 percent six years after a buyout. The variance of the fraction of revenue
from Title IV programs also decreases markedly. Private equity-owned schools’ fraction of
revenue from these programs is tightly clustered just below the statutory cutoffs for aid eligibility,
suggesting management that more consistently targets the threshold. Note that the fraction of
revenue coming from Title IV programs is a lower bound on the total fraction of revenue coming
from all government sources, as there exist many non-Title IV loan, grant and subsidy programs.

4.2

The Effect of the 2007 Loan Limit Increase

A regulatory change in 2007 increased student loan borrowing limits. Specifically, Congress raised
the Stafford loan limits for all types of students for the first time since 1993.20 This created growth
options for for-profit schools. We examine whether schools already under private equity ownership
were more responsive to this opportunity, and increased tuition and borrowing faster than their
counterparts. We employ a standard difference-in-difference framework. Our main coefficient of
interest captures the differential effect of private equity ownership on outcomes of interest, relative
to other schools before and after the loan limit increase. We compare private equity owned schools
to all schools and to other for-profit schools using the difference-in-differences specification in
Equation 2.
Lit = ↵i + ↵t + P Ei ⇤ P ost2007 + Xit + "it

(2)

The term Lit denotes average borrowing or headline tuition in school i in year t. The coefficient of
interest is , which captures the increase in average borrowing at private equity-owned institutions
relative to other institutions after the limit increase. If private equity-owned institutions are better
20

The increase occurred in two stages, with roughly one-third of the increase affecting the 2007–08 academic year,
and the rest beginning with the 2008-09 academic year. There are two types of caps; for annual borrowing and for
total borrowing over the course of the degree. One limit increase took effect in 2007 and another took effect in 2008.
The 2006 Higher Education Reauthorization Act (HERA) HERA took effect in 2007. It increased annual Stafford
loan limits for freshmen, sophomores and graduate students, but did not increase aggregate per-student limits. The
Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act of 2008 increased annual and aggregate unsubsidized Stafford loan
limits for undergrads. Note that these loans are non-dischargeable in bankruptcy. At the time of the legislation the
rate was 6.8 percent for unsubsidized Stafford loans, and 3.4 percent for the smaller unsubsidized loans. GAO (2014)
found no effect on tuition or loans, in part because the recession had a strong negative effect on private student lending,
while Lucca et al. (2016) argue that the loan limits led to increases in tuition, which is consistent with the “Bennett
hypothesis” that schools raise tuition to capture federal loans and grants.

18

at capturing aid, we would expect average loan amounts to rise at a faster rate relative to other
institutions, and the coefficients

should be positive and significant. We include school and year

fixed effects (↵i and ↵t ) to capture trends such as tuition inflation and school-specific factors, as
well as school controls Xit as in Equation 1. Standard errors are clustered at the SystemID level
to address potential serial correlation. The year 2007 is excluded, as it is somewhat ambiguous
whether treatment occurs in 2007 or 2008 (the results are not sensitive to including 2007).
The main identifying assumption of the analysis is that, in the absence of the limit increases,
private equity-owned schools and other for-profits would have had similar borrowing trends. This
implies parallel trends before 2007.

Appendix Figure B6 restricts the treatment group to

institutions that were private equity-owned prior to 2007. Before the 2007 limit increase, the
trends are parallel, but afterward the two series diverge, with a larger increase in average
borrowing among private equity-owned schools.

Table 4 presents estimates of Equation 2.

Consistent with the graphical evidence, the results indicate that following the loan limit increases,
average borrowing increased by at least $800 at private equity-owned institutions relative to other
schools, or around 10 percent of the mean (Panel 1). Columns 1-3 include all schools, while
columns 3-6 include only for-profit schools. Reflecting increases in borrowing across all schools,
the post-2007 indicator is positive. The coefficient on being private equity-owned is also positive,
as borrowing was higher at private equity-owned schools before the reform.
To further establish parallel trends and explore the timing of the effects, we run the following
specification, interacting the private equity-ownership treatment with indicators for each year.

Lit = ↵i + ↵t +

2012
X

j=2002

j P Ei

⇤ 1[Y ear = j] + Xit + "it

(3)

We again restrict P Ei to schools that were acquired by a private equity group before 2007. The
results are plotted in the top panel of Figure 4. The solid line shows point estimates of the
coefficients

j.

We do not observe any significant differences between the private equity-owned

and other for-profit groups before 2007. The coefficients are near and not distinguishable from

19

zero. After 2007, borrowing increases faster at private equity-owned schools.
It is possible that this increase in borrowing is beneficial to students. Indeed, Goodman et al.
(2017) find that many young borrowers are credit constrained and use student loans as an additional
source of liquidity. However, if schools are raising tuition to capture credit expansions, this is
unlikely to benefit students. Table 4 Panel 2 presents regression results for tuition. We see sharp
increases in tuition that completely offset the increase in borrowing. Figure 4 Panel B also shows
that there was no pre-trend; the timing of the limit increase coincides with the tuition hike.21
In the Appendix, we conduct two additional tests for subsidy capture. One shows that private
equity-owned schools are better at avoiding a threshold that determines access to federal aid. The
other shows that the market values of publicly traded for-profits are extremely sensitive to
unfettered access to federal aid. They fell sharply when rules were announced that aimed to tie
this access to student labor market performance, and then rose sharply when these rules were
substantially weakened.
In sum, we find that private equity-held schools raise tuition and borrowing at a faster rate
following loan limit increases, consistent with these institutions being better at capturing
government aid. Their superior ability to capture this strategic opportunity is also evidence of
operational changes; in particular, different management that engages in rent-seeking behavior.
The expanded capture of government subsidies and guaranteed loans naturally leads to higher
profitability (Bachas, Kim, and Yannelis 2019).

5

Buyouts and Student Outcomes

We have thus far established that private equity ownership increases capture of government aid,
which is an adverse outcome from the taxpayer perspective. We now turn to a second group of
stakeholders, students, who are the consumers and have different interests from equity holders,
potentially leading to the violation of implicit contracts (Shleifer and Summers 1988, Appelbaum
21

Additionally, Appendix Table B4 shows that there is no increase in faculty student ratios, suggesting that
additional tuition increases are not being passed on to higher institutional quality.

20

and Batt 2014). Private equity general partners may be more disposed than the pre-existing
owners to violate implicit contracts for three reasons. First, they are new owners and do not have
the same established relationships or commitments.

Second, their compensation structure

incentivizes rapidly increasing operating profits and firm value in the service of a short-term exit.
Third, they have less exposure to potential long-term liabilities from implicit contract violations,
such as regulatory backlash or reputation effects.
This section first examines how private equity buyouts affect the student outcomes of
graduation rates, loan repayment and earnings. Section 5.2 then considers two mechanisms for
the effects: First, private equity firms may select schools on different trends; and second, the
change in ownership may affect the composition of students. A third possibility is that buyouts
affect students through changed operations.

This is considered in Section 6.

These three

mechanisms are not mutually exclusive.

5.1

Effect of Buyouts on Student Outcomes

Graduation rates are a standard measure of school performance in the education literature, as failing
to graduate is unambiguously detrimental to affected students (Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson
2009, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2012, Arcidiacono et al. 2016). It may also harm their peers
who do graduate if the degree is perceived as lower quality by employers. For example, in an
experimental setting, Deming et al. (2016) show that employers prefer candidates with degrees
from programs that have higher graduation rates.
The graduation rate metric that we observe is the share of students who graduate within 150
percent of the degree’s normal time. This only includes full-time students (who are also the vast
majority of students at for-profit colleges), so taking longer to get a degree does not mean that a
student is working in the labor force and taking a light course load (see Gilpin and Stoddard 2017).
Relatedly, Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2007) show that lower graduation rates do not reflect a
longer time to degree or greater human capital acquisition (i.e., more credits); instead, longer times
to degree are associated with dropping out and worse labor market outcomes. However, we cannot
21

strictly rule out the possibility that students are taking longer to graduate, which could generate
higher profits for schools if the students are paying tuition.
In Table 5 Panel 1, we show that private equity buyouts lead to a six-percentage point decline in
graduation rates, or about 13 percent of the mean across all schools. This relationship is consistent
across models, though the matching estimate is somewhat lower. Figure 5 Panel A contains the
event study plot. As in the following figure for loan repayment, it omits the year before the buyout
because these students are partially treated, which we examine below. Both panels reveal a negative
effect on graduation rates. The effect is immediate, which is consistent with the fact that the buyout
year is the first affected academic year. Given that the majority of programs are one-year programs,
operational changes can take effect quickly. Falling graduation rates could be profit maximizing
for schools, particularly for one-year programs, even if they are bad for affected students. The
school receives tuition from the government (and the student acquires debt) when the student has
been in class for just one week at the semester’s start. If the student drops out, the school no longer
bears the instructional, service, and facilities costs associated with her attendance.
For the vast majority of borrowers, defaulting on student loans is an adverse outcome relative
to repaying. This is in part because federal student debt is effectively non-dischargeable in
bankruptcy, so wages may be garnished. The share of students in repayment, shown in Table 5
Panel 1, decreases after the buyout by 3.5 percentage points (column 4), relative to a mean across
all schools of 53 percent. The visual event study in Figure 5 Panel B shows a downward trend
after the buyout.
Private equity buyouts are associated with 6.1 percent lower within-cohort average earnings six
years after enrollment, relative to a mean across all schools of $31,269, in 2015 dollars (Table 5
Panel 2 column 1). Median earnings decline by a similar, albeit slightly smaller amount (columns
3-4). There are insufficient data for the matching estimator.22 Earnings exhibit strong time trends,
increasing over most of our sample period and decreasing in the Great Recession. Therefore, we
22

This is because we only observe six cohorts (as described in Section 2.3). We would need to match on the year
prior to the buyout only for schools where, two years later, we have cohort wage data. There is inadequate data to
conduct a match that improves meaningfully on the within-school, composition-controlled regressions.

22

graph coefficients from a fixed effects regression in Appendix Figure B7. The results contain no
pre-trends and indicate a deterioration after the buyout in log earnings.

5.2

Selection and Student Body Composition

Screening ability, where the private equity firms choose targets that would have changed anyway
(i.e., with no buyout), could explain the effects on graduation rates, repayment rates, and earnings.
This selection mechanism is most plausible when the target firm is on a trajectory towards the
post-buyout outcomes during the pre-buyout years. Instead, the visual event studies presented in
this section as well as subsequently when we discuss operational changes are largely devoid of
pre-trends. They instead reveal discontinuities in levels and trends immediately around the buyout
year. Though we cannot rule out some influence of selection, a selection mechanism is unlikely to
fully explain the results.
Private equity ownership could also change the type of students that enroll. For example, new
students may be less well qualified, with poorer labor market potential. This would be a causal
effect of the buyouts, but has potentially different implications for value-added. Inconsistent with
a composition mechanism, demographic controls do not significantly attenuate the results for any
outcomes. We also find no effect of private equity buyouts on Pell grants per student or the share
of students on federal grants, and the small negative effect on the share of students who are white
is not robust to the matching estimator (Appendix Table B5). Therefore, observable demographic
changes to the student body do not explain the main results.
We hold fixed composition using cohorts that are already enrolled at the school before the
private equity acquisition occurs. We restrict the sample to two-year programs at ultimately private
equity-owned schools. We compare the cohort that enrolled the year before the first private equityowned year with the earlier cohort that enrolled two years before. The former cohort had one year
of private equity treatment, while the latter had zero. We can conduct this test only for graduation
and repayment rates.23 The results are in Table 6. The partially treated cohorts experience a 3.6
23

There is inadequate earnings data (it only exists for six cohorts spaced three years apart). It is also not possible

23

percentage point decline in graduation rates, slightly more than half the main effect among fullytreated cohorts. There is a large effect on repayment rates, at 5.4 percentage points. Thus, a
changing student body composition cannot explain the declines in graduation and repayment rates.
We cannot rule out that different mechanisms may explain the falling graduation rates among
the partially treated and subsequent cohorts. However, the effects among partially treated cohorts
is at least suggestive of quality decline. The student chose to enroll in the program and pay
substantial up-front tuition, mostly through loans that are non-dischargeable in bankruptcy.
Presumably students making these investments believed that the degree is valuable when they
enrolled. In the following section, we show immediate and enduring declines in measures of
education inputs. This makes it unlikely that quality initially declined, leading more already
enrolled students to drop out, and then rebounded such that composition effects explain the results
among subsequent cohorts.

6

Operational Mechanisms

To fully understand how private equity buyouts create firm value in higher education, we examine
operational mechanisms that may explain the increase in profits shown in Section 4 and the
deterioration in student outcomes observed in Section 5. In this section, we consider six areas of
operational change: education inputs, enrollment, recruiting/sales, governance, online education,
and degree cuts. Finally, we examine whether chain acquisitions yield similar effects as private
equity buyouts (Section 6.7).

6.1

Education Inputs

One possible mechanism is that education quality declines. Though we do not observe education
quality directly, we show that measures of education inputs fall after private equity buyouts in
Table 7. The number of full-time faculty per 100 full-time students falls by 0.45 (Panel 1 column
for student loans, considered below, because they are measured only in the cohort’s first year, in which they are either
fully treated or not treated at all.

24

1), relative to a mean of 5.3 across all schools. The matching estimate is smaller and imprecise
(column 3). The share of expenditure devoted to instruction declines by about three percentage
points (columns 4-5), relative to a mean across all schools of 48 percent. Here the matching
estimate is significant and larger (column 6). The visual event studies, in Appendix Figure B7,
reveal that education inputs decline in the first year after the buyout and continue to decline through
the sixth year thereafter. This decline in education inputs is consistent with case studies in a U.S.
Senate report, which documents that reductions in student support following private equity buyouts
had negative impacts on educational quality with implications for student outcomes (Senate 2012).
We summarize these in Appendix A.4. Notably, student complaints consistently point to a heavy
reliance on part-time instructors with minimal certification and high instructional staff turnover
rates.
These declines in education inputs may be responsible for the deterioration in student outcomes
that we observe. Bound et al. (2010) find that lower institutional resources per student, including
the number of faculty, have contributed more than compositional changes to the overall decline
in college graduation rates. Motivated by their analysis, we examine the association between
education inputs and graduation rate changes immediately after buyouts. If operational changes are
responsible for deteriorating outcomes, education quality declines should correlate with graduation
rate declines. Appendix Figure B9 Panels A and B show that this is the case: in the year around
the buyout, schools that decrease their faculty-to-student ratio or instruction share of spending
experience graduation rate declines, while schools that increase these education inputs experience
graduation rate increases. Regressions in Appendix Table B6 also find that the negative effect
of private equity on graduation rates in the year after the buyout is larger for schools with large
negative changes in their faculty to student ratios.
This exercise also helps to explain the immediacy of the effects of buyouts on graduation rates.
Firms can implement operational changes, particularly those that involve labor, relatively quickly.
There is no reason that actions such as reducing the number of faculty and reallocating resources
from instruction to sales would require more than a few months, in time for the buyout to impact

25

what we term the first affected academic year. Adjustments involving fixed capital, such as the
school’s physical plant, might be expected to take years.
Tuition hikes could also explain the fall in graduation rates if students who are already
enrolled decide that the program does not merit higher costs. While this explanation is intuitive,
two institutional features related to the incentive problems in education suggest that tuition may
not play a significant role. First, just over half the programs in our data last one year. Since
payment is up-front, there are no tuition savings from dropping out mid-year. Second, students
are price inelastic because the size of their loan package is not salient at the time of borrowing,
and they have no reason to be sensitive to grant amounts (Bleemer et al. 2017). Consistent with
this, we find no relationship between changes in tuition and graduation rates immediately around
the buyout year (Appendix Figure B9 Panel C).

6.2

Enrollment

Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011) find that private equity buyouts of privately held firms relax
financial constraints at the target firms.

In education, better access to capital can support

investments needed to achieve rapid enrollment growth. Indeed, we find that after a buyout, the
number of full-time equivalent enrolled students increases by about 40 percent in the OLS
regressions, and twice this amount in the matching estimator (Table 7 Panel 2 columns 1-3). The
visual event study shows that the increase begins in the second year after the buyout, which
contrasts with the impacts on student outcomes that occur immediately (Appendix Figure B10).
In light of the negative effects on student success measures, buyouts are unlikely to make
existing student types (i.e., that would have enrolled before the buyout) weakly better off. However,
whether additional students – regardless of their preparedness – are better or worse off as a result
of the buyout depends on their outside option. In Appendix D, we show that additional students
enrolled as a result of expansion after buyouts appear to be drawn away from attending community
colleges, which tend to have higher labor market returns than for-profit colleges (Cellini and Turner
2016). To the degree the additional students would have attended community college, they are
26

likely not better off.

6.3

Recruiting and Sales

It is puzzling that demand (i.e.

enrollment) increases while education quality and student

outcomes decline. One explanation is that private equity-owned schools invest in sales and
marketing operations to attract more students, as suggested by their much higher share of
employees in sales (Figure 2). These activities are typically technology-intensive, relying on
carefully targeted online and phone strategies (Cottom 2017). They may be an area where private
equity ownership enables investment in technology to advance growth, as in Boucly, Sraer, and
Thesmar (2011) and Agrawal and Tambe (2016).
One way to observe the degree to which schools are more aggressively recruiting is to examine
law enforcement actions, which are primarily related to recruiting violations, including predatory
and misleading marketing, and the use of excessive commissions or quotas for salespeople.24 The
chances of a school having its first law enforcement action increase dramatically after a private
equity buyout. The dependent variable in columns 4-5 of Table 7 Panel 2 is one if the school
experienced its first action in a given year. The coefficient is .0036, significant at the .01 level,
relative to a mean of .004. A visual comparison is in Appendix Figure B11. There are insufficient
observations for the matching estimator.

6.4

Governance

Private equity investors often add value to their portfolio companies by changing governance
(Kaplan and Strömberg 2009, Bloom et al. 2015). They exert control by joining the board of the
portfolio firm and actively supervising portfolio firm managers (Cornelli and Karakaş 2015). At
smaller privately held firms, the new owners may bring in experts in, for example, sales and
24

An example comes from a U.S. Senate case study of a school acquired by Warburg Pincus. In the years after
the buyout, marketing and recruitment comprised 39 percent of expenditures. Students complained that they were
deceived about financial aid and whether the program would provide adequate certification for occupational licenses,
and a former recruiter testified that “If we don’t have a degree they want, we are supposed to convince them that one of
ours will work for them anyway” (Senate (2012, 305)). Four students submitted complaints that (Senate, 2012, 306).

27

marketing. Gompers, Kaplan, and Mukharlyamov (2016) find that 31 percent of private equity
investors recruit their own senior management teams before investing, which then replace the
pre-buyout management team. We expect that private equity buyouts may affect operations
through changes in management. We test this hypothesis in Table 7 Panel 1 column 7, where the
dependent variable is an indicator for whether a school’s Chief Executive changes within three
years of the buyout.25 We find 5.2 percentage point effect. The sample mean is 10.5 percent,
indicating that private equity buyouts increase CEO turnover by about fifty percent, to roughly
half of the average found in Gompers et al. (2016). Our results indicate that private equity owners
more often change management, providing one channel for changed operations and increased
firm value.

6.5

Online Schools

As mentioned above, greater access to capital and managerial expertise may lead to informational
technology upgrades under private equity ownership (Agrawal and Tambe 2016). In our context,
this could manifest in the expansion of online education, which might improve educational delivery
and benefit students. For example, online education could reduce transportation costs for students
and make enrollment possible for students who found transportation costs prohibitive. For the
school, online education’s low marginal costs per student presents opportunities for economies of
scale.
We show the effect of private equity ownership on a school’s probability of transitioning from
primarily brick-and-mortar to online in Table 7 Panel 2 columns 6-7. The effect is economically
small and somewhat imprecise, significant at only the .1 level (the matching estimator is not
possible here). In unreported analysis, we find that the effects on education inputs and student
outcomes are robust to excluding online schools. We also find no effect of private equity on the
intensive margin, measured as the number of out-of-state students (or “distance” learners). While
25

As defined in IPEDS, College Chief Executives are typically university presidents or another type of senior
academic official. We define a Chief Executive change as an indicator of whether the last name of the Chief Executive
listed in IPEDS changes from the previous year.

28

we cannot rule out that one reason for the decline in the number of faculty is the addition of video
or online learning, in general, the expansion of online education does not appear to explain the
general patterns observed in the data, including the decline in labor inputs shown in Section 6.1.

6.6

Degree cuts

A potential operational change that might help explain the immediate fall in graduation rates is the
elimination of degree programs. If private equity owners reduce degree offerings, students already
enrolled in a cut program might be forced to drop out. In such a case, the effects that we show
in the cohort partial treatment test, where composition effects are held fixed, might in fact reflect
degree program cuts. We test this by identifying degree programs that are cut each year. We define
a degree cut as a school-year in which there were no graduates of the degree, following a previous
year with positive graduates. Appendix Figure B12 shows the number of degree cuts by year
around the private equity buyout, within schools that switched to private equity ownership. We
separately consider one, two, and four-year programs. In no case is there an observable increase
in the years following the buyout. Appendix Table B7 confirms this in regression analysis. Private
equity ownership does not lead to cuts to degrees offered, so this cannot explain the immediate
decline in graduation rates.

6.7

Private equity as an ownership type

A final step is to confirm the basic mechanism for our findings, which is that private equity
ownership confers distinct incentives. If the results are driven by changes in management and
control rather than the particular approach of private equity to value creation, we expect similar
effects in transitions to chain ownership. To consider this, we create two new variables. First, we
define a “chain” as any parent company (SystemID) that is not private equity-owned and that
owns at least two schools (UnitIDs).

These ownership changes are included as a separate

indicator variable. Second, we restrict the “private equity buyout” indicator to instances where a
private equity-owned school system acquires an independent school.
29

This enables a more

apples-to-apples comparison with non-private equity chain acquisitions.

The results are in

Appendix Table B8. The effects of chain acquisitions are smaller and in many cases insignificant.
However, they have a substantial negative effect on graduation rates and earnings, as well as a
strong positive effect on enrollment. The results suggest a hierarchy of incentives and outcomes.
Chains likely have more sophisticated corporate structures and arms-length owners than
stand-alone, independent schools, giving them somewhat higher-powered incentives. Private
equity ownership yields higher-powered incentives and leads to more adverse student outcomes.
We also examine variation among private equity firms. We find very similar results to the
main model when we include lead private equity firm fixed effects. We also do not find that the
effects vary by private equity firm characteristics, such as having a specialty in education, or being
especially high- or low-performing. Finally, we find that our results are robust to omitting the
largest three deals.26

7

Conclusion

This paper shows that private equity buyouts lead to higher profits, tuition, and borrowing. They
also lead to lower education inputs, graduation rates, repayment rates, and earnings. We show that
following a government credit expansion, private equity-owned schools raise tuition faster than
other schools, which increases student debt. Superior federal aid capture is a key channel for highpowered incentives to translate to higher firm value. We do not conduct a welfare analysis and
cannot rule out that some students are made better off by the buyouts, but it seems that a focus on
maximizing revenue from subsidies helps to explain the average declines in student outcomes that
we observe.
For-profit schools originally participated in an implicit contract: in exchange for federal grant
and loan inputs, the school would increase the human capital of its students. Shleifer and Summers
26

We define “large” as the number of schools (UnitIDs) purchased in the deal and subsequently acquired by the
private equity-owned school system. The largest three are Empire Beauty Schools, which ultimately consisted of 82
schools, Corinthian (63 schools), and EDMC (49 schools).

30

(1988) argue, in the context of hostile takeovers, that changes in ownership increase firm market
value because they enable a transfer of rents from stakeholders (e.g., employees) to shareholders,
and that such redistribution can destroy value from a social perspective. This paper focuses on
two groups of consumer stakeholders in for-profit higher education: students and the government.
From the private equity investor’s perspective, it may be ex-post optimal to renege on the implicit
contracts with them. In fact, students and the government differ from employees in ways that may
increase the appeal of reneging; students typically purchase a degree-program only once, and the
government has largely not been a demanding counter-party.
The existing literature on private equity has focused on sectors characterized by high levels of
competition and product transparency, and low levels of government subsidy. Private equity groups
have in recent decades invested significantly in sectors such as healthcare, education, defense and
infrastructure, which are characterized by low levels of competition, product opacity, and high
levels of government subsidy. Ours is the first study to focus on private equity investments in a
heavily subsidized industry, and contrasts with much of the existing literature. Future work might
study the role of private equity in industries with less competitive market structures.

31

References
Adelino, M., K. Lewellen, and A. Sundaram (2015). Investment decisions of nonprofit firms:
Evidence from hospitals. The Journal of Finance 70(4), 1583–1628.
Agrawal, A. and P. Tambe (2016). Private equity and workers’ career paths: the role of
technological change. The Review of Financial Studies 29(9), 2455–2489.
Appelbaum, E. and R. Batt (2014). Private equity at work: When Wall Street manages Main Street.
Russell Sage Foundation.
Arcidiacono, P., E. Aucejo, A. Maurel, and T. Ransom (2016). College attrition and the dynamics
of information revelation. NBER Working Paper No. 22325.
Arcidiacono, P., J. Holz, A. Maurel, and T. Romano (2014). Modeling college major choices using
elicited measures of expectations and counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics 166(1), 3–16.
Armona, L., R. Chakrabarti, and M. F. Lovenheim (2017). How does for-profit college attendance
affect student loans, defaults and earnings? NBER Working Paper No. 25042.
Bachas, N., O. Kim, and C. Yannelis (2019). Loan guarantees and credit supply.
Bernstein, S., J. Lerner, and F. Mezzanotti (2017). Private equity and financial fragility during the
crisis. NBER Working Paper No. 23626.
Bernstein, S. and A. Sheen (2016). The operational consequences of private equity buyouts:
Evidence from the restaurant industry. Review of Financial Studies 29(9), 2387–2418.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249–275.
Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of application
assistance and information in college decisions results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205–1242.
Bleemer, Z., M. Brown, D. Lee, K. Strair, and W. van der Klaauw (2017). Echoes of rising tuition
in students borrowing, educational attainment, and homeownership in post-recession America.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2015). Do private equity owned firms have better
management practices? The American Economic Review 105(5), 442–446.
Boucly, Q., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2011).
Economics 102(2), 432–453.

Growth LBOs.

Journal of Financial

Bound, J., M. Lovenheim, and S. Turner (2007). Understanding the decrease in college completion
rates and the increased time to the baccalaureate degree. Population Studies Center Research
Report 7, 626.
Bound, J., M. F. Lovenheim, and S. Turner (2010). Why have college completion rates declined?
An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2(3), 129–57.
Bound, J. and S. Turner (2007). Cohort crowding: How resources affect collegiate attainment.
Journal of Public Economics 91(5-6), 877–899.
32

Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Crossing the finish line: Completing
college at America’s public universities, Volume 52. Princeton University Press.
Brown, G. W., O. Gredil, and S. N. Kaplan (2013). Do private equity funds game returns? Working
Paper.
Cao, J. and J. Lerner (2009). The performance of reverse leveraged buyouts. Journal of Financial
Economics 91(2), 139–157.
Cellini, S., R. Darolia, and L. Turner (2017). Where do students go when for-profit colleges lose
federal aid? Working Paper.
Cellini, S. R. and L. Chaudhary (2014). The labor market returns to a for-profit college education.
Economics of Education Review 43, 125–140.
Cellini, S. R. and C. Goldin (2014). Does federal student aid raise tuition? New evidence on
for-profit colleges. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 174–206.
Cellini, S. R. and N. Turner (2016). Gainfully employed? Assessing the employment and earnings
of for-profit college students using administrative data. NBER Working Paper No. 22287.
CFBP (2012). Private student loans report. Report to the U.S. Senate.
Clemens, J. and J. D. Gottlieb (2014). Do physicians’ financial incentives affect medical treatment
and patient health? American Economic Review 104(4), 1320–49.
Cohn, J., N. Nestoriak, and M. Wardlaw (2017). Private equity buyouts and workplace safety.
Working Paper.
Cornelli, F. and O. Karakaş (2015). CEO turnover in LBOs: The role of boards. Working Paper.
Cottom, T. M. (2017). Lower ed: The troubling rise of for-profit colleges in the new economy. New
Press, The.
Dafny, L., K. Ho, and R. S. Lee (2016). The price effects of cross-market hospital mergers. NBER
Working Paper No. 22106.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, K. Handley, R. Jarmin, J. Lerner, and J. Miranda (2014). Private
equity, jobs, and productivity. The American Economic Review 104(12), 3956–3990.
Deming, D. J., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2012, dec). The for-profit postsecondary school sector:
Nimble critters or agile predators? Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(1), 139–64.
Deming, D. J., N. Yuchtman, A. Abulafi, C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2016). The value of
postsecondary credentials in the labor market: An experimental study. The American Economic
Review 106(3), 778–806.
Duggan, M. G. (2000). Hospital ownership and public medical spending. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 115(4), 1343–1373.
Eaton, C., J. Habinek, A. Goldstein, C. Dioun, D. G. Santibáñez Godoy, and R. Osley-Thomas
(2016). The financialization of US higher education. Socio-Economic Review 14(3), 507–535.
Ewens, M., M. Rhodes-Kropf, and I. A. Strebulaev (2016). Insider financing and venture capital
returns. Working Paper.
Fracassi, C., A. Previtero, and A. Sheen (2017). Is private equity good for consumers? Working
33

Paper.
GAO (2014). Federal student loans: Impact of loan limit increases on college prices is difficult to
discern. United States Government Accountability Office Report GAO-14-7.
Gilpin, G. and C. Stoddard (2017). Does regulating for-profit colleges improve educational
outcomes? What we know, what we don’t know, and what we need to find out. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 36(4), 942–950.
Glaeser, E. L. and A. Shleifer (2001).
Economics 81(1), 99–115.

Not-for-profit entrepreneurs.

Journal of Public

Gompers, P., S. N. Kaplan, and V. Mukharlyamov (2016). What do private equity firms say they
do? Journal of Financial Economics 121(3), 449–476.
Goodman, S., A. Isen, and C. Yannelis (2017). A day late and a dollar short: Limits, liquidity and
household formation for student borrowers. Working Paper.
Guo, S., E. S. Hotchkiss, and W. Song (2011). Do buyouts (still) create value? The Journal of
Finance 66(2), 479–517.
Hackmann, M. B. and R. V. Pohl (2018). Patient vs. provider incentives in long term care. NBER
Working Paper No. 25178.
Hansmann, H. B. (1980). The role of nonprofit enterprise. The Yale Law Journal 89(5), 835–901.
Hart, O., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1997). The proper scope of government: Theory and an
application to prisons. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1127–1161.
Hastings, J., C. Nielson, and S. Zimmerman (2017). The effects of earnings disclosure on college
enrollment decisions. Working Paper.
Holmstrom, B. and S. N. Kaplan (2001). Corporate governance and merger activity in the United
States: Making sense of the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(2), 121–144.
ICAS. Steps the Education Department should immediately take to curb default rate manipulation.
Technical report.
Jensen, M. C. (1989). Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review.
Kaplan, S. (1989). The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value.
Journal of Financial Economics 24(2), 217–254.
Kaplan, S. N. and P. Strömberg (2009). Leveraged buyouts and private equity. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23(1), 121–146.
Kelchen, R. (2017, January). How much do for-profit colleges rely on federal funds? Brookings
Institution Chalkboard.
Krishnan, K. and P. Wang (2017). The cost of financing education: Can student debt hinder
entrepreneurship? Working Paper.
Lang, K. and R. Weinstein (2013). The wage effects of not-for-profit and for-profit certifications:
Better data, somewhat different results. Labour Economics 24, 230–243.
Lerner, J. and A. Schoar (2005). Does legal enforcement affect financial transactions? The
contractual channel in private equity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1), 223–246.
34

Liu, Y. T. and C. Belfield (2014). The labor market returns to for-profit higher education:
Evidence for transfer students. A CAPSEE Working Paper. Center for Analysis of Postsecondary
Education and Employment.
Ljungqvist, A., L. Persson, and J. Tag (2016). Private equity’s unintended dark side: On the
economic consequences of excessive delistings. Working Paper.
Looney, A. and C. Yannelis (2015). A crisis in student loans? How changes in the characteristics
of borrowers and in the institutions they attended contributed to rising loan defaults. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1–89.
Lucca, D. O., T. Nadauld, and K. Shen (2016). Credit supply and the rise in college tuition:
Evidence from the expansion in federal student aid programs. Working Paper.
Ma, W., P. Ouimet, and E. Simintzi (2018). Mergers and acquisitions, technological change and
inequality. Working Paper.
Matsa, D. A. (2011). Running on empty? financial leverage and product quality in the supermarket
industry. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3(1), 137–73.
Metrick, A. and A. Yasuda (2010). The economics of private equity funds. The Review of Financial
Studies 23(6), 2303–2341.
Mueller, H. and C. Yannelis (2019). The rise in student loan defaults. Journal of Financial
Economics 131(1), 1–19.
Muscarella, C. J. and M. R. Vetsuypens (1990). Efficiency and organizational structure: A study
of reverse LBOs. The Journal of Finance 45(5), 1389–1413.
Senate (2012). For profit higher education: The failure to safeguard the federal investment and
ensure student success.
Shleifer, A. and L. H. Summers (1988). Breach of trust in hostile takeovers. In Corporate
Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, pp. 33–68. University of Chicago Press.
Sloan, F. A., G. A. Picone, D. H. Taylor, and S.-Y. Chou (2001). Hospital ownership and cost and
quality of care: is there a dime’s worth of difference? Journal of Health Economics 20(1), 1–21.
Stinebrickner, R. and T. Stinebrickner (2013). A major in science? Initial beliefs and final
outcomes for college major and dropout. Review of Economic Studies 83(1), 426–472.
Stinebrickner, T. and R. Stinebrickner (2012). Learning about academic ability and the college
dropout decision. Journal of Labor Economics 30(4), 707–748.
Webber, D. A. and R. G. Ehrenberg (2010). Do expenditures other than instructional expenditures
affect graduation and persistence rates in American higher education? Economics of Education
Review 29(6), 947–958.
Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2014). Determinants of college major choice: Identification using an
information experiment. Review of Economic Studies 82(2), 791–824.

35

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Institution Type

Schools per firm
Operating margin (mill 2015$)
Publicly traded
Selective admissions
Highest degree offered
Graduation rate

⇤⇤

⇤

Repayment rate (3 year)†
Mean earnings after school (2015 $)
Full-time faculty per 100 students

±

Full-time faculty
Share spending on instruction
Spending on instruction (mill 2015 $)
Students‡

Nonprofit, State

Community

For profit, not PE

PE owned

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

1.03

1.05

1.49

8.07

(0.45)

(0.62)

(4.19)

(11.49)

40

6

6

34

(102)

(16)

(34)

(63)

0.00

0.00

0.14

0.000

(0.000)

(0.00)

(0.35)

(0.00)

0.68

0.089

0.092

0.077

(0.467)

(0.29)

(0.29)

(0.27)

1.12

2.12

2.32

2.01

(0.40)

(0.33)

(0.75)

(0.723)

0.52

0.55

0.48

(0.21)

(0.25)

(0.21)

0.64

0.46

0.41

0.34

(0.17)

(0.13)

(0.16)

(0.14)

49,067

36,915

31,769

33,523

(15,121)

(7,9394)

(11,254)

(11,125)

6.28

4.38

4.48

3.62

(4.653)

(4.26)

(4.1)

(2.66)

261

109

16

25

(465)

(110)

(29)

(45)

0.47

0.54

0.42

0.36

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.24)

(0.15)

38

17

2

4

(70)

(23)

(6)

(7)

3,885

3,148

387

747

(5,656)

(3,866)

(1,232)

(1,413)

Continued on following page

36

Table 1 continued

1st law enforcement action
Share students white
Loan per borrower (2015 $)
Tuition revenue per student (2015 $)
Online
Pell grants per student (2015 $)
Share students with federal grant aid

N (school-year obs)

Nonprofit, State

Community

For profit, not PE

PE owned

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

Mean
(Std Dev)

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.004

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.015)

(0.059)

0.67

0.69

0.51

0.44

(0.28)

(0.25)

(0.32)

(0.26)

5,177

4,008

6,700

8,124

(2,370)

(2,016)

(2,978)

(2,834)

10,996

3,673

14,211

17,521

(7,110)

(3,883)

(7,678)

(7,303)

0.000

0.000

0.016

0.027

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.127)

(0.161)

1,351

1,726

4,109

4,609

(1,683)

(1,293)

(3,193)

(3,105)

0.40

0.50

0.67

0.72

(0.23)

(0.21)

(0.24)

(0.20)

55,104

29,678

34,285

4,540

Note: This table contains summary statistics at the school (UnitID, or campus) level. The exception is profits, which
are at the firm/institution-year (SystemID) level; from left, N=47,834; 23,929; 8,254; and 438. ‡ Full-time equivalent
(applies to all below). ⇤ Graduation rate is the share of students that graduate within 150 percent of normal time for
programs of 2 years or less duration. ± Full-time faculty. † Share of students in repayment after three years (have paid
back at least $1 in principal). ⇤⇤ Highest degree offered is 1 for 4-year degrees and higher, 2 for 2-year degrees, and 3
for less-than-2-year degrees and certificates.

37

Table 2: Private Equity Targeting

Dependent variable: Indicator for school experiencing private equity buyout in following year
(1)
Community colleges in CZ
For-profits in CZ
Log FTE students in CZ
Profit growth (last year)
Log profits
Log FTE students

(2)

.023**
(.011)
-.0083**
(.004)
.11*
(.063)
-.0014
(.0011)
.17***
(.043)
.46***
(.059)

3-yr repayment rate

N
Pseudo R2

(4)

-.047
(.18)

.05**
(.022)
-.035***
(.0084)
.35**
(.14)
-.0036**
(.0015)
.22***
(.081)
.42***
(.11)
-2.1***
(.72)
-.55
(.39)

-.0015
(.0011)
.19***
(.043)
.46***
(.061)
-4.7***
(.57)

Share students white

Year f.e.

(3)

Y

Y

Y

Y

21436
.13

13738
.089

20892
.13

10340
.17

Note: This table shows estimates from logit regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator for the schoolyear immediately preceding a private equity buyout. All other years for target schools are excluded from the sample.
The sample is restricted to for-profit, non-publicly traded schools. Only variables with predictive power over buyouts
are shown.

38

Table 3: Private Equity Ownership and Financial Outcomes
Panel 1
Dependent variable:

Tuition per student

(1)
PE buyout

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Loan per borrower

NNM±
(3)

(2)

1610** 1637*** 2107**
(612)
(574)
(973)
N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

102355 102355
.82
.84

(4)
582***
(186)

(5)

NNM±
(6)

591*** 641**
(185)
(278)

-

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

9130
-

77497
.67

77497
.67

16767

-

Panel 2
Dependent variable:

Federal grants per student

(1)
PE buyout

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

(2)

837*** 784***
(176)
(219)

Log profits

NNM±
(3)

(4)

(5)

NNM±
(6)

1450**
(597)

.57***
(.14)

.57***
(.13)

.93***
(.17)

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

86412
.53

86412
.55

20947
-

104459 104459
.84
.84

17785
-

Note: This table shows estimates of the effect of private equity ownership on financials (Panel 1) and on government
aid-related student outcomes (Panel 2). Dependent variables are in millions of 2015$ in Panel 1, and 2015$ in Panel
2. ± Nearest-neighbor matching is done as in previous tables. Observations are at the SystemID-year level for profits,
and the UnitID-year level elsewhere. ‡ We control for the share of students who are white, black, and Hispanic, and the
average amount of federal Pell grants per student, a proxy for low-income students. † These are indicators for having
selective admissions, public ownership, and are fixed effects for highest degree offered. The latter includes less than
2-year (certificate), 2-year, or 4-year. Standard errors two-way clustered by SystemID and year. Coefficients marked
with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

39

Table 4: Effect of Loan Limit Increase
Panel 1: Borrowing
Dependent Variable: Average loan per borrower (2015$)

PE owned·Post 2007
PE owned
Post 2007

Controls
Sample
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

909***
(90)
1743***
(99)
2032***
(24)

1110***
(95)

1086***
(100)

798***
(97)
930***
(97)
2039***
(49)

1009***
(106)

967***
(112)

N
All
N
N
69056
.29

N
All
Y
Y
69056
.68

Y
All
Y
Y
64969
.68

N
For-Profits
N
N
29402
.29

N
For-Profits
Y
Y
29402
.63

Y
For-Profits
Y
Y
26758
.63

Panel 2: Tuition
Dependent Variable: Average tuition (2015$)

PE owned·Post 2007
PE owned
Post 2007

Controls
Sample
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1591***
(247)
5427***
(246)
2472***
(55)

1656***
(262)

1310***
(215)

1193***
(262)
1929***
(268)
2708***
(110)

1238***
(308)

1161***
(256)

N
All
N
N
63123
.26

N
All
Y
Y
63123
.83

Y
All
Y
Y
59386
.86

N
For-Profits
N
N
14156
.2

N
For-Profits
Y
Y
14156
.62

Y
For-Profits
Y
Y
13835
.75

Note: This table shows the difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of the 2007 loan limit increase on borrowing,
in Panel 1, and tuition, in Panel 2. Standard errors are clustered at the systemID level. Coefficients marked with *,
**,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

40

Table 5: Private Equity Ownership and Student Outcomes
Panel 1
Dependent variable:

PE buyout

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Graduation rate (share graduate
in 150% normal time)

Repayment rate (3 year)

(1)

(2)

NNM±
(3)

(4)

(5)

NNM±
(6)

-.06***
(.012)

-.059***
(.012)

-.041*
(.023)

-.035**
(.011)

-.032**
(.0091)

-.057*
(.032)

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

56965
.8

56839
.81

7883
-

28201
.96

28201
.96

4623
-

Panel 2
Dependent variable:

PE buyout

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Log mean earnings

Log 50th pctile earnings

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.061***
(.013)

-.05**
(.012)

-.057**
(.017)

-.043*
(.016)

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

17736
.97

17736
.97

17736
.97

17736
.97

Note: These panels show regression estimates (OLS) of the effect of private equity ownership on student outcomes,
at the school (UnitID)-year level. ± Nearest-neighbor matching is done within the sample of other for-profit schools.
The dependent variable is measured the year after the treated school’s buyout. Matching is exactly on the year before
the treated school’s buyout, and then on characteristics.‡ We control for the share of students who are white, black, and
Hispanic, as well as the average amount of federal Pell grants per student, a proxy for low-income students. † Indicators
for having selective admissions, public ownership, and fixed effects for highest degree offered. The latter includes less
than 2-year (certificate), 2-year, or 4-year. Standard errors two-way clustered by SystemID and year. Coefficients
marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

41

Table 6: Cohort Partial Treatment Effect of Private Equity Ownership on Student Outcomes

Dependent variable (3 year):

Graduation rate
(share graduate in
150% normal time)

Repayment rate

(1)

(2)

-.036***
(.012)

-.054***
(.013)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

40088
.76

21846
.92

PE buyout (partially treated cohort)

School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Note: These panels show regression estimates (OLS) of the partial treatment effect of private equity ownership on
student outcomes, at the school (UnitID)-year level. We limit the sample to two cohorts in two-year programs: the
cohort that enrolled in the year before the first private equity-owned year, and the cohort that enrolled two years before
the first private equity-owned year. The variable “PE owned” is one for the former cohort, which had one year of
private equity treatment, and zero for the earlier cohort, which had no private equity treatment. † Indicators for having
selective admissions and public ownership. Standard errors two-way clustered by SystemID and year. Coefficients
marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

42

Table 7: Private Equity Ownership and Operational Outcomes
Panel 1
Dependent variable:

PE buyout

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Faculty per 100 students

Instruction spending share

CEO⇤

(1)

(2)

NNM±
(3)

-.45**
(.19)

-.36*
(.18)

-.2
(.65)

-.028*
(.016)

-.029*
(.016)

-.049**
(.024)

0.0517**
(0.0215)

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

62,432
0.83

62,432
0.83

7833
-

97401
.75

97401
.75

9343
-

99137
.28

(4)

(5)

NNM±
(6)

(7)

Panel 2
Dependent variable:

PE owned

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Log FTE students

1st law enf. action

Online

(1)

(2)

NNM±
(3)

.39***
(.056)

.37***
(.055)

.88***
(.1)

.0036***
(.00094)

.0036***
(.00091)

.015*
(.0076)

.015*
(.0076)

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

123053
.97

123053
.97

33049
-

123023
.16

123023
.16

123053
.55

123053
.55

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Note: This table shows regression estimates (OLS) of the effect of private equity ownership on education inputs and
operational outcomes. Observations are at the school (UnitID)-year level. ⇤ Dependent variable is an indicator for a
change in school CEO within first three years after buyout. ± Nearest-neighbor matching is done within the sample of
other for-profit schools, where the dependent variable is measured the year after the treated school’s buyout. Matching
is exactly on the year before the treated school’s buyout, and then on characteristics. ‡ We control for the share of
students who are white, black, and Hispanic, and the average amount of federal Pell grants per student, a proxy for
low-income students. † These are indicators for having selective admissions, public ownership, and are fixed effects
for highest degree offered. The latter includes less than 2-year (certificate), 2-year, or 4-year. Standard errors two-way
clustered by SystemID and year. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

43

Figure 1: For Profit Schools Share of Loan Defaults and Enrollment

Note: The left graph shows the for-profit share of total U.S. postsecondary enrollment by whether a school was ever
private equity-owned. The right graph shows the share of total student loan defaults within two years of entering
repayment, by whether a school was ever private equity-owned.

44

Figure 2: Employees in Sales and Non-Instructional Activities

Note: The figure above shows the share of employees who do sales and non-instructional activities by institution type
from 2012 to 2015 (data available only for these years).

45

Figure 3: Per-student Tuition and Per-student Loan Event Studies
s

Note: The figures above show, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the means of tuition per student
and average loan per student in the years around the ownership change. The level of observation is the ultimate parent
company, or SystemID level (N=88 in each year) for the average loan variable. It is at the school, or UnitID level for
the tuition per student variable, for which we restrict the observations to schools that existed in the year prior to the
buyout (N=697). We restrict the observations to schools that existed in the year prior to the buyout. 95% confidence
intervals shown.

46

Figure 4: Loan Limit Increase Diff-in-diff Coefficients over Time

Note: The figure above shows coefficients

j

from the following specification Lit = ↵i + ↵t +

2015
X

j=2001

j P Ei

⇤

1[Y ear = j] + Xit + "it , where 2006 is the base year. The areas represent 95% confidence intervals. Results
are enrollment weighted. The vertical line is positioned before 2007, when student borrowing limits were increased.
Standard errors are clustered at the school system level.

47

Figure 5: Graduation Rate and Repayment Rate Event Studies
s

Note: The figures above show, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the means of the graduation rate
and the repayment rate in the years around the ownership change. The level of observation is the school, or UnitID
level (N=697). We omit partially treated cohorts. For 4-year schools, this consists of the cohorts enrolled starting in
the three years preceding the buyout year. For 2-year schools, this consists of the cohort enrolled the year before the
buyout year. There are no observations for repayment rates in years -5 or 5 (there is generally less coverage in the
data). 95% confidence intervals shown.

48

s
s
When Investor Incentives and Consumer Interests Diverge:
Private Equity in Higher Education

Online Appendix
Charlie Eaton, Sabrina T. Howell & Constantine Yannelissss

sss

Appendix A: Institutional Context
This Appendix first briefly describes the history and defining characteristics of the for-profit
higher education sector. Then, in Section 2, we provide evidence from existing literature that
returns to for-profit education are likely worse – and definitely no better than – similarly selective
public community colleges. We explain how the federal student loan and grant programs create
misaligned incentives in Section 3. Finally, in Section 4, we discuss the role of private equity in
for-profit higher education.

A.1 History and defining features of for-profit higher education
For-profit colleges are incentivized to target prospective students whose low incomes qualify
them to pay tuition primarily with federal grants and loans. Schools receive federal grants and
loans when the student enters school, and revenue is largely disconnected from graduation rates
and labor market outcomes. The taxpayer bears the cost of student defaults.1 An absence of
accessible information, the difficulty of assessing returns to education, and long lags between
enrollment and job placement impede low product quality from translating into reduced future
sales (Arcidiacono et al. 2016, Bettinger et al. 2012, Wiswall and Zafar 2014). Thus government
aid and loan guarantees create a potential misalignment of incentives between for-profit school
owners and customers.
Proprietary, or for-profit, schools have existed in the U.S since the early 1900s. For much of the
20th century, they offered primarily technical and business skills, such as typing. They were also
mostly independent (i.e. single-unit businesses) and privately held. In 1981, for-profit enrollment
was just 0.2 percent of total enrollment. Consolidation and increases in external equity financing
1

Legislation proposed in the U.S. Congress in November, 2017 would require schools to repay a portion of
defaulted student loans. A Wall Street Journal article noted that “This so called skin-in-the-game proposal has
been long fought by the powerful higher education lobby.” See https://www.wsj.com/articles/house-gop-to-proposesweeping-changes-to-higher-education-1511956800.

Online Appendix

began in the 1980s, with substantial private equity involvement. Substantial growth accompanied
these changes; between 1990 and 1995, for-profit enrollment was between 0.35 and 0.82 million,
or 2-5 percent of total enrollment. The largest for-profits today are publicly traded, and all had
private equity investment at one time (see Table C.1). The sector has continued to grow. Between
2010 and 2016, annual total enrollment at for-profit schools has been between 1.5 and 2.7 million
students, or between 8 percent and 11 percent of total enrollment in all higher education.
While the sector is heterogenous, compared to their nonprofit and public counterparts, forprofits have smaller and leaner physical plants, have far more students in online learning programs,
have few non-instructional services like athletics, typically have no research activities, hire most
faculty on short-term contracts, and spend more on career counseling (Lang and Weinstein 2013).2
In lieu of large humanities programs, for-profits focus on teaching specific, often vocational, skills
designed to meet specific job descriptions, such as hair stylist or IT specialist. To minimize costs,
successful for-profits typically offer structured, focused programs of study with few electives. The
material is standardized and replicated across a company’s campuses and online programs. This
approach has been quite successful; chains and online institutions were responsible for almost 90
percent of the growth of the for-profit sector in the 2000s (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012).
Resources are focused on sales and marketing. Deming et al. (2012) cite evidence that at large
national for-profit chains, sales and marketing expenditure comprised 24 percent of revenue in
2009, making the average cost of acquiring a new customer $4,000. In contrast, sales and
marketing comprises about 10 of revenue in healthcare, and 8 percent in financial services.3 A
U.S. Senate staff report found that in 2010, 30 representative for-profit schools employed about
one recruiter for every 53 students, ten times the number of career services staff and 2.5 times the
number of support services staff (Senate 2012). Recruiters’ compensation was closely tied to new
enrollments.

The report found that public for-profits spend 23 percent of their revenue on

2

While the sector is dominated by a few large chains, such as the University of Phoenix, there are many small
schools providing niche vocational certificates for jobs such as dog grooming (Deming et al., 2012). Just over half
of the degrees awarded by for-profits are certificates, but for-profits offer undergraduate, doctorate, and many other
degrees.
3
See http://deloitte.wsj.com/cmo/2017/01/24/who-has-the-biggest-marketing-budgets/

Online Appendix

marketing and recruiting, and cited evidence of large-scale student deception about completion
rates, placement rates, and other statistics. The report concluded that the lack of student support
“may help to explain why more than half a million students who enrolled in 2008-9 left without a
degree or Certificate by mid-2010.” A 2010 GAO investigation sent undercover agents to apply to
for-profits.

They found deceptive marketing at all targeted schools, and applicants “were

encouraged by college personnel to falsify their financial aid forms to qualify for federal aid” at
26 percent of schools.4
The student body at for-profit schools is quite different than that at other schools, even the
closest comparison, public community colleges. Deming, Goldin, and Katz (2012) compare forprofit schools to community colleges, public, and nonprofit institutions. They note that on average,
students at for-profits come from lower-income families and are more likely to be single parents
than students in community colleges (two-year public schools). Other evidence that students at forprofit schools are disproportionately less well-prepared, and more likely to be ethnic minorities, is
in Chung (2012). Similarly, Looney and Yannelis (2015) show that for-profit borrowers tend to be
poorer, older, and have worse labor post-school market outcomes.5
The 2000s saw a dramatic increase in student loan volumes and defaults. After 2008, high
rates of student defaults and the new political environment led to increased scrutiny and
regulatory oversight of for-profit colleges. Enrollment growth slowed, and the large chains saw
substantial declines in new student volumes. The Obama Administration sought to implement
tighter controls over eligibility for federal student aid, and together with local law enforcement,
began to aggressively pursue for-profit higher education companies for various types of fraud.
4

https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-948T
For example, among dependent borrowers, median family income of students at for-profit schools was $30,000,
compared to $48,000 at 2-year and nonselective 4-year schools. In 2011, only 37 percent of borrowers at for-profit
schools were dependents, compared to 50 percent (70 percent) at 2-year (nonselective 4-year) institutions. Deming
et al. (2012) find that for-profits leave students with higher unemployment, lower earnings, and higher loan default
rates than comparable students who graduated from other types of schools. Looney and Yannelis (2015) find that for
the cohort of students that left school in 2011, over 20 percent were unemployed two years later, and median earnings
were about $20,000. The former is higher, and the latter is lower, than for any other institution type, and furthermore
increased (decreased) more relative to 2000 than for any other institution type. The five-year cohort default rate in
2011 was 47 percent, compared to 38 percent (27 percent) at 2-year (nonselective 4-year) institutions.
5

Online Appendix

A.2

Returns to For-Profit Education

Significant information and market frictions exist in the higher education sector (Bettinger et al.
(2012); Wiswall and Zafar (2014)). Also, students targeted by for-profits are among the most
stressed and disadvantaged portions of the population, making them more prone to manipulative
advertising than other groups; 29 percent are single parents, compared to 12 percent at community
colleges, and their family income is about half that of students at community colleges (Deming,
Goldin, and Katz 2012, Schilbach, Schofield, and Mullainathan 2016). Despite these differences,
Cellini, Darolia, and Turner (2017) show that community colleges, which have open enrollment
(i.e. are not selective or capacity constrained), are substitutes to for-profit schools. These public
institutions devote far fewer resources to advertising as is shown in the main text, and thus do not
compete in a meaningful way for students.
There is accumulating causal evidence that relative to their substitutes – public community
colleges – the returns to for-profit education are zero or negative. Deming et al. (2016) assess
employer perceptions of higher education institutions using an experiment in which they sent
resumes with different types of degrees to job openings. They found that applicants with business
BAs from large online for-profit schools were roughly 22 percent less likely to be contacted than
the same applicants with similar degrees from nonselective public schools. Within health jobs,
this discrepancy was 57 percent. Having a for-profit associates degree made a person no more
likely to be contacted than the same resume with no postsecondary degree at all. Deming et al.
(2016) conclude that “employers appear to view for-profit postsecondary credentials as a negative
signal of applicant quality, particularly when objective measures of quality such as a licensing
exam are unavailable.”

In a similar experiment in which resumes were randomly sent to

employers, Darolia et al. (2015) found that employers did not prefer applicants with a for-profit
degree to those with no college at all. Further, they found that employers seemed to slightly prefer
(albeit not significantly) applicants with public community college degrees over those with
comparable for-profit degrees.
Using administrative data from the National Student Clearinghouse between 2000 and 2012,
Online Appendix

Liu and Belfield (2014) find large wage penalties when community college students transfer to a
for-profit college rather than a nonprofit college. They use transcript and other data to control for
selection into for-profits. Cellini and Chaudhary (2014) use data from the NLSY97 to show that
for-profit graduates are not more likely to be employed than comparable people with only high
school degrees; though they find a positive effect on earnings (of about 4 percent per year), this is
contingent on program completion, which many enrollees do not accomplish. The upper bound on
their findings are substantially lower than the returns that other studies have calculated to public
community colleges (e.g. Jacobson et al. 2005, Jepsen et al. 2014).6
Cellini and Turner (2016) address the selection problem by examining within-student wages
before and after attending college, using administrative data on about 1.4 million students. They
find that despite much higher tuition, for-profit students experience smaller earnings increases
than students at comparable public community colleges. The vast majority of for-profit students
experience both lower earnings and higher debt after college than they did before college. Finally,
Armona et al. (2017) assess the effect of attending a for-profit college relative to a local public
college or university using an instrumental variables strategy. They combine local labor market
shocks with local school supply to instrument for enrollment in a for-profit relative to a community
college. They find that students at for-profits are less likely to be employed, have lower earnings,
and have higher debt and higher default rates than students at public counterparts.

A.3

Federal Student Loans and Grants

For-profit higher education companies depend heavily on federal student loans and grants; the
largest chains get over 80 percent of their revenue from federal sources. This fraction would be
even higher if it were not for the 90-10 rules, and a statutory limit that 90 percent of revenue
can come from Title IV loan and grant programs, which exclude veteran and military benefits.
6

In contrast to the above studies, Lang and Weinstein (2013) find no difference in returns to certificate programs
across for-profits and non-profits. They compare labor market outcomes for completers and non-completers across
institution types, arguing that if this difference is similar, lower earnings for for-profit graduates are likely explained
by the more disadvantaged student body at for-profit schools.

Online Appendix

When these sources are included, many for-profits exceed the 90 percent threshold (Kelchen 2017).
Maintaining Title IV eligibility is crucial for most higher education institutions, and it requires
maintaining accreditation with one of a number of private accrediting agencies, and meeting certain
standards, notably limits on the share of students that default over a three-year period.
Federal student loan programs were established in the 1960s and 1970s, and were targeted to
upper middle class students attending higher tuition private colleges (Shireman, 2017).
Government budget rules made it difficult for the federal government to lend directly to students
without having to report the loans as adding to the deficit. Congress therefore subsidized the
provision of federal loans by private lenders by legislating that the U.S. Department of Education
would provide guarantees to private lenders (Berman and Stivers, 2016). That is, the federal
government would cover bank losses when students fail to repay loans. The federal government
also created the Student Loan Marketing Association, commonly known as Sallie Mae, in 1973.
Sallie Mae raised capital to buy and offer student loans by securitizing loans and selling those
securities to investors.
The banking industry aggressively lobbied for the expansion of the guaranteed student loan
program during the 1980s (Wilson 1987, Berman and Stivers 2016, Shireman, 2017). This was
accomplished in 1991, when unsubsidized Stafford loans were introduced.

These were

unsubsidized because the federal government would not pay interest accrued while the borrower
was in school, but would guarantee against non-repayment. The limit for total borrowing with
both subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans doubled from about $30,000 to over $70,000 (in
2015 dollars).7
The Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 had changed federal accounting rule and made it
possible for the federal government to directly lend to students at a much lower cost (Berman and
Stivers 2016). However, the government opted to maintain the more costly guarantee subsidies
from the federal government to private lenders, so that Sallie Mae and commercial banks would
receive support to provide most of the expanded federal student loan programs.
7

See Financial Aid for more information.

Online Appendix

Private lenders and for-profit colleges receiving the loans now had direct incentives to promote
the expansion of student borrowing. This was achieved though regular increases in borrowing
caps, higher interest rates, and restrictions on borrowers’ ability to discharge debt in bankruptcy.
The result was a large increase in federally guaranteed student debt disbursements from about $20
billion per year during the 1980s to $120 billion at the peak in 2011. Per student annual borrowing
flows increased more than three-fold from a little less than $2,000 per student in the 1980s to over
$7,000 in 2011.8
Looney and Yannelis (2015) find evidence that the massive increases in student loan defaults
between 2000 and 2011 was concentrated in for-profit schools, and arose in part because of their
growth. Federal loans to undergraduate borrowers at for-profit schools increased from $3.6 billion
in 2000 to $18 billion in 2011. Borrowers entering repayment at for-profit schools increased from
just over 200,000 individuals in 2000 to about 900,000 in 2011.
Today, Title IV programs consist of Stafford loans, Perkins loans, PLUS loans for parents,
Pell Grants, and work study programs. The amount of federal aid a student may receive depends
on family-specific factors as well as the cost of attendance, of which the most important element
is tuition. Cellini and Goldin (2014) point out that this creates an incentive for for-profit schools
to increase tuition above cost. They evaluate whether for-profits increase tuition in response to
increases in federal loan subsidies, and find some evidence for federal aid capture.

Using

administrative data from California between 1989 and 2003, Cellini (2010) finds that increases in
federal and state grants and loans is strongly correlated with for-profit school entry, particularly in
high poverty counties.9
Pell Grants are need-based awards that depend on a student’s family income, the cost of school
attendance, and the length and type of program.10 The average Pell grant is about $3,724 per year,
8

Per full time enrolled student. Available at the College Board.
In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, Sallie Mae and the major consumer banks found themselves unable to
raise adequate capital from securities markets to fund federal student loans. The Obama administration responded by
eliminating the provision of federal student loans through private lenders. Instead, the Department of Education would
provide loans directly to students. It used savings from this change to fund a significant expansion of Pell Grants
(Shireman, 2017).
10
The Department of Education has more information on the Pell grant program.
9

Online Appendix

and the maximum is $5,775.11 In 2008-09, for-profits enrolled 12 percent of students but accounted
for 24 percent of Pell grant disbursement, and 26 percent of federal student loan disbursements
(Deming et al. 2012).

A.4 Private Equity in Higher Education
A private equity buyout usually affects the target firm’s finances, its operations, or both. The key
financial innovation of the typical leveraged buyout is to pay for much of the acquisition with debt
issued by the target firm. Beyond changing in the target’s capital structure, private equity firms
also impose transaction and monitoring fees on the target. Metrick and Yasuda (2010) find that
that these fees can represent as much as 90 percent of compensation to the private equity firm,
suggesting that they could be material costs to the target firm. They are, however, difficult to
observe (Metrick and Yasuda 2011).

In operations, Bloom et al. (2015) directly measure

management practices and find that private equity owned firms have better management, equaled
only by public firms and family firms run by external CEOs. In manufacturing, Davis et al. (2014)
find that private equity owned firms expand productive plants and shutter underperforming ones.
Bernstein and Sheen (2016) also find evidence of better operations in private equity owned
restaurants, in part through better worker training and incentive alignment.
Private equity investments in higher education have generally taken one of two forms. One is
the purchase of independent (small, private) colleges, usually with consolidation intent. The second
is the large buyout of an existing chain institution; the biggest have taken public companies private.
For example, in 2007 KKR and SAC Capital took Laureate Education private for $3.8 billion.12 An
example of the first type of investment, and which illustrates the broader pattern we find in the data,
is TA Associates’ buyout of Florida Career College for $53 million in 2004. At the time, Florida
11

See theCollege Board for more information.
For other evidence on publicly traded and privately owned schools, see Eaton et al. (2016). Other examples
include Goldman Sachs taking Education Management Corp (EDMC) private in 2006 for $3.4 billion, and various
investors, including Vistria Group, taking Apollo Education Group (University of Phoenix) private in 2017 for $1.1
billion.
12

Online Appendix

Career College had four campuses and 2,500 students. After adding three additional campuses
and expanding enrollment to 4,000 students, TA Associates sold its stake in 2007 for $192 million,
almost quadrupling its investment. Later in 2007, federal investigators found employees producing
fraudulent high school diplomas for applicants, and encouraging students to lie about their high
school status.13
Florida Career also illustrates how private equity pressures for rapid growth in operating
margins can lead to declines in graduation rates. After TA Associates exited, Florida Career
Colleges along with Midwest Career Colleges was acquired by Greenhill Capital Partners and
Abrams Capital. Initially, the company took steps to address compliance issues. In an email
interview with the authors, however, a high-level manager said: “When presenting annual results
to investors, I told Managing Partner of PE firm [sic] that I wanted to address all the compliance
and regulatory achievements. He laughed and said ’they don’t care about that. All they want to
know is how much money you made them.’” In this context, investors again changed the senior
management of Florida and Midwest Career in 2012. After these changes in executive leadership,
“they started decimating faculty and student services and opening doors to all students regardless
of ability” according to the former high-level manager.
Similar changes occurred after private equity buyouts of existing chains such as the KKR
acquisition of Laureate. A 3,000 page investigative report by the U.S. Senate Health, Labor,
Education, and Pension Committee in 2012 examined complaint data from most of 10 firms for
which it published case studies on firm behavior after buyouts. Student complaints consistently
point to a heavy reliance on part-time instructors with minimal certification and high instructional
staff turnover rates. After the buyout of Concorde Career Colleges by Liberty Partners in 2006,
for example, the entire 2010 class of licensed vocational nursing students at one campus filed a
complaint with administrators. In their complaint, the students wrote that: “instructors [were] late
to start class . . . [by] 20-40 minutes,” lectures were “vague” and “lack[ed] structure,” instructors
were “ill prepared” and spent time “searching for lost papers or tests or equipment” (Senate,
13

See the Chronicle for further information.

Online Appendix

2012, 374)
A student in a separate March 11, 2010 complaint letter complained that the Concorde’s San
Bernardino campus had cycled through three Directors of Nursing and two Assistant Directors
during the student’s first year at the school. Annual faculty turnover across all Concorde campuses
was 42 percent in 2008 and 35 percent in the first 9 months of 2009 (Senate, 2012, 374).
With backing from Warburg Pincus, Bridgepoint Education made similar changes after
acquiring Ashford University and University of the Rockies. Bridgepoint transformed its schools
into exclusively online campuses with 96 percent of faculty working only part-time (Senate,
2012, 310). With 39 percent of its expenditures going to marketing and recruitment, enrollment at
Bridgepoint grew to a high of 77,119 students in 2010 (Senate, 2012, 299). Deceptive recruiting
practices at Bridgepoint may have in turn harmed graduation rates, after-school earnings, and
student debt repayment.

Brent Park, a former recruiter for Bridgepoint submitted written

testimony to a Department of Education rulemaking process in which he wrote: “If we don’t have
a degree they want, we are supposed to convince them that one of ours will work for them
anyway” (Senate, 2012, 305).Consistent with Park’s account of Bridgepoint recruitment practices,
four students submitted complaints that they were deceived about financial aid and whether the
program in which they enrolled would actually provide adequate certification for teaching or
dental licenses (Senate, 2012, 306).
Private equity has played a role in a large fraction of for-profit higher education by enrollment.
Since the late 1990s, private equity-owned schools have contributed to a large portion of the growth
in enrollment. Private equity owned schools have also contributed significantly to the increase in
defaults. In the late 2000s, despite being only approximately 10 percent of enrollments, for-profits
schools accounting approximately 40 percent of student loan defaults. Most of this increase is
attributable to the growth in the default share at private equity backed for-profits. The share of
defaults has remained relatively flat at non private equity backed for-profit schools.
Education-related deals comprise between 2 and 3 percent of total private equity deal volume
and number (Appendix Figure B.1). However, other sectors with similar issues of incentive

Online Appendix

alignment are remarkably large shares of the industry.

Appendix Figure B.1 shows that

healthcare, infrastructure, and defense have at different times comprised significant shares of total
private equity deals. For example, since 2010, health-related deals have comprised about 40
percent of total private equity deal value and volume, and infrastructure has comprised about 14
percent of deal value, and 23 percent of deal volume. These sectors also feature intensive
government subsidy, opaque outcomes that are distant in time from payment for service, and
diffuse customers who may not have the ability to “vote with their feet”.
Private equity ownership may increase profitability through operational changes, or may yield
returns to investors through financial engineering. We do not observe debt, and are in any event
interested in student outcomes, so we focus on operations. Profit growth in higher education, as
in many industries, comes from increasing scale (enrolling more students) and increasing margins
(the gap between costs and revenues). This differs markedly from most nonprofit higher education
institutions, which are primarily concerned with increasing prestige and attracting those students
most likely to succeed in labor markets (Hentschke 2010). It also differs from public institutions,
which are typically capacity constrained by state and local funding limits (Hentschke 2010).

Online Appendix

Appendix B: Additional Tables and Figures

Online Appendix

Table B.1: Variable Descriptions
Variable name

Unit of
Analysis

Years
Source
Description
covered
Panel 1: School Type

Highest degree offered

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Indicator for whether the highest degree offered
is a 4-year degree or higher, a 2-year degree, or a
less-than-2-year certificate or degree.

Selective admissions

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

An indicator for whether the school has any
selective admissions requirements.

Panel 2: Demographics
Share students white

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Share of fall semester undergraduates who are
white.

Total Pell grant revenue per
student (mill 2015$)

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Total revenue from Pell grants awarded to
fulltime first-year students per fulltime first-year
student.

Panel 3: Student Outcomes
Graduation rate, all levels

UnitID

19952010

IPEDS

The graduation rate after 150 percent of normal
time to degree.±±

Cohort default rate (2 year)

OPEID

19902011

NSLDS

The default rate of the exiting cohort of
borrowers 2 years after the cohort leaves school
by either graduating or dropping out.

Loan repayment rate (3
year)

OPEID

20072011

NSLDS

The share of borrowers who have not defaulted
and have repaid at least $1 dollar of principal on
their loans 3 years after exiting school either by
graduating or dropping out.

Wages 6 years after
graduation

OPEID

19982007

College
Score
Card

Average income of exiting student cohort 6 years
after the cohort leaves school by either graduating
or dropping out.

Panel 4: Operational Outcomes
Share of employees in sales

UnitID

20122015
20122015

IPEDS

The share of school employees who are in sales.

Non-instructional share of
employees.

UnitID

IPEDS

The share of school employees who are not
instructional.

Number of students

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

The number of fall semester fulltime equivalent
students.⇤

Online institution

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Indicator for whether a school was an online
campus.±

1st law enforcement action

UnitID

19872015

Authors

Indicator for the school experiencing its first law
enforcement action in year.

Online Appendix

Panel 5: Financial Outcomes
Profits

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Gross operarting margins calculated as total
revenue minus total education and operating
costs.

Net tuition revenue per FTE
Student (2015$)

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Total revenue from tuition, including tuition paid
for by federal and state grant aid programs,
divided by the number of FTE students

Average loan per borrower
(2015$)

UnitID

20002015

IPEDS

Dollars borrowed per borrower among fulltime,
first-year undergraduate student.

Federal grant revenue per
student (mill 2015$)

UnitID

20002015

IPEDS

Total revenue from federal grants awarded to
fulltime first-year students per fulltime first-year
student.

Panel 6: Educational Inputs
Faculty per 100 students

UnitID

Instruction spending share

UnitID

19872015
19872015

IPEDS

The number of fulltime faculty per 100 students.

IPEDS

The share of all expenditures related to
instruction.

Panel 6: Ownership and identifiers
PE

19872015

Authors

Indicator for whether a parent company of a
college or system was under private equity
ownership at the beginning of the academic year.

Public

19872015

Authors

Indicator for whether a parent company of a
college or system was publicly traded at the
beginning of the academic year.⇤⇤

UnitID

19872015

IPEDS

Unique identification number assigned to
postsecondary institutions surveyed in IPEDS.

SystemID

19872015

Authors

A unique identifier created by the authors for the
parent system of postsecondary institutions
including parent companies of for-profit college
chains.

OPEID

19902015

NSLDS

Reporting unit in the National Student Loan Data
System. ††

Year

19872015

IPEDS

Year in which the spring term ends. For example,
the 2001/2002 academic year is referred to as
2002.

Note: ⇤ Each part time student is included in this count as a fraction of a full time based on IPEDS specificied formulas.
±
For-profit institutions are classified as online if they have the word online in their name or if they enroll no more than
33 percent of their students from a single state. This replicates the definition for online institutions used in Deming,
Goldin, and Katz (2012). ±± For 4-year, 2-year, and less-than-2-year degrees and certificates. We include this by year
of the cohort’s first enrollment. ⇤⇤ This is not mutually exclusive from private equity ownership such as in cases where
private equity owners take a company public or acquire substantial shares in a publicly traded company without taking
it private. †† OPEIDs commonly encompass more than one college owned by a for-profit parent company.

Online Appendix

Table B.2: Law Enforcement Actions

Total law enforcement actions linked to IPEDS data

125

Allegation

Prosecuting Agency

Violated rules about recruiting/marketing

44

State AG

56

Student loan fraud

35

DOJ

24

False Claims

31

DOE

23

Misrepresented job placement statistics

28

FBI

5

Misrepresented credentials/accreditation

23

FTC

4

Embezzlement

7

SEC

4

Fraudulent High School Diplomas

5

CFPB

3

Illegal Funds

4

Other

6

Real estate fraud

1
PE-owned

Not PE-owned

Total

Total school-year observations

11,508

198,797

210,305

Number of instances in which school
experienced its first law enforcement action in
years for which it reported enrollments to
IPEDS

32

26

58

⇤

Note: This table documents the law enforcement actions.
compensation to sales force.

⇤

For example, there are regulations limiting incentive

Online Appendix

Table B.3: Nearest-neighbor matching covariate balance

Panel 1: Balance after matching
Control

Treated

N

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

Diff

2-tailed
p-value

Community colleges in CZ

52

8.67

10.21

4623

6.23

7.31

2.44

0.02

Independent for-profits in CZ

52

17.27

22.40

4623

15.30

17.62

1.97

0.43

Log profits

52

14.17

1.48

4623

14.00

1.44

0.17

0.39

Log FTE students in CZ

52

6.33

1.48

4623

6.31

1.15

0.02

0.88

Share students white

52

0.46

0.27

4623

0.59

0.26

-0.14

0.00

IC Level

52

2.17

0.65

4623

1.98

0.71

0.19

0.05

Panel 2: Balance before matching
Control

Treated

N

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

Diff

2-tailed
p-value

Community colleges in CZ

45781

9.71

12.87

574

11.98

14.17

-2.27

0.00

Independent for-profits in CZ

45781 30.76

45.86

574

35.95

47.76

-5.19

0.01

Log profits

40440 14.19

2.30

508

14.31

1.72

-0.12

0.25

Log FTE students in CZ

42428

0.54

0.33

513

0.51

0.29

0.03

0.06

Share students white

45774

6.38

1.48

573

6.75

1.21

-0.37

0.00

IC Level

45794

2.36

0.71

574

2.15

0.77

0.21

0.00

Note: This table reports covariate balance after nearest-neighbor matching, using the matching for log FTE students.
The sample is limited to for-profit, non-publicly traded schools. Further, among PE targets, the sample is limited to
the year prior to the buyout. CZ refers to commuting zone.

Online Appendix

Table B.4: Effect of 2007 Loan Limit Increase on Faculty by PE status

PE owned·Post 2007
Controls
Sample
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: FT Faculty per 100 Students
(1)
(2)
(3)
-1.4*
-.61***
-1
[.73]
[.15]
[.95]
N
Y
Y
All
All
For-Profits
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
41829
37660
8059
.016
.69
.18

Note: This table shows the difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of the 2007 loan limit increase on full time
faculty. Standard errors are clustered at the system level. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05,
p < .01, respectively.

Table B.5: Private Equity Ownership and Demographic Outcomes
Dependent variable:

Share students
white

Pell grants per
FTE student

NNM±

PE owned

Composition controls‡
School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

NNM±

Percent
students on
federal grants
NNM±

(1)
-.05***
[.0073]

(2)
.031
[.028]

(3)
-161
[269]

(4)
675**
[319]

(5)
.015
(.013)

(6)
.041*
[.023]

N
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

-

N
Y
Y
Y

-

123053
.92

33610
-

123053
.61

24503
-

87739
.75

26197
-

Note: This table shows regression estimates (OLS) of the effect of private equity ownership on school operational
outcomes. Observations are at the school (UnitID)-year level. ± Nearest-neighbor matching is done within the sample
of independent for-profit schools. The dependent variable is measured the year after the treated school’s buyout.
Matching is exactly on the year before the treated school’s buyout, and then on characteristics (see Section 3.3 in main
paper). ‡ We control for the share of students who are white, black, and Hispanic , and the average amount of federal
Pell grants per student, a proxy for low-income students. † These are indicators for having selective admissions, public
ownership, and are fixed effects for highest degree offered. The latter includes less than 2-year (certificate), 2-year, or
4-year. Standard errors two-way clustered by SystemID and year. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1,
p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

Online Appendix

Table B.6: Effect on Graduation Rates by Changes in Education Inputs (Faculty per student, and Instruction Share of Spending)
Dependent Variable: Graduation rate in first year after buyout yerar
Sample:

PE

F aculty
t 1,t

F aculty
t 1,t

<
25 pctile

>
25 pctile

(1)
-.13***
(.038)

(2)
-.089**
(.031)

Y
Y
Y
5596
.82

Y
Y
Y
24021
.89

1|<25th pctile

Online Appendix

PE·1|<25th pctile
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Controls
Observations
R2

Interaction between
PE and
F aculty
< 25 pctile
t 1,t

InstructShare
t 1,t

25 pctile

25 pctile

(3)
-.07**
(.029)
-.0036
(.0023)
-.019
(.036)
Y
Y
Y
30894
.86

(4)
-.074
(.059)

(5)
-.047
(.035)

Y
Y
Y
6638
.86

Y
Y
Y
20778
.89

<

InstructShare
t 1,t

>

Interaction between
PE and
InstructShare
< 25
t 1,t
pctile
(6)
-.047
(.032)
.00017
(.0022)
-.06*
(.033)
Y
Y
Y
28215
.86

Note: This table shows whether the effect of private equity buyouts on graduation rates in the first year after the buyout (i.e., the immediate effect) is larger among
schools where there is a larger immediate decline in education inputs. We consider only the year after the buyout, to focus on drivers of the immediate decline
in graduation rates. We use two types of education inputs: FTE faculty per 100 students (columns 1-3) and the instruction share of total spending (columns
4-6). The first two columns for each split the sample below and above the 25th percentile for the change in education input between the year before and the year
after the buyout. The third column interacts an indicator for whether the change in education input is below the 25th⇣percentile with the PE indicator.
Letting t
⌘
EducInput
represent the first affected buyout year, the estimating equation for this interaction model is Yi,t = ↵i + ↵t + 1 P Ei,t ·
< 25th pctile + 2 P Ei,t +
t 1,t
⌘
⇣
EducInput
< 25th pctile + Xit + "it . Here, EducInput
< 25pctile indicates that the change in education input between t 1 and t is less than its 25th
3
t 1,t
t 1,t
percentile. The 25th percentile is -.4 for faculty, and -.018 for instruction spending share. ⇤ Standard errors are clustered at the system level. Coefficients marked
with *, **, *** denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

Table B.7: Effect of Buyouts on Degree Cuts in First Two Years after Buyout
Dependent Variable: Degree cuts
(1)
PE owned
.00085
(.071)
Controls
Y
School Fixed Effects
Y
Year Fixed Effects
Y
R2
2399
Observations
.37

(2)
-.012
(.034)
Y
Y
Y
2399
.39

(3)
-.014
(.012)
Y
Y
Y
2399
.42

Note: This table shows the relationship between private equity buyouts and degree cuts. A degree cut is the removal
of a degree from the school’s offerings. There are a total of 230 possible degree offerings. We restrict the sample to
PE targets, and to no more than two years after the buyout. Standard errors are double-clustered at the system and year
levels. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

Online Appendix

Table B.8: Private Equity Ownership Compared to Chain Acquisitions
Dependent variable:

PE buyout
(acquisitions only)†
Non-PE chain

⇤

School type controls†
School Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
N
R2

Graduation Repayment
rate
rate

Log
mean
earnings

Average
loan per
borrower

Tuition per
student
(2015$)

Faculty
per 100
students

Log number
of FTE
students

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-.06**

-.037**

-.064*

1032***

3668***

-.31*

.46***

[.02]
-.043**
[.017]

[.011]
-.019
[.012]

[.025]
-.037***
[.009]

[229]
553
[393]

[721]
-183
[546]

[.15]
-.17
[.3]

[.063]
.21***
[.055]

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

56965
.8

28201
.96

24652
.97

77497
.67

102355
.82

62432
.83

123053
.97

Note: This table shows regression estimates (OLS) of the effect of ownership type on primary outcomes. † This is an
indicator for an acquisition of an independent school by a private equity-owned school system. ⇤ This is an indicator
for an independent school being purchased by a non-private equity owned chain. We define a “chain” as any parent
company (SystemID) that is neither publicly traded nor private equity-owned and that owns at least two schools
(UnitIDs). Observations are at the school (UnitID)-year level. Standard errors two-way clustered by SystemID and
year. † Defined as in previous tables. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

Online Appendix

Figure B.1: Share of private equity investment in government subsidy-intensive sectors as share of overall
private equity investment, 1995-2016

Note: All global private equity transactions included. Total value was $716 billion in 2016, up from just $19 billion in
1995. Source: CIQ.

Online Appendix

Figure B.2: Private Equity Deals and School Ownership

s
Panel A: Bar Charts of Buyout Deals and School Ownership Changes by Year

Note: The top graph shows the number of private equity buyouts of independent schools or chains of schools by year.
The total is 88. The bottom graph shows school (UnitID)-level changes to private equity ownership. The total is 557.

Online Appendix

Panel B: Histograms of Colleges Purchased in Buyout Deals and Subsequent Acquisitions

Note: The top graph shows the concentration of colleges per buyout, and the bottom graph shows the concentration in
subsequent acquisitions. These demonstrate that most deals involve a single school, but some involve more than one.

Online Appendix

Figure B.3: Federal Grants Event Study

s

Note: The figure above shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the mean of federal grants per
student in the years around the ownership change. 95% confidence intervals shown.

Online Appendix

Figure B.4: Financial Event Studies
s

Note: The figure above shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the mean of profits, revenues, and
expenditure in the years around the ownership change. 95% confidence intervals shown.

Online Appendix

Figure B.5: Distance from 90/10 Threshold

Note: The figure above shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the average fraction of school
revenue from Title IV programs in the years around the ownership change. The level of observation is the SystemID.
We restrict the observations to schools that existed in the year prior to the buyout. 95% confidence intervals shown. The
data source is the Department of Education FSA Proprietary School 90/10 Revenue Percentages. Data are available
from 2007 to 2016.

Online Appendix

Figure B.6: Borrowing at Private Equity Institutions

Note: This figure shows borrowing at PE-owned schools bought before 2007, and borrowing at other for-profits. The
vertical line shows 2007, when student borrowing limits were increased.

Online Appendix

Figure B.7: Earnings Event Study (Time Demeaned)

Note: This figure shows the coefficients
lnW agesit = ↵i + ↵t +

3
X

j

j 1[Y

from the following specification:
ear = Y earP E + j] + "it

j= 4

Here, 1[Y ear = Y earP E + j] is an indicator of a year before or after the buyout year. The year before the buyout
(-1) is the baseline, normalized to zero. We also include school and year fixed effects (↵i and ↵t ). The sample is all
schools, and the control group is all non-private equity-owned schools. The area denotes a 95% confidence interval.
This data is at the school, or UnitID level (N=697). We restrict the observations to schools that existed in the year
prior to the buyout.

Online Appendix

Figure B.8: Education Inputs Event Studies
s

Note: Panel A shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the mean of full-time faculty per 100 FTE
students in the years around the ownership change. Panel B shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE,
the mean of the share of spending on instruction in the years around the ownership change. 95% confidence intervals
shown.

Online Appendix

Figure B.9: Relationship between Graduation Rate Changes and Other Variables In Year Following Buyout

Note: Panel A contains a binscatter relating changes in faculty per 100 students (x-axis) to graduation rates
(y-axis), between the two years before and after the buyout. Panels B and C repeat this analysis but with the
instruction share of expenditure and tuition on the x-axis, respectively.

Online Appendix

Figure B.10: Enrollment Event Study

s

Note: The figure above shows, within the sample of school systems bought by PE, the mean of enrollment in the years
around the ownership change. 95% confidence intervals shown.

Online Appendix

Figure B.11: Law Enforcement Actions by School Type

Note: This figure shows the chances in a given year that a school has its first law enforcement action.

Online Appendix

Figure B.12: Degree Cuts Around Buyouts

Note: These plots show the number of degree cuts by year around private equity buyouts, within schools that
switched from independent to private equity-owned. A degree cut is the removal of a degree from the school’s
offerings. There are a total of 230 possible degree offerings.

Online Appendix

Appendix C: Subsidy Capture Tests

C.1

Cohort Default Rate Bunching

A key determinant of federal aid eligibility that has been consistently in force for decades is a
limit on the extent to which students can default. School survival depends on not triggering these
thresholds. Before 2012, the policy held that the share of students that default in the fiscal year after
the fiscal year in which they graduated cannot exceed 25 percent for three years in a row, nor can
it be higher than 40 percent in a single year. The two-year cohort default rate (CDR) is the fraction
of students within a certain repayment cohort who default within two years of entering repayment,
which may be vulnerable to manipulation (Looney and Yannelis (Looney and Yannelis)).
We find evidence that private equity-owned institutions are better at avoiding the threshold.
Appendix C Figure 1 shows the density of two-year cohort default rates by institution type. We
restrict the sample to pre-2012, as the policy changed somewhat in that year.14 The solid line shows
private equity-owned institutions, and the other two lines show independent for-profit and nonprofit schools. The vertical line is the 25 percent two-year CDR threshold. CDRs largely evolve
smoothly across the threshold among independent for-profits and other schools. In contrast, there
is a sharp drop in the default density right before the threshold at private equity-owned schools,
consistent with avoiding the threshold.

C.2

Gainful Employment Announcement

In this section, we present evidence that the market value of for-profit postsecondary schools is
tightly connected to their ability to access federal aid regardless of student outcomes. We exploit
four events comprising the introduction, watering down and eventual end of the Gainful
14
In 2012, the CDR calculation was changed from a two-year to a three-year window (that is, default is now
measured in the second fiscal year after graduation). To partially compensate for this more onerous policy, the 25
percent was changed to 30 percent. The rule change was expected to be very detrimental to for-profit colleges (see e.g.
http://www.finaid.org/loans/cohortdefaultrates.phtml).

Online Appendix

Employment (GE) rule, which aimed to tie a school’s access to federal grants and federally
guaranteed loans to student labor market performance.

Consistent with for-profit schools

capturing government aid, we find that the market values of publicly traded for-profits fell sharply
when the GE rule was announced. Conversely, affected firms experienced positive abnormal
returns when the rules were weakened and ultimately vacated.
This analysis uses data on publicly traded firms. While this approach may seem somewhat
disconnected from the paper’s focus on private equity, in fact it serves to highlight the role of
private equity in building the modern for-profit higher education sector. Currently, the largest
purveyors of for-profit higher education are publicly traded, and all of the major public companies
have at some point been private equity-owned. We document this in Appendix C Table 1. All
received private equity investment prior to going public, except for Strayer University, which was
taken private in a reverse LBO in 2001. The results in Section 4 revealed that the behavior of
these formerly private equity owned, publicly traded schools is more similar to private equity
owned, privately held schools than to other for-profits. Therefore, this section is both an extension
of the private equity analysis, and also demonstrates the relationship between federal aid access
and future cash flows for all for-profits with higher powered incentives than either independent,
privately held for-profits or community colleges and other nonprofit institutions.
First announced on July 26, 2010, the GE rule would have required graduates to meet debtto-earnings requirements in order for the college to remain eligible for federal aid.15 The goal
was to eliminate programs in which students took on debt that was unmanageable relative to their
expected labor market outcomes. Following the initial announcement, the rules were revised on
June 2, 2011. This change substantially weakened the original rules.16 In 2017, the rules were
15
Specifically, to remain Title IV-eligible, all for-profit and certificate programs would have had to pass at least one
of three metrics: 1) at least 35 percent of former students must be in active repayment, defined as reducing their loan
annually by at least $1; 2) annual loan payments could not exceed 30 percent of a typical graduate’s discretionary
income; or 3) annual loan payments could not exceed 12 percent of a typical graduate’s total earnings. See IFAP and
US News for more information.
16
Under the 2010 rules, if a school failed three tests, the school would immediately lose access to federal grants
and loans. Under the new rules, if schools failed three tests three times in a four year span, access to federal grant and
loans programs would be cut. The tests are that (1) at least 35 percent of students are paying down their loans, (2)
graduates on average are spending less than 12 percent of their total income on loan payments and (3) graduates on
average must be spending less than 30 percent of their discretionary income on loan payments. See the announcement

Online Appendix

suspended altogether.17
Cumulative abnormal returns follow Campbell et al. (1997) and Acemoglu et al. (2016). The
abnormal return for stock i at date t is given by

ARit = Rit

ˆ i + ˆi Rmt )
(↵

(1)

where Rit is the return of stock i at date t, and Rmt is the market return. The terms ↵ˆi and ˆi are
estimated from the following equation

Rit = ↵i +

i Rmt

+ "it

(2)

Equation 2 is estimated for the 250 day trading period from 270 days prior to the event period.18
The abnormal return in Equation 1 is calculated for each day of the event window, which
encompasses the 20 trading days before to the 20 trading days after the event date. Firms are
excluded if they are in the data for fewer than 150 days of the estimation window or fewer than 20
days of the event window.
Cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) are then calculated as
n
X
ARit ,
CAR[0, n] =

(3)

t=0

where n is the day following the start of the analysis period, 20 trading days prior to the event date.
We compare fifteen firms that own for-profit institutions with GE data available between 2010 and
2015. Control firms for the event studies are publicly traded firms with the same first three-digit
NAICS as those in the treatment sample. Thus, the control firms are those with NAICS codes with
611 (Educational Services) and 812 (Personal Services) as the first three digits, which includes 48
controls firms in total.
for more information.
17
See the Washington Post for more information.
18
This estimation period is chosen to prevent the estimation period from influencing market returns and the expected
return calculation.

Online Appendix

Appendix C Figure 2 shows the CAR results. Each panel shows CAR values before and after a
regulatory event. Time denotes days, and prices are measured at the close of each trading day. The
left hand panel shows the announcement of the GE rules on July 26, 2010.19 There is a sharp drop
in CAR for exposed firms. In contrast, we see no discernible pattern for education firms unaffected
by the GE rules. The right hand panel in Appendix C Figure 2 shows the jump in CAR following
the June 2, 2011 rule weakening. Again we see no response for the control group.
Appendix C Table 2 presents results analogous to those in the figure. We use variants of the
following specification

CARit = ↵i + ↵t + F Pi ⇤ P ostt + "it ,

(4)

where CARit are the cumulative abnormal returns for firm i on day t. We include firm effects ↵i ,
which absorb time invariant firm specific factors. Trading day fixed effects ↵t absorb market-wide
factors. The coefficient of interest is , which gives us the differential effect of the treatment group,
firms owning for-profit colleges, relative to the control group following the announcement.
The first three columns of Appendix C Table 2 show results for the initial announcement of
GE rules. The first column presents difference-in-differences estimates using post and treatment
dummies, the second column adds date fixed effects, while the third column includes both sets
of fixed effects. Consistent with the graphical evidence, we see a sharp drop in CAR, and the
effect is statistically significant at the .05 level or higher in all specifications. Columns (4) through
(6) repeats the analysis for the announcement of the new less restrictive GE rules. The estimates
regarding the GE rules being softened are also consistent with the graphical results.
In sum, this analysis provides additional evidence that a major aspect of for-profit market value
is rent-seeking capture of government aid, which is unambiguously not in students’ or taxpayers’
interests. We focus here on publicly traded for-profits, which likely have higher-powered incentives
than independent, privately held for-profit schools. Also, the largest of these public firms were
once private equity owned. Our result does not in itself imply that private equity buyouts do not
19

See the announcement for more information.

Online Appendix

improve education quality. However, in combination with the other evidence in Section 5 (loan
limit increase and CDR bunching), it indicates that superior rent-seeking federal aid capture is an
important channel through which high-powered incentives translate to higher profits.

Online Appendix

Table C.1: Major Publicly Traded Higher Education Institutions

EDMC

First private
equity
investment/buyout
1986

IPO
date
1996

Private equity
reverse LBO date
(public to private)
2006

Second
IPO date

Share of for-profit
enrollment in 2010

2009

2.7%

Devry

1987

1991

2.8%

Corinthian

1995†

1999

2.1%

Capella

1995

2006

1.6%

Strayer

1996

2001

2.2%

Apollo (U. of Phoenix)

2000

2017

20.2%

Grand Canyon

2004

2008

1.4%

Laureate

2007

2017

1.8%

Note: This table lists the largest for-profit higher education institutions ever publicly traded. † PE-financed acquisition
of 15 campuses.

Online Appendix

Table C.2: Gainful Employment Event Studies

Panel 1
Event:

GE Rules Announced

GE Rules Held

Dependent Variable: Cumulative Abnormal Returns

FP X Post

FP
Post
Firm Fixed Effects
Date Fixed Effects
Observations
Note:

(1)
-0.186***
(0.0340)
-0.0321**
(0.0146)
0.00455
(0.0181)
No
No
1845

(2)
-0.186***
(0.0344)
-0.0321**
(0.0148)

(3)
-0.186***
(0.0348)

No
Yes
1845

Yes
Yes
1845

(4)
0.135***
(0.0245)
0.0264
(0.0198)
-0.0192
(0.0134)
No
No
2050

(5)
0.135***
(0.0248)
0.0264
(0.0200)

(6)
0.135***
(0.0251)

No
Yes
2050

Yes
Yes
2050

Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns for the stocks are calculated around 60-day event windows,
n
X
ARit . Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p
CAR[0, n] =
⇤

t=0

< .1, p < .05, p < .01, respectively.

Online Appendix

Figure C.1: Density of Cohort Default Rates by Institution Type

Note: This figure shows the density of two-year cohort default rates, broken down by institution type.

Online Appendix

Figure C.2: Gainful Employment Rules and Cumulative Abnormal Returns

Note: The figure above shows cumulative abnormal returns for treatment and control schools.
Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns for the stocks are calculated around 60-day event windows.

Online Appendix

Appendix D: Community Colleges as Source of Additional Enrollment
We find a large increase in the number of full-time equivalent enrolled students after a buyout.
Given the negative effects on student success measures, buyouts are unlikely to make existing
student types (i.e., that would have enrolled before the buyout) weakly better off. However,
whether additional students – regardless of their preparedness – are better or worse off as a result
of the buyout depends on their outside option. At one extreme, additional students may be drawn
from a population that would not attend college otherwise. These students may benefit relative to
receiving no higher education at all. At the other extreme, private equity-owned schools may
draw students away from institutions with higher value-added.
A rich education economics literature finds strong evidence that (a) community colleges are
an available substitute to for-profits, and (b) the returns to for-profit education are zero or negative
relative to community college education.20

We examine evidence for substitution at the

commuting zone (CZ) level, which roughly corresponds to a local labor market. We regress the
change in all community college enrollment (
private equity (

96 16

96 16

Enrollment) within a CZ on the change in

PE Enrollment) in that CZ.21 The results are in Appendix D Table 1. If

there is no substitution, we expect a coefficient of zero. Conversely, if there is full substitution, we
expect a coefficient of -1. In column 1, the point estimate is -.67. The second row shows the
results from an F-test that the coefficient is equal to -1; it reveals that we cannot reject full
substitution away from community colleges. The second column repeats the analysis using
full-time enrollment and finds similar results. Corresponding graphical evidence is in Appendix D
Figure 1 Panel A. We do not expect substitution from high quality institutions to private
equity-owned schools, so we use them in a placebo test. We define high quality institutions as
those institutions where more than 50 percent of students graduate within 150 percent of the usual
time. There is no effect for higher quality institutions (Appendix D Table 1 columns 3 and 4 and
20
See Jacobson et al. 2005, Jepsen et al. 2014, Liu and Belfield (2014), Cellini and Chaudhary (2014), Darolia et al.
(2015), Deming et al. (2016), Cellini and Turner (2016), Armona et al. (2017), and Cellini, Darolia, and Turner (2017).
These papers are summarized in Appendix A Section 2.
21
There were 709 commuting zones in the United States in 2000. We have a lower number in our sample, as some
commuting zones do not have colleges in the sample.

Online Appendix

Appendix D Figure 1 Panel B). Thus, the effects in columns 1 and 2 are not driven by general
population or other sources of enrollment growth.
Appendix D Figure 2 takes an event study approach within CZs.

It shows increasing

community college enrollment over time before the entry of a private equity-owned school, and a
flat line afterward.

Private equity-owned schools appear to siphon enrollment away from

community colleges, likely because of superior marketing.22 Consistent with this strategy, the
targeting analysis in Section 3.3 found that private equity firms tend to acquire schools in
commuting zones with a higher number of community colleges. One possibility is that private
equity schools draw the worst students away from local community colleges. If this is the case,
we would expect to see an improvement in education outcomes at community colleges after
private equity entry. To explore this possibility, we examine graduation rates at community
colleges in commuting zones following a private equity buyout. We find no significant effect on
graduation rates. In sum, additional students enrolled as a result of expansion after buyouts seem
to be drawn away from attending community colleges. Together with much higher tuition and
lower success measures, this suggests that additional students are unlikely to be made better off
by the buyout.
22

Results are available upon request.

Online Appendix

Table D.1: Relationship Between Entry and Community College Enrollment

96 16

PE Enrollment

96 16

PE FTE

P-Value (=-1)
Observations
R2

Community Colleges

High Quality Schools

96 16

96 16

96 16

96 16

Enrollment

FTE

Enrollment

FTE

(1)
-0.67**
(0.3)

(2)

(3)
1.09
(0.90)

(4)

-1.121**
(0.49)
.27
451
.03

.81
451
.03

0.9
(0.7)
.0036
301
.10

.002
301
.09

Note: This table shows the relationship between changes in private equity-owned and community college enrollment
at the commuting zone level between 1996 and 2016. Columns 1 and 3 include all enrollment, while columns 2 and
4 include only full-time enrollment. Columns 3 and 4 are placebo tests, which replace community college enrollment
with enrollment at institutions that graduate more than half of their students with 150% of the normal time (“high
quality schools”). We also show the p-value from an F-test that the coefficient equals -1, which is consistent with full
substitution. Community colleges are defined as public institutions granting two year or lower degrees. Huber-White
robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Coefficients marked with *, **,*** , denote p < .1, p < .05, p <
.01, respectively.

Online Appendix

Figure D.1: Commuting Zone Enrollment by School Type
s
Panel A: Commuting Zone Enrollment at Private Equity-Owned and Community Colleges

s
s
Panel B: Commuting Zone Enrollment at Private Equity-Owned and High Quality Colleges

Note: The graphs in Panel A collapse the mean change in community college enrollment and full-time enrollment
within a commuting zone into twenty bins ranked by the mean change in private equity-owned school enrollment. The
figure on the left (right) shows the cross sectional relationship between the change in enrollment (full-time enrollment)
at community colleges and private equity owned for-profits between 1996 and 2016. Community colleges are defined
as public institutions granting two year or lower degrees. The graphs in Panel B are a placebo test; they replicate Panel
A, but use high quality colleges (>50% of students graduate in normal time) rather than community colleges.

Online Appendix

Figure D.2: Private Equity-Owned School Entry and Community College Enrollment

Note: This figure shows log enrollment in community colleges before and after the entry of a private equity backed
for-profit college, within a commuting zone. Community colleges are defined as public institutions that grant two year
or lower degrees.

Online Appendix

Appendix E: Course Catalogs
All Title IV colleges are required to disclose their ownership history through course catalogs,
which are collected by the Department of Education. We researched ownership history of schools
in part through these course catalogs. An example is given below, of the University of Phoenix,
which in 2016 was the largest for-profit college in the United States. The University of Phoenix is
a subsidiary of Apollo Education Group, which is wholly owned by Apollo Global Management
and the Vistria Group, a Chicago-based private equity fund. Thus the 2018 course catalog notes
on p.1 that: “University of Phoenix, Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Apollo Education Group,
Inc. ("the Parent"). The Parent’s stock is wholly- owned by AP VIII Queso Holdings, L.P., which
is owned by Apollo Global Management, LLC and The Vistria Group, LLC.”

Online Appendix

Figure E.1: Sample Course Catalog

University of Phoenix, 2018-2019
UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX

.....................................................................................................................................................................................

UNIVERSITY OF PHOENIX

.....................................................................................................................................................................................
Beginnings -- A Brief History
In 1976, the leading edge of the Baby Boom generation was just
turning 30. That same year saw the introduction of the first personal computer, the Apple I -- an event that signaled the birth of a
new economic system in which intellectual capital would eventually supplant industrial might as the dominant economic force.
These milestones marked the beginning of a sea of change in
higher education, though many (perhaps even most) within that
system did not recognize it at the time.
Considered together, these phenomena suggested that the jobs that
would make up the workforce of the future were only just beginning to be created or imagined. In order to fill those jobs, the bulk
of the new workforce would require higher-level knowledge and
skills than those needed in a manufacturing economy. At the same
time, the largest-ever age cohort of the population, adult learners,
would be going through the stages of life during which they would
be most affected by the coming economic dislocation and would
need advanced education to adapt to these changes.
It was in this historical context in 1976 that Dr. John Sperling, a
Cambridge-educated economist and professor-turned-entrepreneur, founded University of Phoenix. Sperling anticipated the confluence of technological, economic, and demographic forces that
would in a very short time herald the return of ever larger numbers
of adult learners to formal higher education.
In the early 1970s, at San Jose State University in San Jose, California, Sperling and several associates conducted field-based research
in adult education. The focus of the research was to explore teaching/learning systems for the delivery of educational programs and
services to adult learners who wished to complete or further their
education in ways that complemented both their experience and
current professional responsibilities. At that time colleges and universities were organized primarily around serving the needs of the
18-22 year-old undergraduate student. That is not all that surprising, given that the large majority of those enrolled were residential
students of traditional college age, just out of high school. According to Sperling adult learners were invisible on the traditional campus and were treated as second-class citizens.
Other than holding classes at night (and many universities did not
even do this), no efforts were made to accommodate their needs.
No university offices or bookstores were open at night. Students
had to leave work during the day to enroll, register for classes, buy
books or consult with their instructors and advisors. Classes were
held two or three nights per week and parking was at the periphery of a large campus. The consequence, according to Dr. Sperling
was that most adult learners were unable to finish a four-year program in less than eight years, or a two-year program in less than
four years (Tucker, 1996, p. 5).
Sperling's research convinced him not only that these underserved
learners were interested in furthering their educational goals, but
also that this group differed from their more traditional counterparts in significant ways. He saw a growing need for institutions
that were sensitive to and designed around the learning characteristics and life situations of a different kind of learner population.
He suggested ways for institutions to pioneer new approaches to
curricular and program design, teaching methods, and student services. These beliefs eventually resulted in the creation of University
of Phoenix, and they continue to this day to inspire the University's
mission, purpose, and strategies. As an institution, University of

Phoenix is unique in its single-minded commitment to the educational needs of non-traditional students, who in fact today make
up the majority (73 percent) of all college enrollees. This focus
informs the University's teaching and learning model approach to
designing and providing student services, and academic and
administrative structure. It also guides the institution as it plans
and prepares to meet the needs of the next generation of learners.
Over the last three and a half decades, the University of Phoenix
has been cause-driven working to build an institution with the
agility to address directly the shifting economic and academic challenges that many students face. Dr. Sperling's predictions concerning the innovations higher education would be required to make
have come to pass. Today roughly 45 percent of all college students
work at least part-time and approximately one quarter of all students have dependent children. The educational tenets set forth by
Dr. Sperling in 1976 now apply to the majority of college students
in the United States.

Official School Colors

...........................................................................................
University of Phoenix Official School Colors are University of
Phoenix Red and University of Phoenix Platinum.
These are custom colors and proprietary to the University.

Ownership Information

...........................................................................................
University of Phoenix, Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Apollo
Education Group, Inc. ("the Parent"). The Parent's stock is whollyowned by AP VIII Queso Holdings, L.P., which is owned by Apollo
Global Management, LLC and The Vistria Group, LLC. The University's central administration is located in Phoenix, Arizona.

Our Mission Statement

...........................................................................................
University of Phoenix provides access to higher education opportunities that enable students to develop knowledge and skills necessary to achieve their professional goals, improve the
performance of their organizations, and provide leadership and
service to their communities.

Our Purpose

...........................................................................................
• To facilitate cognitive and affective student learning-knowledge,
skills, and values- and to promote use of that knowledge in the
student's workplace.
• To develop competence in communication, critical thinking,
collaboration, and information utilization, together with a
commitment to lifelong learning for enhancement of students'
opportunities for career success.
• To provide instruction that bridges the gap between theory and
practice through faculty members who bring to their classroom
not only advanced academic preparation, but also the skills that
come from the current practice of their professions.
• To provide General Education and foundational instruction and
services that prepare students to engage in a variety of
university curricula.
• To use technology to create effective modes and means of
instruction that expand access to learning resources and that
enhance collaboration and communication for improved
student learning.

1

Online Appendix

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, A. Kermani, J. Kwak, and T. Mitton (2016). The value of connections in turbulent
times: Evidence from the United States. Journal of Financial Economics (121), 368–391.
Arcidiacono, P., E. Aucejo, A. Maurel, and T. Ransom (2016). College attrition and the dynamics of
information revelation. NBER Working Paper No. 22325.
Armona, L., R. Chakrabarti, and M. F. Lovenheim (2017). How does for-profit college attendance affect
student loans, defaults and earnings? NBER Working Paper No. 25042.
Berman, E. P. and A. Stivers (2016). Student loans as a pressure on US higher education. The University
under Pressure 46, 129–160.
Bernstein, S. and A. Sheen (2016). The operational consequences of private equity buyouts: Evidence from
the restaurant industry. Review of Financial Studies 29(9), 2387–2418.
Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of application assistance
and information in college decisions results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205–1242.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2015). Do private equity owned firms have better management
practices? The American Economic Review 105(5), 442–446.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W.-C. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
Princeton University Press.
Cellini, S., R. Darolia, and L. Turner (2017). Where do students go when for-profit colleges lose federal
aid? Working Paper.
Cellini, S. R. (2010). Financial aid and for profit colleges: Does aid encourage entry? Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 29(3), 526–552.
Cellini, S. R. and L. Chaudhary (2014). The labor market returns to a for-profit college education. Economics
of Education Review 43, 125–140.
Cellini, S. R. and C. Goldin (2014). Does federal student aid raise tuition? New evidence on for-profit
colleges. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 174–206.
Cellini, S. R. and N. Turner (2016). Gainfully employed? Assessing the employment and earnings of
for-profit college students using administrative data. NBER Working Paper No. 22287.
Chung, A. S. (2012). Choice of for-profit college. Economics of Education Review 31(6), 1084–1101.
Darolia, R., C. Koedel, P. Martorell, K. Wilson, and F. Perez-Arce (2015). Do employers prefer workers
who attend for-profit colleges? Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 34(4), 881–903.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, K. Handley, R. Jarmin, J. Lerner, and J. Miranda (2014). Private equity, jobs,
and productivity. The American Economic Review 104(12), 3956–3990.
Deming, D. J., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2012, dec). The for-profit postsecondary school sector: Nimble
critters or agile predators? Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(1), 139–64.
Deming, D. J., N. Yuchtman, A. Abulafi, C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2016). The value of postsecondary

Online Appendix

credentials in the labor market: An experimental study. The American Economic Review 106(3), 778–
806.
Eaton, C., J. Habinek, A. Goldstein, C. Dioun, D. G. Santibáñez Godoy, and R. Osley-Thomas (2016). The
financialization of US higher education. Socio-Economic Review 14(3), 507–535.
Hentschke, G. C. (2010). Innovations in business models and organizational cultures: The for-profit sector.
USC Rossier School of Education (June).
Jacobson, L., R. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (2005). Estimating the returns to community college schooling
for displaced workers. Journal of Econometrics 125(1), 271–304.
Jepsen, C., K. Troske, and P. Coomes (2014). The labor-market returns to community college degrees,
diplomas, and certificates. Journal of Labor Economics 32(1), 95–121.
Kelchen, R. (2017, January). How much do for-profit colleges rely on federal funds? Brookings Institution
Chalkboard.
Lang, K. and R. Weinstein (2013). The wage effects of not-for-profit and for-profit certifications: Better
data, somewhat different results. Labour Economics 24, 230–243.
Liu, Y. T. and C. Belfield (2014). The labor market returns to for-profit higher education: Evidence for
transfer students. A CAPSEE Working Paper. Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and
Employment.
Looney, A. and C. Yannelis. The consequences of student loan credit expansions: Evidence from three
decades of default cycles.
Looney, A. and C. Yannelis (2015). A crisis in student loans? How changes in the characteristics of
borrowers and in the institutions they attended contributed to rising loan defaults. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1–89.
Metrick, A. and A. Yasuda (2010). The economics of private equity funds. The Review of Financial
Studies 23(6), 2303–2341.
Metrick, A. and A. Yasuda (2011). Venture capital and other private equity: a survey. European Financial
Management 17(4), 619–654.
Schilbach, F., H. Schofield, and S. Mullainathan (2016). The psychological lives of the poor. The American
Economic Review 106(5), 435–440.
Senate (2012). For profit higher education: The failure to safeguard the federal investment and ensure
student success.
Shireman, R. (2017). Learn now, pay later: A history of income-contingent student loans in the United
States. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 671(1), 184–201.
Wilson, R. (1987). Two banking industry representatives play key lobbying role on student loans. Chronicle
of Higher Education, 26.
Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2014). Determinants of college major choice: Identification using an information
experiment. Review of Economic Studies 82(2), 791–824.

Online Appendix

