                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FIRM HETEROGENEITY, INTERNAL
                           FINANCE, AND CREDIT RATIONING




                               Charles W. Caloiniris

                                  R. Glenn Hubbard




                              Working Paper No. 2497




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 1988




apartment of Economics, Northwestern University; and Department of Economics and Center
 r Urban Affairs and Policy Research, Northwestern University, and the National Bureau
F Economic Research, respectively. This paper isa revised version of an earlier
per entitled "Multiple Loan Markets, Collateral, and Credit Rationing." We are grateful
) Ben Bernanke, Mark Gertler, Bruce Greenwald, Kenneth Judd, William Rogerson, Andrew
iss, Stephen Williamson, and members of the 1987 NBER Summer Institute Working Group
i Credit Market Failures and Economic Performance for helpful comments and suggestions.
ubbard acknowledges support from a John M. Olin Fellowship at the National Bureau
F Economic Research. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
  Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
jthors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #2497
                                                         January 1988



         Firm Heterogeneity, Internal Finance, and Credit Rationing



                                  ABSTRACT



     Assessing the extent to which agents or firms face capital—market
imperfections and quantity restrictions on credit is crucial for measuring
intertemporal tradeoffs in consumption or the cost of capital for investment.
In contrast to standard price-clearing, "full-information" models of loan
markets, in models of credit allocation where information is imperfect (which
we describe as "information—intensive"), "the interest rate" need not reflect
the shadow price of credit in financial intermediation. Credit rationing to
some borrowers is likely.

     In actual markets, many loan contracts are offered, both
"full-information" and "information Intensive." our focus in this paper is on
firm heterogeneity in credit markets; we analyze mechanisms by which credit
markets sort borrowers in the presence of differing degrees of asymmetric
information; we emphasize the potential for credit rationing in equilibrium
and the response of credit allocation to borrower-specific shocks. Our
approach suggests that external finance will be differentially available to
entrepreneurs ——holding constant their project opportunities -- according to
their internal net worth position. that is, there is an important link for
many firms between internal finance and investment spending.

     We develop a simple general equilibrium model of credit mllocation, in
which different loan contracts are offered to different types of borrowers.
The extent to which different borrowers can obtain credit depends on the
distribution of internal finance, aggregate net worth levels, and whether
projects are observable. While credit restrictions to some classes of
borrowers are a feature of a multiple—contract equilibrium, the severity can
vary substantially in response to financial disturbances. We consider shocks
to borrowers' net worth. Credit restrictions may occur in response to a
deterioration of net—worth positions. A "credit collapse," in which no loans
are offered to certain types of borrowers is possible. Investment and financing
decisions are not, in general independent. We discuss implications for tax
policy and for public policy toward financial institutions.



Charles W. Calomiris                          R. Glenn Hubbard
Department of Econoaics                       NBER
Northwestern University                       aoso Massachusetts Avenue
2003 Sheridan Road                            Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
Evanston, Illinois 60201                      (617) 868—3900
1.   IntroductIon

     Assessing the extent to which agents or firms face capital—market

imperfections and quantity restrictions on credit is crucial for measuring

intertemporal tradeoffs in consumption or the cost of capital for investment.

The ability of individual firms to participate actively in capital markets is

an important factor in models which use prices in centralized securities

markets as measures of the marginal cost of capital.

     In a standard Walrasian, "full-information" model of loan markets,

factors determining asset supplies and demands fix interest rates, which then

constitute the set of shadow prices for credit in various markets. In

contrast to this price-clearing, full-information framework, models of loan

markets where information is imperfect (which we describe here as

"information—intensive" sectors) have emphasized that "the interest rate" need

not reflect the shadow price of credit in financial intermediation and that

credit rationing to some borrowers is likely (Jaffee and Russell, 1976;

Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981; bernanke, 1983: Blinder, 1987; Williamson, 1985,

1987). Friedman (1982) has noted a strong empirical link between credit

availability and economic activity.1

     In actual markets, many loan contracts are offered, both

"full—information" and "information—intensive," Our focus in this paper is on

firm heterogeneity in credit markets; we analyze mechanisms by which credit

markets sort borrowers In the presence of differing degrees of asymmetric

information across types of entrepreneur—borrowers.2 We model the allocation

of credit to heterogeneous entrepreneurs with different endowments of

internal equity and project opportunities.
                                        —2


     Our multiple—credit-markets approach suggests that external finance will

be differentially available to entrepreneurs —-    holding   constant their project

opportunities ——   according to their internal net worth position. That is,
there is an Important link for many firms between internal finance and

investment spending.3 This result has implications for determinants of

crass-sectional variation in investment behavior among firms of various sizes,

from which single-credit market models of investment behavior necessarily

abstract. Srini Vasan (1986, Chapter 3), using data on 'small," "medium," and

"large" U.S. manufacturing firms, demonstrates that such cross-sectional

variation is empirically important -—    both in terms of the basic determinants
of investment and the cyclical sensitivity of investment.4 Similar findings

based on a panel of manufacturing firms are obtained by Fazzari, Hubbard, and

Petersen (1987a), who distinguish between investment decisions of firms with

low levels of internal equity relative to investment demand and firms for

which cash flows exceed investment demand.

     We develop a simple general equilibrium model of credit allocation, and

analyze the operation of an economy-wide "mutual fund," which invests funds

deposited by risk-neutral individuals in project loans. The extent to which

different groups of borrowers can obtain credit depends on individual net

worth positions, whether projects are observable, and on individual and

aggregate net worth levels. Aggregate disturbances can have allocative

effects on loan markets, While credit restrictions to some types of

entrepreneurs are a feature of a multiple-contract equilbrium, the severity

can vary substantially in response to financial disturbances. We consider

shocks to borrowers' net worth. Credit restrictions may occur in response to
                                      —3-


a deterioration of net-worth positions. Indeed, a "credit collapse," in which

no loans are offered to certain types of borrowers, is possible (see also

Mankiw, 1986).

     Recent research has highlighted the development of financial

intermediaries in equilibrium models of credit allocation (see for example

Williamson, 1986). Our interest in this paper is not so much in "banks" as

intermediaries (issuing demandable debt to depositors and making term loans),

but in considering "sufficient statistics" for credit—market conditions in

realistic markets, where both information-intensive and full-information loan

contracts are signed. Our "sufficient statistics" consist of full—information

loan rates and the quantity of credit made available in the information-

intensive sector. These variables have figured prominently in empirical work

(Bernanke, 1983; Calomiris and Hubbard, 1986; Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock,

1986); we derive their role formally here.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section II develops a model of

equilibrium credit rationing, and examines the effects of internal finance on

the availability of credit to information-intensive borrowers. We develop a

two-period general equilbirium model of credit allocation, in which both

information-intensive and perfect—information loan contracts are offered.

Implications for public policy toward financial institutions and for the role

of government finance are analyzed in section III; we review some empirical

evidence there.. Conclusions and extensions to dynamic models of debt

maturity, net worth accumulation, and financial institutions are discussed

in section IV.
                                       —4-


II. Internal Finance, Credit Allocation, and Investment

Imperfect Information and Credit Allocation

     In the simplest possible model, no information problems exist, and the

competitive equilibrium in a Walrasian credit market involves clearing through

"price." Firms borrow to finance projects as long as expected project returns

exceed the cost of borrowed funds in the market, We will assume throughout

this paper that borrowers must finance their investments internally or through

debt (more on this later). The observation by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) that

when borrowers have private information about the riskiness of their project

returns, lenders ("banks") cannot necessarily distinguish "good borrowers"

from "bad borrowers" implies that adverse selection may render unprofitable a

credit—market equilibrium in which loan contracts specify only price. That

is, with a nonzero probability of default, banks consider the potential for

loan repayment as well as the interest rate to be charged when assessing the

profitability of a loan. Past some critical interest rate level, banks will

be selected against by borrowers with a high probability of default; quantity

rationing will be part of a competitive equilibrium in the

information—intensive credit market.

     The central contribution of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) is that imperfect

information can limit the number of loans a lender will make; that is, "credit

rationing" occurs in the sense that within a class of observationally

identical borrowers, not all receive loans. The basic original model is

simple --   lenders can vary only the interest rate; different price-quantity
combinations are ruled out. The profitability of loans to the lender does not

increase uniformly with the interest rate. In particular, reductions in
                                         -5-


borrower net worth can precipitate more severe credit rationing in

information—intensive loan markets. Bester (1985) argues that if lenders are

free to use different interest rates and collateral requirements across

borrowers, no credit rationing occurs in equilibrium. It is important to

note, however, that in Bester's model, investors have access to unlimited

collateral --   that   is, loans have only a liquidity function (see also than and

Thakor, 1987 in this respect). In the multiple-contract model described

below, we assume that an individual entrepreneur's available internal finance

is given exogenously by his initial endowment and that project size is "large"

relative to individuals' endowments. Under these conditions, the credit

rationing observed in the Stiglita—Weiss model will occur for some classes of

borrowers in equilibrium.


Information and a General Equilibrium Model of Credit Allocation

     In reality, many "markets" for credit exist side by side, differing in

types of borrowers and the terms of loans. These markets effectively sort

borrowers along dimensions of both "information intensity" and risk.

Borrowers with significant financial resources and reputations (e.g., the

federal government and large, publicly traded corporations) have access to

"full—information" credit markets (such as those for commercia1 paper or

long-term bonds), while imperfect information characterizes more accurately

the loan market in other sectors.

     Our conceptual experiment is to formalize a multiple-contract market—

clearing process. Information—intensive and full—information contracts

coexist. We develop a simple general equilibrium model of credit allocation.
                                                               -
                                       -6—


Our focus is on the important role played by collateral in credit supply

(i.e., borrower internal equity or net worth); we show that considering

variations. in internal equity not only enhances the potential for credit

restrictions relative to standard full—information eodels, but also relative

to the simple single-loan—contract models under imperfect information

previously analyzed in the literature. Aggregate credit supply shocks have

allocative effects in such a world, with quantity restrictions applied to

borrowers participating in the information-intensive market, and price

rationing of credit to higher—quality (less information—intensive) borrowers.

If substitution in production across business activities is limited in the

short run (i.e., if General Motors cannot immediately enter farming), credit

restrictions to individuals will have real effects on investment (see for

example Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock, 1986).

     We consider a stylized credit market with different borrowers indexed by

(i) internal net worth, (ii) returns on project opportunities, and

(iii) observability of projects by potential lenders. The model has two

periods,   during which investment and consumption are undertaken, respectively.

In the first period, each of the countable infinity of agents is endowed with

some amount of collateral and an "investment project." Consumption takes

place during the second period. Individuals are assumed to be risk-neutral

over consumption decisions. A key feature of the model is that investment

projects are individual-specific, indivisible, and large relative to

entrepreneurs' net worth.5 Project technologies are either "observable" or

"not observable."6 Actual project returns are observable ex post.

     We assume equal numbers of individuals with access to each of three

project types ——   1, 2, and W. Project opportunities 1 and 2 are
                                          —7-


indistinguishable to lenders, while project opportunity W is observable.

Endowments of entrepreneurs with access to projects I and 2 is denoted by Ck.

with an equal number of high (k=H) and low (k=L) endowment types within each

information—intensive project clmssification. Full-information borrowers have

identical endowments           A fourth group of individuals are pure savers; that

is, they have no project opportunity. They have identical net worth C5. Thus

entrepreneurs (those individuals with project opportunities) divide into five

groups, which differ according to project opportunities and collateral

endowments. There are, however4 only three observable classes of borrowers:

Walrasimn (W); high-endowment, information—intensive (1H); and low-endowment,

information—intensive (1L)

     On the supply side of the credit market, individuals either invest their

endowments directly in their own projects or turn their endowments over to a

central mutual fund, which offers different contracts to different borrowers.

Savers deposit their endowments in the mutual fund. The "mutual fund' is a

convenient fiction for a large number of competing mutual funds. That is,

rents from successful projects accrue to successful entrepreneurs, not to

lenders. We employ the fiction of an economy-wide mutual fund rather than

focus on developing various financial intermediaries endogenously because we

are interested primarily in borrower heterogeneity, in particular credit

allocation over different types of borrowers.7 In the real world, of course,

borrowers may be segmented in different loan markets and shocks which are

specific to particular loan markets ——     for   example, a contraction of

high-powered money --   will   also have important effects on the allocation of

investment funds (see Bernanke, 1983; and Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock,

1986).
                                             —8-


       Ge Meza and Webb (1987) show that the adverse selection problem which

gives rise to credit rationing in Stiglit2 and Weiss (1981) can be eliminated

through the use of equity finance in a model in which entrepreneurs share

identical expected project returns. Ge Meza and Webb demonstrate, however,

that when projects' expected returns differ, debt finance is optimal because

it avoids the "lemons-market" disadvantages inherent in external equity

finance (as, for example, in Myers and Majluf, j9$4),8 In order to abstract

from equity finance we assume that both expected returns and variances differ

across projects.9 "Good' projects stochastically dominate "bad" projects. We

consider only fixed-rate debt contracts between borrowers and lenders.10

       The three projects are described as follows. The observable project (W)

has a mean gross return         and a distribution of returns given by F CR). The

two projects in the information—intensive (I) sector ——               and 12 -— have mean

gross returns of       and A,        respectively,   and distributions of returns,

F1(R) and F2(R), respectively. Mean gross returns are such that

   >      > R2 and     >
                              ( + Ri).       (Following the logic of de Meza and Webb

(1987), one could assume that project I earns                with probability p1 and zero

otherwise, while project 12 earns R2 with probability p2 and zero otherwise,

where p1 >         and R1 >
                              R2.)
              p2
       When the project's gross return is less than the amount borrowed to

finance investment, the individual loses his equity in the project. Because

of this "limited liability" assumption, the lower bound on the gross return

for an entrepreneur is zero. Bankruptcy occurs if

            R<(1+i)S,
where the lender receives R and where i is the interest rate charged and S is
                                            -9-


the amount of the loan. $ equals (X —         C),   where X is project size, and C is

the level of internal net worth. Let p be the (endogenous) equilibrium

expected return from a mutual fund share, so that Ck(l +                ) is the opportunity
cost of investing one's endowment, k = L,14,W,S.          An individual of type (k,I)

will borrow to finance his project if his expected profit from so doing

exceeds his opportunity cost, that is, if


(1) Irk,2 =   / max[Il   —
                             (1. 4
                                     ik)   O]dF2(R) >   C(l   +    );    k   H,L,W;1    1,2,W.


F1 is the distribution function of returns. For pure savers, the expected

gross return from mutual fund investment in the first period is Ck(l +                 p).
     The question arises of whether projects will be partially financed

directly by investors' endowments, or financed fully by loans from the mutual

fund in which all endowments are deposited (see also de Meza and Webb, 1987).

Under the assumption of risk neutrality there will be no motive for

diversification (which would make internal finance unattractive). Investors

with project I opportunities will always prefer to invest in their own project

rather than earn the average rate of return (marginal rate of interest on

loans) from the mutual fund because all mean project returns are less than or

equal to that of their own projects. Project 2 borrowers will imitate project

i types in their credit market behavior —-          otherwise     they would reveal their

identity. Thus all information-intensive borrowers who receive loans will use

their endowments to fund a portion of their projects. Information-intensive

borrowers who do not receive loans will deposit their endowments in the mutual

fund. These conditions mean that in equilibrium all information—intensive

borrowers who engage in projects will borrow only the amount needed to finance
                                              -10-


the project over and above their initial endowments. Of course, i'i-type

borrowers will also self-finance, so long as the equilibrium expected rate of

return in the mutual fund is lower than or equal to the return on their

projects. The decision to self-finance does not affect the equilibrium

allocation of credit, since self-finance is contingent on receiving a loan.

Only the distribution of profits, not the allocation of funds, is affected by

self—financing.

     The expected profitability to the mutual fund of loans received by each

(observable or unobservable) project class 1 is given 9k1' where


(2) Pk,,Sk,, =    f    Thin [(1 +
                                    ik)skI   R] dF1(R); k = Ii,L,W; 11,2,W;


Where Ski =          - C.   Because of the possibility of default, the profitability

of the loan is dependent on the amount of the internal net worth of the

borrower. Ex post non-pecuniary penalties are excluded by assumption.

     Given existing inforaation—intensive net worth levels (again denoted by H

and U, the competitive mutual fund will order its opportunities so that for

all borrowers who receive loans, the rate of profit to the mutual fund is

equivalent; otherwise, competing mutual funds could bid away borrowers.

Investors are interested in obtaining funds as long as their net profits from

project investment are positive.

     The asymmetry of information between borrowers and lenders leads to an

adverse selection problem in the information-intensive market, as in Stiglitz

and Weiss (1961). That is, in borrower categories within the information—

intensive sector, there exists a maximum loan profit rate p* for lenders, at

which ap/ai =   0,   given the internal net worth levels for information—intensive
                                         —11—


borrowers. That is true because average profitability on loans in the

information-intensive sector depends on the mix of applicants (between project

1 and project 2 borrowers). Over an initial range of i (for a given value of

collateral), ap/ai >   0,   because as interest rates increase the fund earns more

interest, with no increase in the extent of adverse selection; at interest

rates greater than T, good borrowers drop out of the market.11 Thus the

maximum profit the fund could make would be achieved by setting i e     i (for   a

given collateral value) and choosing borrowers from among its pool of

applicants.

     The fund's maximum profit rate on information—intensive projects in any

observable collateral class        is thus a probability-weighted combination of

the profit rates from loans on unobservable projects 1 and 2:


(3) P*(Cksik) =
                  f(Pl(Ck     'k' P2(Ck.ik)). Ck <

where the implied weights depend on the mix of applicants. It is because of

this adverse selection problem that borrowers' equity in projects is

important. We denote by       the level of collateral (net worth) at which

information-intensive loan applicants will sort themselves according to true

underlying project returns.12 That is, C is the net worth level such that


          (1 i.p)ë


Hence   will depend on the expected mutual fund return .      The higher is the

opportunity cost of investing one's net worth in a project, the lower will

be the critical net worth level C. When internal net worth is less than

"good" (project 1) and "bad" (project 2) borrowers with low collateral will
not be distinguishable. As net worth rises to C, equation (1) implies that
                                                   —12—


borrowers with inferior projects will no longer have an incentive to compete

for loans, leaving only good projects in that net worth class to seek loans,

and thus eliminating problems associated with asymmetry of information.

      If for some information-intensive borrowers p* is greater than the

expected return on the full-inforaation project alternative (RW) ——                     that   is,

if    >        for   some of these borrowers -- and if the projects are the ones

receiving fundson the margin, then the equilibrium return on loans to the

information-intensive borrowers, 1 +               p, is just equal to R. If            exceeds

1 +   p   --   that   is, if Ck <   C   ——   for   all information—intensive borrowers, then

information—intensive borrowers will be the marginal borrowers, because the

maximum return when borrowers pool,                       +          is less than     As total
                                                              R2),
wealth to be allocated increases, marginal conditions in the loan market will

change, as different borrowers are brought in on the margin. That is, changes

in the aggregate level of net worth can have allocative effects. Marginal

conditions (and the participation of particular classes of borrowers) depend

as well on the allocation of wealth ——                i.e.,     internal equity —-   since   changes

in this allocation can affect the profitability of lending to

information—intensive borrowers.

      Proposition 1 makes precise (I) the role of internal equity in credit

allocation when full-information and information-intensive credit markets

coexist; and (ii) the extent to which "underinvesteent" in particular sectors

occurs.

Proposition 1: Depending on per capita levels of internal net worth, the

                      allocation of funds to classes of borrowers alternatively will

                      follow the full—Information credit allocation or ration funds
                                                          -13-


                         away from information—intensive borrowers who would receive

                         credit in the absence of asymmetric information. A "financial

                         collapse" may occur, in which some or all classes of

                         information-intensive borrowers are denied any access to

                         credit.

Proof:

       Within the framework described above, borrowers may be ordered in teras

of desirability depending on their project opportunities and net worth Ck.

Three possible orderings exist:

       (i)
                         -
                             1 >
                                   p*(CH.      > p*(C.           1L when H,L <

       (ii)            P*(CH 1H R -          1 >
                                                   p*(CL, 4), when L < C(p) < H, and

       (iii) p*(CH, 1H > p*(CL,                       >          — 1, when ILL > C(p).

       In    other words, the maximum possible gross rate of return from contracts

offered to information-intensive borrowers exceeds %                          only   when borrowers with

the same (high) net worth level and different production opportunities do not

pool. This occurs only when internal net worth exceeds the critical level

The level of aggregate net worth determines, for any of the three orderings,

which borrowers class received funds on the margin. The profit rate from

marginal loans sets the profit rate for inframarginal loans as well; marginal

and average profit rates ()                 are    equal.

       Under ordering N),              increasing     aggregate net worth causes           to fall from
   -   I    to p*(CH, 1H) and then to p*(C1, 'L Under (ii),                            follows the path:

   -   1,    ft111 -   1, p*(CL, i) ft2 - 1. For ordering (iii),    falls from
   - 1 to              - 1 to    - 1. Thus, depending on the aggregate level and

distribution of net worth, some classes of borrowers may be rationed (i.e.,

receive a loan opportunity only through a lottery with a certain probability)
                                        -14-


or excluded entirely from the credit market.

    We stress two corollaries of Proposition 1 addressing the importance of

internal equity for investment.


Corollary 1: The distribution of investment across borrower types depends on

              the distribution of endowments among borrowers and savers.


Discussion:

     Changes in net worth that precipitate a change in funding ordering, but

hold constant the aggregate endowment level, are borne by the marginal

borrower class. That is, some groups of borrowers may be denied credit.

These borrowers must be information-intensive. Hence, the share of

information—intensive investment in total investment can never increase when

the aggregate net worth of potential borrowers (non-S-type individuals) is

reduced, and will in general decrease. A fortiori, changes in H or L relative

to C(p) will have allocative effects.


Corollary 2: Any redistribution of funds from entrepreneurs to savers thet

              change Ii or L relative to E()   will   reduce the share of

              investment undertaken by information—intensive borrowers.


Discussiont
     This corollary follows iramedietely from Proposition I and Corollary 1.

Consider a redistribution of internal finance AC from potential entrepreneurs

to be given to savers --   changing (H,L,C(p)) to (H-AC,L-AC,()). If the new
internal net worth positions are such that funding ordering (iii) prevails,

the redistribution is only a transfer. If funding ordering (ii) obtains, then
                                      —15-


   borrowers may not be granted loans; under funding ordering (i). the

information—intensive sector as a whole may experience financial collapse,

with most or all of mutual fund deposits invested in full—information

projects. The return on the mutual fund deposits is lower going from (iii) to

(ii) to (i). Taken together, corollaries 1 and 2 imply that financing and

investment decisions are not independent.


III. Public Policy: Some Remarks


Internal Finance and Public Finance

     The simple setup of the model in section III permits some observations

about the effects of tax policy on credit allocation. We consider the

government sector as having commitments for a stream of public projects. The

government's revenue requirements depend on its endowment relative to the cost

of the exogenously specified projects. If required public spending exceeds

the endowment of the government, taxes will be levied. If the public

endowment exceeds the cost of public projects, the government becomes a net

contributor of funds to the economy-wide mutual fund.

     Consider first the case in which the public sector requires additional

funds and uniform lump-sum taxes on endowments are imposed prior to credit

allocation. The effects of taxation on the allocation of funds for investment

depends both on the aggregate level of collateral and its distribution, as

would be expected from the allocations discussed before. That is, all other

things equal, reductions in the total amount of private funds should lead to an

increase in the share of investment undertaken by full-information borrowers.

Moreover, uniform (lump-sum) taxation of net worth prior to investsent
                                      -16-


reduces collateral 0f1L borrowers proportionately more than that of

  borrowers, making more likely the possibility of the complete closure Of

the loan market to    borrowers.

     Policy-induced redistributions of money from the "corporate sector"

(individuals with project endowments) to the household sector (individuals

including those who are "savers") will in all likelihood reduce investment

profitability as it reduces the share of investment done by

information—intensive entrepreneurs. One such redistribution was accomplished

in the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-1937, in which a progressive

surcharge was placed on retained earnings to encourage payout. Dividend

payments relative to earnings increased substantially during the two years for

which the surtax was in effect (Poterba, 1961). Available evidence on

behavioral responses is sketchy, with the consensus being that large companies

issued (primarily debt) securities to raise funds externally for investment.

Small and medium-sized companies in growing industries were paying out little,

and suffered a loss in internal finance as a result of the surcharge. Surveys

cited by a contemporary chronicler suggest a decline in investment in those

groups (see the discussion in Lent, 1946). The Tax Reform Act of 1986 raises

substantially the average tax rate on corporate earnings; an analysis of its

likely effects on corporate saving is given by Poterba (1987). The Act

redistributes funds from the corporate sector to the household sector, where

average tax rates are lowered. Our model would predict that investment

decisions of information—intensive firms are affected by this redistribution.

     The importance of internal finance -—   particularly   for information—

intensive borrowers —-   suggests the possibility that the impact of tax policy
                                     —17—


on investment may be channeled as much through its effects on net cash flow

(as an addition to internal equity) as through its effects on the "cost of

capital". That is, depending on levels of internal equity, information—

intensive borrowers may face binding internal-finance contraints, with a very

high shadow price of debt—finance. For such borrowers, the effects of tax

policy on investment would come through impacts on internal equity and cash

flow and not just through changes in the full—information cost of capital in

centralized securities markets. That is, average tax rates matter as well as

marginal tax rates.13


Public Policy and Financial Institutions

     The multiple-credit-markets approach outlined here sheds new light on

public policies toward financial institutions. Actual loan markets are not a

replication of an identical mutual fund. Real-world markets are characterized

not only by a multiplicity of potential contracts (differing in price or

quantity terms) at the national level, but by regional and institutional

differences as well, because of, inter alia, restrictions on the types of

securities in which certain institutions may invest and on intrastate and

interstate branch banking. The resulting diminished ability to spread risks

leaves lenders more vulnerable to deflationary shocks. For such institutions,

adverse shocks to borrowers' net worth are likely to have still more negative

effects on the availability of credit to information-intensive borrowers,

since other borrowers will have access to less localized, full-information

credit markets.

     Empirical evidence from historical experience illustrates the sensitivity

of credit allocation to the responses of financial institutions to periodic
                                      -18-


episodes of deflation. That deflationary shocks can disrupt credit markets

has been suggested by Fisher (1933) and Minsky (1977). In our model, large

reductions in borrower net worth are associated with the first two funding

orderings described in the proof of proposition 1, where full-information

interest rates are high, and credit in information-intensive sectors will be

scarce, though loan rates may not rise. Support for these responses to

aggregate deflationary shocks to net worth is provided for the

pre-Federal—Reserve period in Calomiris and Hubbard (1985) and for the period

of the Great Depression of the 1930s in Bernanke (1983).

     A contemporary example of aultiple market clearing In response to

deflationary shocks and reductions in internal equity is reflected in the

recent troubles of the federal Farm Credit System (FCS). Agricultural

borrowers from "banks" in the FCS are required to hold stock in the bank from

which the loan was obtained. In periods of deflation in farm prices (and land

values), default rates can be expected rise, inflicting capital losses on all

remaining borrowers. Of course, some borrowers could liquidate their loans

and refinance thea in full—inforsation credit markets. As strong (high net

worth) borrowers leave the FCS to obtain funds in full—information markets,

the cost of credit to weaker borrowers rises, worsening the adverse selection

probles and increasing the likelihood of a credit collapse (see the discussion

in Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock1 1986).


IV. Conclusion and Extensions

     The principal findings of the paper were stated in the introduction. We

consider differences in equilibrium credit availability to various types of

borrowers and projects and responses to disturbances. This merger of
                                       -1.9-



full—information mnd information-intensive credit markets is an important step

toward an examination of why different forms of financial institutions and

loan contracts emerge, and what public policies toward credit markets should



      Two theoretical extensions of this paper seem particularly proeising ——

(i)   modeling further the dynamic accumulation of net worth, and

(Ii) motivating the existence of particular information-intensive

intermediaries. With respect to the former, it is important to consider

saving toward the threshold level of internal finance required to gain access

to particular loan markets in a stochastic cyclical context.14 An additional

element of precautionary response might be the agglomeration of internal

equity through mergers.

       With respect to the second extension, given the demonstrated importance

of internal finance for the sorting of borrowers and the costs of adverse

shocks to net worth in terms of reduced credit availability, both borrowers

and lenders may choose to undertake costly investments in "information" --

"reputations"   for borrowers and the development of specialized intermediaries

by lenders. For example, intermediaries could differ in the costs of

gathering information about prospective borrowers. "Banks" may be the lenders

most efficient in monitoring information-intensive loans, so that banks

failures could have real effects by destroying information capital and raising

monitoring costs in the aggregate. Alternatively, borrowers may decide to

invest in costly signals and audits in order to gain admittance to

centralized, full-information financial markets which supply funds relatively

elastically. Evidence from the mid—1930s indicates that this was one run




                                                                                  I
                                       -20—


response to the high number of bank failures of the early lsaos (see Butters

and Lintner, 1945). Incorporating these dynamic considerations (as for

example in   the banking aodel of Bernanke and Gertler, 1985) would add
significantly to the richness of the approach presented here.

     Both of these extensions suggest the importance of research on links

between credit—market structure and the persistence of aggregate income

fluctuations. The model developed here provide a good basis for such dynamic

analysis because of its potential to describe the availability of various

types of loan contracts in response to aggregate disturbances and their iapact

on the persistence of those disturbances. The accueulation of internal

finance by borrowers is important, and cyclical fluctuations in the quantity

of funds available for internal finance will accentuate economy-wide

fluctuations in income (see also the discussion in Bernanke and Gertler, 1987;

and Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1q86). During a boom —— when collateral levels

are high —— more socially productive investments can be undertaken in

information—intensive sectors of the economy. These considerations may also

be significant for the evaluation of federal credit—market interventions or of

certain fiscal policies.

     Finally, on an empirical level, our approach provides theoretical

eotivation for the inclusion of particular indicators of credit scarcity in

econometric work. The model yields testable hypotheses about the impact of

shocks to internal finance on loans to information-intensive borrowers (both

absolutely and relative to full-information borrowers). In particular, the

eaphasis on fluctuations in the value of internal net worth suggests useful

applications to studies of business investment and to financial crises. Such
                                     -21-


empirical tests are important as evidence of the quantitative significance of

credit rationing and as guidelines for public policy.
                                      —22—


                                   Footnotes


1. King (1986) is unable to isolate the effects of innovatiàns in banks loans

from the effects of innovations in banks deposits, and argues, therefore, that

there is little empirical basis for distinguishing between the

liquidity-preference transmission mechanism and the loan-supply transmission

mechanism of monetary policy. Bernanke (1956) argues that non-recursive

("structural") orthgonmlizations of VAR models lend core support to the

credit-supply approach than the simple recursive method.

2. Bernanke and Gertler (1985) have addressed some of these issues in their

consideration of bank intermediation in a general equilibrium framework. Boyd

and Prescott (1986) also demonstrate that financial-intermediary coalitions

are part of an efficient arrangement in the sense that they are needed to

support the participants' private—information core allocations.

3. An eephasis on internal finance in the investment decision is not new.

Butters and Lintner (1945) analyzed the importance of internal finance for the

development of growing enterprises. Arguments linking cash flow and

investment are articulated in Meyer and Kuh (1957). See also Eisner (1978).

4. Srini Vasmn designates small, medium—sized, and large corporations to be,

respectively, firms with assets below $10 million, firms with assets between

$10 and $100 million, and those with assets over $100 million. He finds that

external equity finance (new share issues) is rare in general, and is

virtually nonexistent outside large firms. Smaller firms rely mainly on bank

loans and other short-term debt for external finance. Dividend payout ratios

increase significantly with firm size (see also the analysis in McDonald and
                                     —23—


Soderstrom, 1986; and Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, 1967a). Moreover, the

volatility of dividends and earnings are higher for small firms and their

investments and sales are more procyclical than those of larger firms

indicating a greater reliance on internal finance and the potential importance

of cash flow per se. Thus, although small firms account for a small

percentage of average investment and sales, they account for a much larger

percentage of cyclical variability in these variables. In part, this also

reflects the reliance of small firms on bank debt for external finance, since

bank loan supply is sensitive to aggregate credit cycles (see Eckstein and

Sinai, 1986).

5.   Modeling specifically the allocation of capital to projects with at least

some degree of individual specificity is crucial to understanding potential

real effects of shocks to borrowers' collateral. If borrowers and lenders

were identical in their access to projects, unanticipated deflation would be,

for example, merely a redistribution of wealth,

6.   it is important to consider both perfect—information and

information-intensive loan markets to motivate examination of real-world

institutions. For example, Bernanke and Gertler (1987) employ a model of

costly state verification to motivate links between the level of collateral

and the availability of credit. In actual credit markets, some borrowers (our

information—intensive firms) are doubtless subject to insider (equity) and

outsider (debt) distinctions, while others (full—information firms) offer the

same information to holders of both debt and equity claims (e.g., large,

publicly traded corporations).
                                        —24—


7.   Indeed, Williamson (1986) emphasizes the importance of developing

financial intermediation from first principles. While loans from

intermediaries are important to some (information—intensive) borrowers, they

are not uniformly important to all borrowers. Srini Vasan's "small,"

'medium-sized," and "large" firms (see the description in footnote 4) relied

on bank loans for 79 percent, 64 percent, and 17 percent of their external

finance, respectively.

8.   lIe   Meza and Webb (1987) obtain an overinvestment result within a

framework similar to ours, but different in four important respects, in that

they rely on: (i) identical distributions of project returns across

entrepreneurs (entrepreneurs differ only in their probabilities of success),

(ii) identical net worth across entrepreneurs, (iii) the existence of a

continuue of individual types (rather than some number of discretely different

types), and (iv) an exogenously determined marginal expected return to

lenders. By relaxing (i), we can obtain the sort of credit rationing

suggested by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) when collateral levels are sufficiently

low. Our multiple-markets approach relaxes (ii)-(iv) to examine the effects

of collateral changes on the allocation of credit across different types of

borrowers.

9.   In the 11.5. manufacturing sector, new share issues as a source of

external finance are significant only for the very largest firms (Srini Vasan,

1985). Important recent papers by Myers and Majluf (1984) and Greenwald,

Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984) explain why asymmetric information either

eliminates effectively any reliance on external equity finance in the market

or causes suppliers of new equity to demand a large premium. Sea also the
                                         —25—


    review of arguments in Greenwald and $tiglitz (1986). Myers and Majluf

    consider a situation in which managers (or current owners) are better informed

    about the true value of both the firm's investment opportunities and the

    existing assets in place. Managers are assumed to act in the interest of

    existing shareholders, and potential new investors are aware of this. Given

    this set of assumptions, firms may be forced completely out of markets for

    external equity finance. See also the analysis in razzari, Hubbard, and

    Petersen (198Th).

    10. That is, we exclude interest rates that vary with a firm's performance.

    There are enforcement issues raised by such contractual contingencies in debt

    instruments: First, ex 22!! third-party verification must be straightforward

    ("id certum est quod certum reddi potest" --   that   is certain which can be made

    certain). Second, if the borrower can exercise influence over the outcome,

    this unequal power might raise questions as to whether the contract is

    negotiated "in good faith" and whether the "mutuality" test of coapensation is

    satisfied. Contracting contingent on a price index does not raise these

    issues, while contracting on firm performance does (for definitions of terms,

    see Oawson, Harvey. and Henderson, 1982, pp. 228-38; and Kimbrough, 1974. pp.

    68—70). These enforcement considerations suggest that attempts to mimic

    aspects of an equity position in a limited form with interest rate

    contingencies eight be an unenforceable compromise between ownership, on the

-
    one hand, and a fixed promise, on the other hand. It is like'y that, were

    such contingent contracting feasible, it would occur as a means of charging

    different loan fees to borrowers with different unobservable project

    opportunities. The adverse-selection problem in our model will not be
                                     —26-


eliminated by this complication, as long as firms' realizations are less than

fully revealing of their underlying project opportunities.

11. The adverse selection result obtains because of the different

distributions of project returns for entrepreneurs of types 1 and 2. For

interest rates greater than 1, project 1 borrowers drop out, and project 2

borrowers remain.

12. The importance of collateral as borrower net worth in a project has been

emphasized by Leland and Pyle (1977) and Bernanke and Gertler (1987).

13. This emphasis on the difference between the shadow cost of internal and

external finance parallels closely the exaaination of "liquidity-constrained"

consumers in Hubbard and Judd (1986. 1987), where the effects of average, not

marginal, tax rates dominate as long as the constraint binds. Fazzari,

Hubbard, and Petersen (1987b) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987) discuss

conditions under which average tax rates are relevant for the investment

decision.

14. That is, are there circumstances under which borrowers with access to

credit would turn down projects with positive net present value in order to be

able to borrow in future periods? More broadly, can fluctuations in borrower

net worth generate persistent effects on investment ("accelerator effects")?

     Consider an extra period in the model, and assume that individual—

specific project opportunities are randomly distributed in each period, so

that it is not possible for lenders to learn usefully about the

characteristics and types of borrowers. In the first period, an individual

borrower is either granted a loan or not. If credit is made available in

period 1, the borrower must decide whether or not to invest, Given the
                                     —27—


significance of entrepreneurs' net worth    in   the credit allocation process,

there is an important interdependence between investment decisions in the two

periods. If there were an adverse realization of project returns in the first

period, net worth positions for some borrowers may be eroded sufficiently to

preclude obtaining a loan in the second period. As long as borrowers are

optimizing over both periods, depending on expectations about the relative

expected profitability of investments made in the two periods, some borrowers

may turn down investment opportunities with positive net expected returns in

the first period in order to be more sure of obtaining a loan in the second

period, Under a full-information credit allocation with risk-neutral

borrowers, such a result would never obtain; borrowers would undertake

investment in the first period whenever the expected net present value is

positive.
                                     -28—


                                 References


Akerlof, George A. "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality and the Market
     Mechanism." .Qprterly Journal of Economics 84 (August 1970): 488—500.

Bernanke, Ben S. 'Alternative Explanations of the Money—Income Correlation,"
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Amsterdam:
     North-Holland, 1986.

Bernanke, Ben S. "Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession." American Economic
     Review 71 (May 1981): 155—159.

Bernanke, Ben S. "Nonaonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
     Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73
     (June 1983): 257—276.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark. "Banking in General Equilibrium."
     Working Paper No. 1647, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 1985.
     In William Barnett and Kenneth Singleton, eds., New ADproachea to
     Monetary Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark. "Financial Fragility and Economic
     Performance," Working Paper No. 2318, National Bureau of Economic
     Research, July 1987.

Bester, Helmut. "Screening Versus Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect
     Information." American Economic Review 75 (September 1985): 850—855.

Boyd, John H. and Prescott, Edward C. "Financial Intermediary-Coalitions."
     Journal of Economic Theory 38 (April 1986): 211-232.

Butters, J. Keith and lintner, John V. Effects of Federal Taxes on Growing
     Enterprises. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press, 1945.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Hubbard, R. Glenn. "Price Flexibility, Credit
     Rationing, and Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from the U.S., 1879-
     1914." Working Paper No. 1767, National Bureau of Economic Research,
     December 1985.

Calomiris, Charles W., Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Stock, James H. "The Farm Debt
     Crisis and Public Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     (19B6:2): 441479.

Chan, Yuk—Shee and Thakor, Anjan V. "Collateral and Competitive Equilibria
     with Moral Hazard and Private Information." Journal of Finance 42
     (June 1987): 345—363.

Dason, John P., Harvey, William Burnett, and Henderson, Stanley 0.
     Contracts: Cases and Comments. New York: The Foundation Press,
     Inc. ,   1982.
                                    —29-


De Men, David and Webb, David C. "Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
     Information." Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (May 1987): 281-292.

Eckstein, Otto and Sinai, Allen. "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle in
     the Postwar Era," In Robert J. Gordon (ed.), The American Business
     Cycle: Continuity and Change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     1986.

Eisner, Robert. Factors in Business Investment. Cambridge: Ballinger, 1978.

Fazarri, Steven, Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Petersen, Bruce C. "Financing
     Constraints and Corporate Investaent." Working Paper No. 2387,
     National Bureau of Economic Research, September 1987a.

Fazarri, Steven, Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Petersen, Bruce C. "Tax Policy,
     the Financing Decision, and Investment.' Mimeograph, Northwestern
     University, September 1987b; American Economic Review, 78 (May 1988),
     forthcoming.

Fisher, Irving. "The Debt—Deflation Theory of Great Depressions."
     Econometrica 1 (October 1933): 337357.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States."
     In Benjamin M. Friedman (ed), The Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in
     Financing U.S. Capital Formation. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, 1982.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Financial Structure and the
     Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." Mimeograph, Princeton
     University, 1987.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Information, Finance Constraints,
     and Business Fluctuations." Mimeograph, Princeton University, February
     1986.

Greenwald, Bruce, Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew. "Informational
     Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations."
     American Economic Review 74 (May 1984): 194—199.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Judd, Kenneth L.  "Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy,
     and Consumption." Brookings Papers on Economic ActivIty (1986:1): 1-51.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Judd, Kenneth L. "Social Security and Individual
     Welfare: Precautionary Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll
     Tax." American Economic Review 77 (September 1987): 630-646.

Jaffe, Dwight M. and Russell, Thomas. "Imperfect Information, Uncertainty,
     and Credit Rationing." Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November
     1976): 651—666.
Kimbrough, Robert T. Summary of American Law. New York: The Lawyers
     Cooperative Publishing Company, 1974.
                                     —30-


King, Stephen R. "Monetary Transmission: Through Bank Loans, or Bank Liabil-
     ities?" Journal of Money1 Credit, and Banking 18 (August 1986): 290—303.

Leland, Hayne and Pyle, David. "Informational Asymmetries, Financial
     Structure, and Financial Intermediation." Journal of Finance 32 (May
     1977): 311—387.

Lent, George E. The Impact of the Undistributed Profits Tax, 1935—1937.
     New York: Columbia University Press, 1948.

Mankiw, N. Gregory. "The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (August 1985): 455-470.

McDonald, Robert and Soderstrom, Naosi. "Dividend and Share Changes: Is
     There a Financing Hierarchy?" Working Paper No. 2029, National Bureau
     of Economic Research, September 1986.

Meyer, John R. and Kuh, Edwin. The Investment Decision. Cambridge: Harvard
     University Press, 1957.

Minsky, Hyman P. "A Theory of Systemic Fragility." In E.J. Altman and
     A.W. Sametz (eds.). Financial Crises: Institutions and Markets in a
     Fragile Environment. New York: Wiley, 1911.

Myers, Stewart C. and Majluf, Nicholas S. "Corporate Financing Decisions
     When Firms Have Investment Information That Investors Do Not." Journal
     of Financial Economics 13 (June 1984): 187-220.

Poterba, James M. "Tax Policy and Corporate Saving." Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity (1987:2).

Srini Vasan, Philip Vijay. Credit Rationing and Corporate Investment.
     Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, October 1985.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew. "Credit Rationing in Markets with
     Imperfect Information." American Economic Review 71 (June 1981)
     393—410.

Williamson, Stephen 0. "Costly Monitoring. Financial Intermediation, and
     Equilibrium Credit Rationing." Journal of Monetary Economics 18
     (September 1986): 156-179.

Williamson, Stephen 0. "Costly Monitoring, Loan Contracts, and Equilibrium
     Credit Rationing." Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (February 1987):
     135—146.
