                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SMOKERS’ RATIONAL LEXICOGRAPHIC PREFERENCES
                      FOR CIGARETTE PACKAGE WARNINGS:
               A DISCRETE CHOICE EXPERIMENT WITH EYE TRACKING

                                       Jeffrey E. Harris
                                      Mariana Gerstenblüth
                                        Patricia Triunfo

                                      Working Paper 24974
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24974


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




We thank Gastón Ares (Instituto Polo Tecnológico de Pando, Facultad de Química, UDELAR)
and Leandro Machin (Centro de Investigación Básica en Psicología, Facultad de Psicología,
UDELAR) for their assistance in conducting the experiment and their insightful comments. We
thank Alejandra Arrúa (Facultad de Psicología, UDELAR) and Sebastián Suárez (Facultad de
Arquitectura, Diseño y Urbanismo, UDELAR) for the package illustrations. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the Unión Contra la Tuberculosis y Enfermedades
Respiratorias through an unrestricted grant to the Tobacco Control Program of the Ministry of
Public Health of Uruguay. The authors have no competing interests to declare. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jeffrey E. Harris, Mariana Gerstenblüth, and Patricia Triunfo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences for Cigarette Package Warnings: A Discrete
Choice Experiment with Eye Tracking
Jeffrey E. Harris, Mariana Gerstenblüth, and Patricia Triunfo
NBER Working Paper No. 24974
August 2018
JEL No. D12,D83,D87,D91,I12,M31

                                           ABSTRACT

We asked 97 cigarette smokers to make a series of 12 binary choices between experimental
cigarette packages with varying warnings and background colors. Each smoker had to decide
which of the two packages contained cigarettes less risky for his health. We tested whether the
smokers, confronted with warnings that were repugnant and threatening to many of them, could
still make choices that adhered to the standard axioms of rational choice. We supplemented our
observations on smokers’ choices with data on their eye movements. We find that participants
universally made choices consistent with a complete, transitive preference ordering. We find little
evidence of inconsistent choices violating the weak axiom of revealed preference. In a majority of
smokers, we find strong evidence of the use of a lexicographic decision rule to assess the
riskiness of a cigarette package. These smokers first ranked the two packages solely on the basis
of their warnings. Only when the two packages had the same warning did they rank the packages
on the basis of their color. The data on eye tracking strongly confirmed the lexicographic nature
of the underlying decision rule. Our study represents an entirely different angle of inquiry into the
question of rational addiction.

Jeffrey E. Harris                                          Patricia Triunfo
Department of Economics, E52-422                           Departamento de Economía
MIT                                                        Facultad de Ciencias Sociales
77 Massachusetts Avenue                                    Universidad de la República
Cambridge, MA 02139                                        Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
and NBER                                                   patricia.triunfo@cienciassociales.edu.uy
jeffrey@mit.edu

Mariana Gerstenblüth
Departamento de Economía
Facultad de Ciencias Sociales
Universidad de la República
Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
Uruguay
mariana.gerstenbluth@cienciassociales.edu.uy
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                     Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        In a landmark report released in May 1988, the U.S. Surgeon General concluded
that the nicotine in cigarette smoke was an addictive drug. The report described cigarette
smoking as a highly controlled, compulsive behavior driven by strong, often irresistible
urges that could overcome repeated attempts to quit (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 1988). In an article published just three months later, economists Gary
Becker and Kevin Murphy inquired whether a cigarette smoker could still make rational
decisions within the confines of his addiction (Becker and Murphy 1988).
        Prior economic research on rational addiction has focused mostly on the smoker’s
ability to make farsighted rather than myopic utility-maximizing consumption choices
(Gruber and Koszegi 2001). Here, we report on the results of a discrete choice
experiment that looks at a different angle of rationality. We asked cigarette smokers to
make a series of binary choices between experimental cigarette packages with varying
warnings and background colors. With each successive choice, a participating smoker
had to decide which of the two packages contained the cigarettes less risky for his health.
We tested whether the participating smokers, confronted with experimental warnings that
were undoubtedly repugnant and threatening to many of them, could still make choices
that adhered to the classic axioms of rational choice. We supplemented our observations
on smokers’ choices with data on their eye movements, a technique that has attracted
increasing interest among economists (Reutskaja et al. 2011, Lahey and Oxley 2016).
        We find that participants in our experiment universally made choices consistent
with a complete, transitive preference ordering. We find little evidence of inconsistent
choices violating the weak axiom of revealed preference. What’s more, in a majority of
smokers, we find strong evidence of the use of a lexicographic decision rule to assess the
riskiness of a cigarette package. These smokers first ranked the two packages solely on
the basis of their warnings. Only when the two packages had the same warning did they
rank the packages on the basis of their color. To be sure, our observations on the
participants’ choices were consistent with an additively separable utility function in
which package warnings simply had far greater weight than package color. The
additional data on eye tracking, however, strongly confirmed the lexicographic nature of
the underlying decision rule. The smoker’s eyes, in effect, provided a window into the
neural sequences in his brain.


                                                                                              3
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


                                    I. Experimental Design

                                         A. Participants

        We recruited a convenience sample of 98 self-reported adult current cigarette
smokers aged 19–60 years from the students, faculty and staff of the Universidad de la
República in Montevideo, Uruguay, to participate in a discrete choice experiment
concerning their evaluation of the risks of different types of cigarettes.
        Table 1 below shows the descriptive statistics for the 97 participants who
completed the entire experiment. These study participants were predominantly female
(nearly 60 percent). Most (68 percent) were under 30 years of age. Nearly half (46
percent) were students. Sixty percent smoked their first cigarette of the day within one
hour of arising in the morning. Eighty-four percent reported smoking 20 or few cigarettes
daily. Twenty-nine percent of the participants had made a serious attempt to quit smoking
in the past year. Ninety-four percent believed that smoking caused lung cancer and 91%
believed that it was a cause of heart disease.
        All study participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision as well as
full-color vision. Participants gave written informed consent and received a gift
equivalent to US$13 for participating in the study. The Ethics Committee of the School
of Chemistry of the Universidad de la República, Uruguay, approved our study protocol.

                                      B. Experimental Task

        The experimental task consisted of a series of 12 predetermined choice sets shown
consecutively on a computer monitor. Each choice set contained images of two cigarette
packs that varied in design only along two specific dimensions: the warning, which
consisted of an image and accompanying text occupying 80 percent of the face of the
pack, and the background color. For each binary choice set shown on the computer
screen, the participant was asked to click his mouse pointer on the cigarette pack that was
“less risky for your health” (“menos riesgosa para su salud”). We adopted a forced-choice
design. Participants were not permitted to opt out by indicating “none of these,” “not
sure,” or “don’t know.” There was no time limit to make a choice. Our study design was




                                                                                               4
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


similar to that of a previously reported discrete choice experiment on cigarette packages
(Harris et al. 2017). In that study, however, we did not track eye movements.



          TABLE 1––DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR 97 STUDY PARTICIPANTS*
                       Variable                               Mean                   SD
Female (%)                                                      59.8
Age (years)                                                     28.2                 8.8
Education attained:
    Some high school (%)                                         1.0
    Completed high school (%)                                    1.0
    Technical education (%)                                      6.2
    Some university (%)                                         75.3
    Graduated university (%)                                     8.3
    Graduate study (%)                                           8.3
Cigarettes smoked per day:
    1–10 (%)                                                    44.3
    11–20 (%)                                                   40.2
    21–30 (%)                                                   10.3
    More than 30 (%)                                             5.2
Time to first cigarette on arising in a.m.:
    0–5 min. (%)                                                12.4
    6–30 min (%)                                                39.2
    31–60 min. (%)                                              18.6
    More than 60 min. (%)                                       40.2
    No response (%)                                              2.1
Tried seriously to quit during past year (%)                    28.9
Believes that smoking causes lung cancer (%)                    93.8
Believes that smoking causes heart disease (%)                  90.7
Believes that smoking causes syphilis (%)                       14.4
*Includes 97 of 98 recruited subjects who completed the entire experiment. All
participants were self-reported current cigarette smokers.



                                                                                             5
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        We randomized both the sequential order of the 12 choice sets and the right-left
orientation of the two packs shown on the computer screen for each choice set.
Specifically, among the 97 smokers who completed the entire experiment, 52 subjects
were randomly assigned to Group I, while the remaining 47 subjects were randomly
assigned to Group II. Both groups were exposed to the same 12 choice sets in random
order, but the right-left orientation of the two packs in each computer screen shown to
Group II was the reverse of that shown to Group I.
        Figure 1 below provides two examples of the 12 choice sets displayed to each
participant on the computer monitor. For expositional purposes, we have labeled the
twelve choice sets A through K. The figure specifically shows choice sets D and K
displayed to the 52 participants randomized to Group I. Those in Group II, as noted
above, saw the same packs, but with the right-left orientation reversed. The participants
saw only what is shown within each rectangle, and not the labels above the rectangles.




          FIGURE 1. CHOICE SETS D AND K SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


        In choice set D, the warning on the left contained the image of a fetus held in a
doctor’s gloved hand, accompanied by the text, “Smoking during pregnancy harms the
health of your baby.” In the same choice set, the warning on the right contained the image
of a tagged cadaver in a morgue, accompanied by the text, “Smoking causes heart
attack.” In choice set K, the warning on the left contained the image of a boot stamping
out cigarettes, accompanied by the text, “Take the first step today. It’s possible to quit


                                                                                               6
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


smoking.” The warning on the right contained the image of a mouth with an ulcer along
the gum line, accompanied by the text, “Smoking causes bad breath, tooth loss and
cancer of the mouth.” The four warnings were selected from a public repository
maintained by the Comisión Intergubernamental para el Control del Tabaco del
MERCOSUR (CICT 2016), and had not appeared on any cigarettes marketed in Uruguay.
        Each pack had one of three background colors: gray (RGB 122 136 129), light
brown (RGB 167 115 51), or dark brown (RGB 74 65 42). Thus, in screen D, the pack at
the left has a light brown background, while the pack at the right has a gray background.
In screen K, the pack at the left has a dark brown background, while the pack at the right
has a gray background. The dark brown background color, also referred to as Pantone
448C, is mandated by the Australian government on all packages of cigarettes sold in that
country (Australian Government 2011). In a study of Australian smokers (Parr et al.
2011) that included the three background colors studied here, the dark brown was
identified as implying the greatest harm.
         Aside from the warning and the background color, all cigarette packs had the
same design. The brand name, which did not correspond to any brand sold in Uruguay,
was displayed in a uniform font, without a logo or other distinctive design element, at a
fixed location at the bottom center of the pack. A skull-and-crossbones icon was placed at
the bottom right, with the annotation, “Toxic Product.” The lateral edge contained the
text warning, “This product contains nicotine, tar and carbon monoxide.” The overall
design conformed to the requirements of plain packaging, currently in effect in Australia,
France, the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Norway (Australian Government 2011,
Moodie et al. 2018), and recently promulgated by the Uruguayan government.
        Table 2 below shows the design parameters of the 12 different choice sets shown
to the 52 participants randomized to Group I. The 12 choice sets were generated by the
mix-and-match procedure (Johnson et al. 2007) implemented in the support.CEs package
of R software (Aizaki 2012).




                                                                                             7
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



               TABLE 2––CHOICE SETS SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I
      Screen          Package on the Left                  Package on the Right
         A            Mouth, Dark Brown                    Cadaver, Dark Brown
         B            Fetus, Dark Brown                    Fetus, Light Brown
         C            Cadaver, Light Brown                 Boot, Light Brown
         D            Fetus, Light Brown                   Cadaver, Gray
         E            Mouth, Gray                          Boot, Dark Brown
         F            Boot, Gray                           Fetus, Gray
         G            Cadaver, Light Brown                 Cadaver, Dark Brown
         H            Fetus, Gray                          Fetus, Dark Brown
         I            Cadaver, Gray                        Mouth, Dark Brown
         J            Boot, Light Brown                    Mouth, Light Brown
         K            Boot, Dark Brown                     Mouth, Gray
         L            Mouth, Light Brown                   Boot, Gray
Notes: Participants in Group II were shown the same 12 choice sets, but with the right
and left packages reversed. In the case of choice set F, for example, participants in Group
II saw the fetus warning on the left and the boot warning on the right. There were 52
participants in Group I and 45 participants in Group II.



                                         C. Eye Tracking

        Each participant was asked to sit at a distance of 65 cm in front of a 17-inch,
1280x1024-pixel LCD monitor of a Tobii T60 eye tracker (Tobii Technology 2011).
While seated in front of the eye tracker, but before starting the task, participants
underwent a standard calibration procedure (Tobii AB 2016). Immediately before the
appearance of each of the 12 choice sets, the computer monitor showed only a fixation
cross, centered on the screen, for 0.2 seconds. That way, participants were induced to fix
their gaze at a predetermined point before looking at any details of the two packs in the
choice set that was to appear next.
        During the task, the eye tracker noninvasively recorded participants’ eye
movements at a sampling frequency of 60 Hz. The accompanying software (Tobii AB
2016) classified participants’ eye movements into two types: fixations and saccades. A
fixation corresponds to a state where the eye remains relatively still over a period of time,


                                                                                               8
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


while a saccade corresponds to the rapid motion of the eye from one fixation to another.
The classification is based on the velocity of the directional shifts of the eye (Salvucci
and Goldberg 2000). If the velocity is higher than 30 visual degrees per second, the eye
movement is classified as a saccade. If the velocity is below this threshold, the eye
movement was classified as part of a continuing fixation.
        We further classified the participants’ fixations according to their corresponding
coordinates on the computer screen. In accordance with recommended practice
(Holmqvist et al. 2011), we divided up the screen coordinates into five mutually
exclusive areas of interest, specifically, the warning image, the warning text, the lateral
text, the toxic-product symbol, and the brand name.




               FIGURE 2. EYE FIXATIONS BY PARTICIPANT 30 ON CHOICE SET J


        To illustrate the data acquisition process, Figure 2 above shows the eye fixations
of participant 30 on choice set J, which appeared next to last in her 12-set task.
Superimposed on the two-pack choice set is the standard representation for fixations and
saccades (Salvucci and Goldberg 2000), where each fixation is a circle with diameter


                                                                                               9
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


proportional to its duration, and where a connecting line represents a saccade. Her first
fixation, lasting 180 milliseconds (ms), was on the image in the boot warning on the left.
After a 50-ms saccade, her second fixation, lasting 580 ms, was on the image of the
mouth warning at the right. Shown below the two packs is a time line of the participant’s
eye movements, where each minor tick represents 100 ms. Her first fixation occurred 280
ms after choice set J appeared on the computer screen. Her second fixation occurred 510
ms into the task. At 1090 ms, the participant clicked her mouse, choosing the pack on the
left as less risky, thus ending the task. In this choice set, which was introduced near the
end of the experimental task, the participant fixated only once on each of two areas of
interest on the computer screen and then made her choice. In other cases, participants
fixated repeatedly on the same or different areas of interest, going back and forth between
the two packs, before making a decision.
        At the completion of the 12-set task, each participant was shown a diagram of his
fixations for two of the choice sets and then asked to respond to three questions. Why do
you think you looked at those areas, how did you select the pack that was less risky for
your health, and do you think that this type of pack could make you smoke less? We refer
to this final phase of our experiment as the “retrospective think-aloud.”

                                              II. Theory

                       A. Additive and Lexicographic Utility Functions

        Our objective in this section is not to break new theoretical ground, but to
establish basic definitions that will guide the exposition below. In this study, our
fundamental objects of choice are cigarette packages. Each package has two variable
attributes, its warning and its background color. Let W = { Boot, Cadaver, Fetus, Mouth}

denote the finite set of warnings, where w ∈W is an arbitrary element of W. Let
B = {Gray, Light Brown, Dark Brown} denote the finite set of background colors, where

b ∈B is an arbitrary element of B. The set of packages is X = W × B with arbitrary
element x = ( w,b) ∈ X . Since W and B are finite, so is X.




                                                                                              10
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                                 Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


         In each successive computer screen, a cigarette smoker selects his preferred
package from a binary choice set S = { x, x′} , where x ≠ x′ . We study whether these

choices are consistent with a complete, transitive, binary preference relation on the set X
of packages. Since the set X is finite, such a preference relation can be represented by a
real-valued utility function u : X → ! . That is, the smoker prefers the package x to the

package x′ if and only if u ( x ) ≥ u ( x′ ) . Here, we use “prefers” as shorthand to mean that

the smoker perceives x to be (weakly) less risky than x′ . We do not imply that the
smoker would in fact purchase x from a given consumption bundle. In general, this
utility representation admits the possibility that the smoker is indifferent between
packages x and x′ when u ( x ) = u ( x′ ) .

         We specifically study whether the smoker’s preferences can be represented by an
additive utility function on the set X of packages. In that case, his utility function

                                            () (          )       ( )       ()
u : X → ! can be decomposed as u x = u w, b = uW w + uB b , where uW :W → ! is

a real-valued function on the set W of warnings and uB : B → ! is a real-valued function

on the set B of background colors.
         We also study whether the smoker’s choices are consistent with a lexicographic
utility function on the set X of packages. In that case, his utility function u : X → !
satisfies the following conditions. There are separate real-valued functions uW :W → !

on the set W of warnings and uB : B → ! on the set B of background colors. Moreover,

for any two packages x = ( w, b) and x′ = ( w′, b′ ) , u ( x ) ≥ u ( x′ ) when either:

(i) uW ( w) > uW ( w′ ) ; or (ii) uW ( w) = uW ( w′ ) and uB ( b) ≥ uB ( b′ ) .

         The smoker with lexicographic utility thus compares two packages on the basis of
their warnings and relies on their background colors only when the two packages have an
equally risky warning. We don’t formalize the opposite case where the smoker compares
two packages based on their background colors and only on their warnings when they
have an equally risky color. This restriction is based on our research findings, to be
discussed below. As in the case of additive utility, the preferences implied by our
lexicographic utility function are complete and transitive. We will refer to uW as a



                                                                                                         11
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                                             Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



warning utility and uB as a background-color utility. Below, we use the terms

“lexicographic utility” and “lexicographic preferences” interchangeably, recognizing that
the former is in fact a representation of the latter on a finite set X of packages.
        Not every additive utility function is lexicographic. But under certain conditions,
lexicographic utility can be represented as an additive utility function. The following
result is a special case of a more general result proved by Kohli and Jedidi (Kohli and
Jedidi 2007). Assume that a smoker has lexicographic utility. A necessary and sufficient
condition that his utility function can be expressed additively as u ( w, b) = uW ( w) + uB ( b)


   w, w′∈W
              (                  )    b, b′∈B
                                                (                         )
is: min abs uW ( w) − uW ( w′ ) > max abs uB ( b) − uB ( b′ ) . That is, the minimum absolute

difference between any two warning utilities exceeds the maximum absolute difference
between any two background-color utilities.
        To see how this condition works, suppose that uW ( Mouth ) = 0 , uW ( Fetus ) = 3 ,

uW ( Cadaver ) = 6 , and uW ( Boot ) = 9 , while uB ( Dark Brown ) = 0 , uB ( Light Brown ) = 1 ,

                                         (                        )                         (
and uB ( Gray ) = 2 . Then min abs uW ( w) − uW ( w′ ) = 3 , max abs uB ( b) − uB ( b′ ) = 2 ,
                            w, w′∈W                                           b, b′∈B
                                                                                                             )
and thus the condition holds. The additive utility function u ( w, b) = uW ( w) + uB ( b) in this

example is in fact lexicographic.
        Our characterization of the conditions under which lexicographic utility admits an
additive representation suggests an empirical test for the existence of lexicographic
preferences. First, we use the data on participants’ binary choices to estimate the utilities
uW and uB as parameters in a discrete choice model such as conditional logit with an

additive utility specification. Second, we use the estimated values ûW and ûB to compute

                  w, w′∈W
                            (                       )   b, b′∈B
                                                                      (                         )
the statistic Q = min abs ûW ( w) − ûW ( w′ ) − max abs ûB ( b) − ûB ( b′ ) , and then employ

bootstrap methods to test the one-sided null hypothesis that Q ≤ 0 .
        Below, we also consider a variant of lexicographic utility in which the smoker is
indifferent between two or more warnings or background colors. To see how this works,
suppose that we change the very first warning utility in the foregoing example to
uW ( Mouth ) = 3 , but leave all the remaining utilities unchanged. Then we could collapse


                                                                                                                     12
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


the mouth and fetus warnings into a single attribute named Mouth or Fetus and write
u ( Mouth or Fetus, b) = 3+ uB ( b) for any background color b. Kohli and Jedidi describe

this variant as “satisficing lexicographic preferences.”

                              B. Context-Dependent Preferences

        There is a plethora of experimental evidence supporting the notion that individual
preferences are context-dependent (Tversky and Simonson 1993). Most of the supporting
data involves a demonstration that an individual’s preference for x versus x′ depends on
the presence or absence of a third option x ′′ , sometimes referred to as a decoy
(Trueblood et al. 2013, Rooderkerk, Van Heerde, and Bijmolt 2011). These experimental
findings undermine the theoretical notion of “simple scalability” that an individual’s
binary preference between x and x′ depends solely on the comparative utilities u ( x )

and u ( x′ ) (Tversky 1972). Context-dependent effects provide one explanation why the

behavior of participants in experimental settings does not always adhere to the weak
axiom of revealed preference (WARP) (Hey 2001, Agranov and Ortoleva 2017).
Apparently faced with the same choice set S = { x, x′} , the participant chooses x at one

point in the experiment, but opts for x′ later on. The resolution of the apparent
contradiction is that some contextual element must have changed.
        There are two natural contextual elements in our experimental design: the right-
left orientation of the two packages in each binary choice set, and the sequential order of
each choice set in the 12-set task. When the right-left positioning of a package on the
computer screen influences the smoker’s choices, we’ll say that his preferences exhibit a
positioning effect (Ryan, Krucien, and Hermens 2018). Such an effect may become
important in a visual choice experiment when the subject has a systematic preference for
objects in some parts of the visual field. When the order of presentation of a choice set
influences the smoker’s choices, we’ll say that his preferences exhibit an ordering effect.
Such an effect may become important when there is learning or fatigue during the course
of the experiment (Campbell et al. 2015, Day et al. 2012, Czajkowsk, Giergiczny, and
Greene 2014).




                                                                                              13
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                                 Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        In our experimental setting, the context in which a package is displayed consists
of its screen position and a sequential order. Let M = { Left, Right } denote the set of

screen positions with element m ∈ M , and let N = {1,…, 12} denote the set of sequential

orders with element n ∈N . The extended set Y = X × M × N with element y = ( x, m, n )

thus contains all possible packages in all possible contexts. To take a concrete example,
at the 11th computer screen in his experimental task, participant 30 was confronted with
choice set J shown in Figure 2 above. This choice set contained the elements { y, y′} ,

where y = ( x, m, n ) with x = ( Boot, Light Brown ) , m = Left , and n = 11 , and where

y′ = ( x′, m′, n′ ) with x′ = ( Mouth, Light Brown ) , m′ = Right , and n′ = 11 .

        A complete, transitive binary preference relation on the finite set Y can likewise
be represented as a real valued context-dependent mapping v :Y → ! . In particular, we
can consider an extension of the context-free additive utility model of the form
v ( y ) = u ( x ) + u M ( m) + uN ( n ) , where u ( x ) = uW ( w) + uB ( b) . When

u M ( Left ) ≠ u M ( Right ) , we have a positioning effect, and when uN ( n ) ≠ uN ( n′ ) for

n ≠ n′ , we have an ordering effect. A context-free utility function has no positioning
effect and no ordering effect.
        Consider an extension of the additive utility model with positioning effects, but
no ordering effects. A package x located on the left side of the screen has utility
u ( x ) + u M ( Left ) , while a package x′ located on the right has utility u ( x′ ) + u M ( Right ) .

For a smoker with a systemic preference for packages on the right, we have

u M ( Right ) − u M ( Left ) > 0 . In the case where 0 < u ( x ) − u ( x′ ) < u M ( Right ) − u M ( Left ) ,

the smoker would choose x over x′ when x is on the left, but x′ over x when x is on
the right. Unless we account for positioning effects, we may conclude that the smoker’s
choices are unstable and violate WARP. Within the additive utility framework, we can
similarly construct an example where failure to consider positioning effects would lead us
to conclude that the smoker’s choices violated transitivity. Failure to consider ordering
effects can likewise result in apparent violations of WARP and transitivity.



                                                                                                          14
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


                                              III. Results

                                   A. Stability of Preferences

        We first address whether smokers’ preferences for cigarette packages are stable
without context effects and thus adhere to WARP. As before, we emphasize that the
preferred cigarette pack is the one perceived as less risky. Figure 3 displays the choice
sets E and K shown to the 52 participants assigned to Group I. The remaining 45
participants assigned to Group II were shown the same two choice sets, except that in our
internal labeling scheme, the labels E and K were reversed.




          FIGURE 3. CHOICE SETS E AND K SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


        In Figure 3, choice set E shows the product x = ( Mouth, Gray ) on the left and the

product x ′ = ( Boot, Dark Brown ) on the right. Choice set K shows the same products x

and x′ , except that the right-left orientation is reversed. Stable preferences without
context effects would require that a participant consistently chose x or x′ . As shown in
row 1 of Table 3 below, 93 out of a total of 97 participants in our experiment gave stable
responses, while only 4 (or 4.4 percent) showed apparent violations of WARP. Among
the 93 participants with stable preferences, 89 (95.7%) consistently chose

( Boot, Dark Brown) over ( Mouth, Gray ) .



                                                                                              15
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



  TABLE 3. TESTS OF STABILITY, ADDITIVE UTILITY, AND LEXICOGRAPHIC PREFERENCES
Test    Choice Sets Package on Left             Package on Right         Condition§           N*
  1           E         Mouth, Gray             Boot, Dark Brown         WARP                  93
              K         Boot, Dark Brown        Mouth, Gray
  2           A         Foot, Dark Brown        Mouth, Dark Brown        Transitivity,         97
              C         Boot, Light Brown       Foot, Light Brown        Additive utility
              J         Mouth, Light Brown      Boot, Light Brown
  3           A         Mouth, Dark Brown       Foot, Dark Brown         Lexicographic         89
              I         Foot, Gray              Mouth, Dark Brown        preferences
  4           E         Mouth, Gray             Boot, Dark Brown         Lexicographic         88
              J         Boot, Light Brown       Mouth, Light Brown       preferences
              K         Boot, Dark Brown        Mouth, Gray
              L         Mouth, Dark Brown       Boot, Gray
  5           C         Boot, Light Brown       Foot, Light Brown        Transitivity,         91
              D         Fetus, Light Brown      Foot, Gray               lexicographic
              F         Boot, Gray              Fetus, Gray              preferences
  6           B         Fetus, Dark Brown       Fetus, Light Brown       Lexicographic         77
              G         Foot, Light Brown       Foot, Dark Brown         preferences
 1–6                                                                                  63
§ WARP = Weak axiom of revealed preference. All conditions include context-free
utility.
*N = Number of participants whose choices satisfied each specific test. There were 97
total participants. A total of 63 participants satisfied all 6 tests.



                                 B. Transitivity of Preferences

        We next address whether smokers’ preferences for cigarette packs adhere to the
axiom of transitivity in a context-free additive utility model. Figure 4 below displays the
choice sets A, C and J shown to participants assigned to Group I. Again, the remaining
participants in Group II were shown the same choice sets, except that the right-left
positioning of the packages in each screen was reversed.
        In choice set A, the smoker has to choose between ( Mouth, Dark Brown ) on the

left and ( Cadaver, Dark Brown ) on the right. Under the context-free additive utility

model u ( w, b) = uW ( w) + uB ( b) , his choice will depend only on the relative values of

uW ( Mouth ) and uW ( Cadaver ) , as both packages have the same background color. In

choice set C, the smoker has to choose between (Cadaver, Light Brown) on the left and


                                                                                               16
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


(Boot, Light Brown) on the right. Again, under an additive utility model, his choice will

depend only on the relative values of uW ( Cadaver ) and uW ( Boot ) , as both packages

likewise have the same background color. Similarly, under an additive utility model, the
smoker’s choice in set J will depend on the relative values of uW ( Boot ) and uW ( Mouth ) .




         FIGURE 4. CHOICE SETS A, C AND J SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


        Comparison of the smoker’s choices in sets A, C and J thus constitutes a test of
transitivity. For example, if the smoker chooses the package on the right in set A, then
uW ( Cadaver ) > uW ( Mouth ) , and if he chooses the package on the right in set C, then




                                                                                              17
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Cadaver ) . These two choices imply uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Mouth ) . Thus,

transitivity would require that the smoker choose the package on the left in set J.
        As shown in row 2 in Table 3 above, all 97 participants made choices among
screens A, C and J that were consistent with transitivity in a context-free additive utility
model. The most common utility ordering was uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Cadaver ) > uW ( Mouth ) ,

observed in 55 (56.7 percent) of participants. The second most common implied ordering
was uW ( Cadaver ) > uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Mouth ) , observed in 26 (26.8 percent) of

participants, while the third most common was uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Mouth ) > uW ( Cadaver ) ,

observed in 13 (13.4 percent).
        We have thus verified that the smokers who participated in our experiment made
choices among cigarette packages that adhered to the weak axiom of revealed preference
and the transitivity property in a context-free additive utility model. Yet in the
retrospective think-aloud task at the end of the experiment, many participants described
the images of the fetus, cadaver and mouth tumor as frightening (“espantosa”), disgusting
(“asquerosa”), and horrible (“horrible”) – in short, as aversive stimuli (Fehr and Rangel
2011). Said one participant, “The image of that mouth is so disgusting that I didn’t want
to see it.” (“La imágen de la boca me da un asco que no quise verla.”) Said another, “The
image of the baby impresses me. I can’t even look at it.” (“Me da mucha impresión la
imágen del bebé. No la puedo ni mirar.”) Yet another said, “I think the image of the dead
feet is strong, but the mouth is disgusting.” (“Yo creo que la imagen de los pies muertos
es fuerte, pero la de la boca es asquerosa.”)

                                 C. Lexicographic Preferences

        We next test whether the choices of our participating smokers, which appeared to
be consistent with an additive utility model, also conformed to lexicographic preferences.
Our test was motivated in part by the statements of many participants in the retrospective
think-aloud task that they took account of the background color only when both packages
had the same warning. Said one participant, “When I saw two images were the same, I
went with the lighter color.” (“Cuando veía dos imágenes iguales, me guiaba por el color
más clarito.”) Said another, “I was guided by all the images, by the photo. In case they


                                                                                               18
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                         Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


were the same, I focused on the colors and chose the lighter color.” (“Me guié en todas
las imágenes, por la foto. En las que era igual, me fijaba en los colores y elegía el color
más claro.”)
        Figure 5 below shows the choice sets A and I displayed to the 52 participants in
Group I. Choice set A compares ( Mouth, Dark Brown ) on the left with

(Cadaver, Dark Brown) on the right, while choice set I compares (Cadaver, Gray ) on
the left with ( Mouth, Dark Brown ) on the right. If a smoker with context-free

lexicographic preferences chooses ( Cadaver, Dark Brown ) on the right in choice set A,

he will choose ( Cadaver, Gray ) on the left in choice set I, even though the two packages

have different background colors. Similarly, if he chooses ( Mouth, Dark Brown ) on the

left in set A, he will also choose that package when it appears on the right in set I.
        Any reversal would not constitute a violation of additive utility, but it would
violate lexicographic preferences. For example, if a smoker with an additive utility
function u ( w, b) = uW ( w) + uB ( b) chose ( Cadaver, Dark Brown ) on the right side in

choice set A and ( Mouth, Dark Brown ) on the right side in choice set I, we can conclude

only that uB ( Dark Brown ) − uB ( Gray ) > uW ( Cadaver ) − uW ( Mouth ) > 0 . That is, the

smoker trades off the warning and the background color in his perception of riskiness.




           FIGURE 5. CHOICE SETS A AND I SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


                                                                                                 19
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        As shown in row 3 in Table 3 above, 89 (91.8 percent) of our 97 participants
made choices consistent with lexicographic utility. Among these 89 participants, 77
(86.5%) consistently chose the package with the cadaver warning in both sets.
        Figure 6 shows the choice sets underlying an additional test of context-free
lexicographic utility, based upon a comparison of the responses to choice sets E, J, K, and
L, all of which paired a package with a boot warning to a package with a mouth warning.
If a smoker has lexicographic preferences, he will consistently choose either the package
with the boot warning or the package with the mouth warning in all four choice sets.




        FIGURE 6. CHOICE SETS E, J, K AND L SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.




                                                                                            20
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                   Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        As shown in row 4 in Table 3, 88 (90.7%) of the 97 smokers made choices among
these four sets that were consistent with context-free lexicographic preferences. Among
these 88 smokers, 85 (96.6%) preferred the packages with the boot warnings.
        Figure 7 below shows the choice sets underlying yet another test of lexicographic
preferences, based upon a comparison of the responses to choice sets C, D and F. If a
smoker has lexicographic preferences, his choices among these three sets should display
a transitive ordering among the boot, cadaver and fetus warnings that is independent of
the background colors of the packages.




         FIGURE 7. CHOICE SETS C, D, AND F SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


        As shown in row 5 in Table 3 above, 91 (or 93.8%) of the 97 smokers made
choices among these three sets that were consistent with lexicographic preferences. The

                                                                                           21
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                         Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



most common warning utility ordering was uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Cadaver ) > uW ( Fetus ) ,

observed in 54 (59.3 percent) of the 91 smokers who made choices consistent with
lexicographic preferences among the three choice sets. The second most common
warning ordering was uW ( Cadaver ) > uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Fetus ) , observed in 14 (15.4

percent), while the third most common was uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Fetus ) > uW ( Cadaver ) ,

observed in 13 (14.3 percent).
        For each of the 91 smokers who displayed transitive lexicographic preferences in
test 5, based on choice sets C, D and F, we can deduce an ordering among the warning
utilities uW ( Boot ) , uW ( Cadaver ) , and uW ( Fetus ) . In particular, 68 (74.7%) of these 91

smokers made choices implying uW ( Boot ) > uW ( Cadaver ) , while the remaining 23 made

choices implying a reverse ordering of warning utilities. Moreover, each of these 91
smokers displayed transitive preferences in test 2 above, based on choice sets A, C and J.
From those choices we can similarly deduce an ordering among the warning utilities
uW ( Boot ) , uW ( Cadaver ) , and uW ( Mouth ) . We can thus check whether the relative

ordering of warning utilities uW ( Boot ) and uW ( Cadaver ) derived from test 5 is

consistent with the relative ordering of the same utilities derived from test 2. In fact, the
relative ordering was consistent in every one of the 91 smokers who displayed transitive
lexicographic preferences in test 5.
        Thus far, our tests of lexicographic preferences have focused on smokers’
preferences over warnings as the dominant choice criterion. Test 6 addresses the
preference ordering over background colors when both packages in a choice set have the
same warning. Figure 8 draws a comparison between choice sets B and G. In set B, the
smoker has to choose between ( Fetus, Dark Brown ) and ( Fetus, Light Brown ) . In set G,

the smoker instead has to choose between ( Cadaver, Dark Brown ) and

(Cadaver, Light Brown) . If a smoker with a context-free additive or lexicographic utility
function chose ( Fetus, Light Brown ) on the right side in choice set B, he would be

expected to choose ( Cadaver, Light Brown ) on the left side of choice set G.



                                                                                                 22
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                          Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        As shown in the row 6 of Table 3, 77 (79.4%) of 97 participants gave responses
consistent with either additive utility or lexicographic preferences. Among these 77
smokers, 67 (87.0%) displayed a consistent preference for light brown, while the
remaining 10 displayed a consistent preference for dark brown.




          FIGURE 8. CHOICE SETS B AND G SHOWN TO PARTICIPANTS IN GROUP I.


        The last row of Table 3 shows that 63 (64.9%) of the 97 smokers passed all six
tests combined. Below, we use the term “violators” to characterize the 34 smokers who
choices failed one or more of the six tests shown in the table. We use the term “non-
violators” to characterize the 63 smokers whose choices passed all six tests.

                                     D. Parametric Models

        Table 4 below shows the results of conditional logit regressions on the
12 × 97 = 1,164 discrete choices made by our 97 participating smokers. Each of the three
columns of parameter estimates in the table represents an additive utility model of the
form uW ( w) + uB ( b) + u M ( m) , where uW ( w) is the warning utility, uB ( b) is the

background-color utility, and u M ( m) is the utility component that captures the

participant’s preference for a package situated on one side of the computer screen. Below
each parameter estimate is its estimated standard error. Also calculated for each model is




                                                                                                  23
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                         Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


the Q test statistic of the hypothesis that the estimated additive utility is consistent with
lexicographic preferences, which we discussed above.


             TABLE 4. CONDITIONAL LOGIT ADDITIVE UTILITY MODELS*
Independent variable           Model 1                 Model 2                 Model 3
   Cadaver                      –1.096                  –1.112                  –1.332
                                (0.177)                (0.174)                 (0.175)
   Fetus                        –2.711
                                (0.266)
   Mouth                        –2.864
                                (0.162)
   Fetus or Mouth                                       –2.835                  –2.752
                                                       (0.152)                 (0.149)
   Light Brown                   0.707                   0.745
                                (0.178)                (0.164)
   Dark Brown                   –0.507                  –0.490                  –0.825
                                (0.139)                (0.134)                 (0.110)
   Right Side                    0.209                   0.209                   0.201
                                (0.082)                (0.082)                 (0.081)
   Q Statistic§                 –1.061                  –0.124                   0.507
                                (0.283)                (0.224)                 (0.141)
*All models had 1,164 observations on 97 participants. Numbers in parenthesis
below each parameter estimate are standard errors.

      w, w′∈W
                (                  )   b, b′∈B
                                                 (             )
§ Q = min abs ûW ( w) − ûW ( w′ ) − max abs ûB ( b) − ûB ( b′ ) . We used bootstrap
methods to compute the standard error of this statistic.

        In model 1, the omitted reference category for the warnings was the boot, that is,
uW ( Boot ) = 0 . Accordingly, the estimated utility component for the cadaver warning,

relative to the boot warning, was ûW ( Cadaver ) = −1.096 with standard error 0.177. The

negative sign means that the cadaver warning was perceived as more risky than the
reference boot warning. The omitted category for the background colors was gray, that is,
uB ( Gray ) = 0 . Thus, the positive sign of uB ( Light Brown ) means that the light brown

color was perceived as less risky than the gray background color.
        The utility component for left-sided positioning on the computer screen was set to
u M ( Left ) = 0 . The estimate û M ( Right ) = 0.209 (standard error 0.082) indicates that for

the sample as a whole, there was a significant right-sided positioning effect. The odds of


                                                                                                   24
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


choosing a package on the right side of the computer screen were an estimated 23.2
percent greater than the odds of choosing a package on the left ( exp ( ûR ) = 1.232 ). The

estimated utility parameters for the warnings and background colors were all different
from zero at the significance level p < 0.0003. In a two-sided test, we could reject the null
hypothesis that u M ( Right ) = 0 at the level p = 0.011. Running the logit model with

standard errors clustered by individual did not materially alter the significance levels.
        In model 1, we could not reject the hypothesis that uW ( Fetus ) = uW ( Mouth ) . (In a

chi-squared test with one degree of freedom, p = 0.574.) The main reason for our inability
to discriminate between these two warning utilities is the absence of a choice set in Table
2 that directly compares packages with the fetus and mouth warnings. To economize on
parameters, we therefore ran model 2 under the restriction that smokers were indifferent
between the two warnings, that is, uW ( Fetus ) and uW ( Mouth ) shared a common value

uW ( Fetus or Mouth ) . We retained the same reference categories as in model 1. This

simplification did not significantly alter any of the estimated utility components.
        Our finding of a significantly positive value of ûB ( Light Brown ) in both models 1

and 2 was unexpected, as it implied that the light brown background color was perceived
as less risky than the gray background color. This finding went contrary to the original
study among Australian smokers that included the three background colors studied here
(Parr et al. 2011). In the retrospective think-aloud phase of the present experiment, many
participants explicitly stated that they chose the lighter color (“el color más claro”) as less
risky. Other experimental studies and cross-sectional surveys have supported the
conclusion that lighter package colors are perceived as more healthful (Hammond et al.
2014, Wakefield, Germain, and Durkin 2008, Bansal-Travers et al. 2011, Doxey and
Hammond 2011). In an earlier discrete choice experiment (Harris et al. 2017), we found
that a package with a white background and a blue stripe was perceived as less risky.
        As noted in our discussion of test 6 above, both choice sets B and G directly
compared the light brown and dark brown background colors in packages with the same
warning. There was no choice set directly comparing the gray background with either of
these two colors. The data from choice sets B and G, we found, had significant leverage


                                                                                               25
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                     Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


in the estimation of the parameters in model 1. When we included an interaction term for
these two choice sets in model 1, the estimate for uB ( Light Brown ) was no longer

statistically significant (p = 0.344). The dark brown color appears to have served as a
decoy to enhance the attractiveness of the light brown alternative (Trueblood et al. 2013).
        Accordingly, we tested an even more concise model 3, in which the light brown
and gray background colors together served as the omitted category. In that model,
uB ( Dark Brown ) represented the utility component of dark brown relative to the

remaining colors. In fact, ûB ( Dark Brown ) derived from model 3 was significantly

different from the corresponding estimate derived from model 1 (p = 0.0039).
        Table 4 also shows our calculations of our Q test statistic. The negative values of
Q derived from models 1 and 2 were inconsistent with lexicographic preferences.
However, the positive value of Q = 0.507 derived from model 3 was consistent with
lexicographic utility for the entire sample of 97 smokers. The 95% confidence interval
based on an asymptotically normal distribution, computed by bootstrap methods, was
[0.229, 0.784]. A one-sided test of the null hypothesis that Q ≤ 0 gave p = 0.0002. These
results supported the conclusion that, at least for the more concise model 3, smokers had
lexicographic preferences that could be represented by an additive utility function.
        The models reported in Table 4 do not incorporate ordering effects. To test for
such effects, we ran our three conditional logit additive utility models with additional
right-hand-side variables representing the sequence order, either as a continuous variable
or as fixed effects. We also tested interactions between sequence order and the other
utility components of the model. In no case were the coefficients corresponding to the
ordering effects significant.
        As an additional test of ordering effects, we ran model 3 on subsets of the
database partitioned by sequence number. We found no significant evidence of trend in
the estimated coefficients during the course of the experiment. As an example, Figure 10
below shows the estimate of the warning utility u ( Cadaver ) from model 3 in relation to

the sequence ordering. We have collapsed the sequence number n into four groups (1–3,
4–6, 7–9, and 10–12) to reduce the dispersion of the data plot. Surrounding each point



                                                                                             26
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


estimate is its 95 percent confidence interval. The figure shows no significant differences
during the course of the experiment and thus provides evidence against ordering effects.




   FIGURE 9. ESTIMATED UTILITY OF THE CADAVER WARNING RELATIVE TO THE BOOT
          WARNING IN RELATION TO SEQUENTIAL ORDER, BASED UPON MODEL 3


                                        E. Response Time

        As part of our tracking of the eye movements of participants, we monitored the
time elapsed from the appearance of each choice set on the computer screen until the
smoker clicked his mouse pointer on the cigarette pack he perceived as less risky. As we
noted above, we imposed no time limit on the choice task. For all choice sets among all
smokers, the mean response time was 4.408 seconds, with a median of 2.78 seconds and
a range of 0.19 to 52.8 seconds.
        Among the 12 choice sets described in Table 3, three sets (B, G and H) compared
cigarette packages with identical warnings, while the remaining nine sets compared
packages with distinct warnings. Figure 11 below shows the mean response time in
relation to the screen sequence and the presence or absence of identical warnings.


                                                                                            27
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo




     FIGURE 11. MEAN RESPONSE TIME IN RELATION TO SEQUENTIAL ORDER AND THE
      PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF IDENTICAL PACKAGE WARNINGS IN THE CHOICE SET


        As Figure 11 shows, there was an overall downward trend in the mean response
time during the course of the experimental task. Whether early or late in the overall
sequence of choice sets, participants spent more time reaching a decision when faced
with a comparison of packages with identical warnings. By contrast, the mean response
time had no relation to the presence or absence of identical background colors. In a linear
regression of response time as a function of fixed effects for identical warnings, identical
colors, screen sequence and each individual smoker, the estimated effect of identical
warnings was 1.390 seconds (95% confidence interval [0.846, 1.934], p < 0.0001), while
the corresponding parameter estimate for identical colors was –0.218 seconds (95%
confidence interval [–0.715, 0.280], p = 0.391). While Figure 11 suggests that the effect
of identical warnings on response time diminished during the course of the experimental
task, a fixed-effect regression did not show statistically significant interaction terms.
        Our finding that identical package warnings – but not identical package colors –
increased the response time is consistent with lexicographic preferences. If the smoker


                                                                                              28
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                          Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


first evaluates the two package warnings and addresses differences in background color
only when the package warnings are identical, then we would expect a choice set with
identical warnings to require more cognitive processing time.
        For each of the 12 binary choice sets { x, x ′} in each of the two groups our

experiment, we used the parameter estimates in model 3, shown in Table 4 above, to

compute the quantity Δ û = û ( x ) − û ( x ′ ) as a measure of the divergence in utility

between the two package alternatives. Since the calculation included the estimated
positioning effect û M ( Right ) , the estimated values of Δ û for any given choice set

differed between Groups I and II. When Δ û is large, there is a strong preference for one
of the alternatives, but when Δ û is very small, the decision between the two packs is a
close call. For each choice set and group, Figure 12 relates Δ û to the mean response
time.




 FIGURE 12. RELATION BETWEEN MEAN RESPONSE TIME AND ESTIMATED DIVERGENCE IN
              UTILITY AMONG 12 CHOICE SETS IN EACH OF THE TWO GROUPS




                                                                                                  29
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        Figure 12 confirms that response time is inversely related to the estimated
divergence in utility between the two package alternatives. The sets with the lowest
values of Δ û were B, G and H, precisely those in which the warnings were identical. The
significant negative relation between the two variables was confirmed in a weighted least
squares regression, where the weights were the estimated inverse standard errors of the
mean response time (estimated slope = –0.723, p = 0.001). We also obtained a significant
inverse relationship when we instead used models 1 and 2 to compute Δ û .

                                         F. Eye Tracking

        Figure 13 shows the initial fixation patterns of the 97 participants in relation to the
presence or absence of identical warnings in the choice set. The figure shows two
decision trees. The tree at the left corresponds to 3× 97 = 291 choice sets with identical
warnings, while the tree at the right corresponds to 9 × 97 = 873 choice sets with distinct
warnings. These numbers appear inside the respective decision nodes at the root of each
tree.




 FIGURE 13. INITIAL FIXATION PATTERNS IN RELATION TO THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF
                     IDENTICAL PACKAGE WARNINGS IN THE CHOICE SET




                                                                                               30
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        Along the branches emanating from the decision node at the root of each tree, we
show the proportions of choice sets in which participants did or did not initially fixate on
a package warning, including the image or text. Thus, proceeding along the upper branch
labeled “Fixate on Warning” in the tree on the left, we see that participants fixated
initially on a warning in 250 (85.9%) of the 291 choice sets with identical warnings. In
the tree on the right, proceeding along the corresponding branch labeled “Fixate on
Warning,” participants fixated initially on a warning in 736 (84.3%) of 873 choice sets
with distinct warnings. There was no significant difference between the two types of
choice sets – identical versus distinct warnings – in the probability of initially fixating on
a package warning. (In a linear regression of initial fixation on a package warning as a
function of the type of choice set and the sequence number n of the choice set, with fixed
effects for each individual, the coefficient of the identical-warning type was 1.72% with
p = 0.417.)
        Proceeding along the branch labeled “Fixate on Warning” emanating from the
root of each tree, we arrive at another decision node. The number of choice sets in which
participants initially fixated on a warning (250 and 736, respectively) is shown inside
each node. From that node, we determine the proportion of choice sets in which
participants then fixated on the other package warning. While they may have fixated back
and forth on the text and image of the first warning, the other warning had to be the next
distinct area of interest to receive a fixation. If a smoker who initially fixated on areas
within the first warning then fixated on (say) the brand name of either package, his choice
would count instead toward the branch labeled “Fixate Elsewhere.” In the tree at the left,
we find that participants next fixated on the other package warning in 165 (66.0%) of 250
choice sets. In the tree at the right, the proportion was 497 (67.5%) of 736 choice sets.
There was no significant difference between the two types of choice sets in the
conditional probability of fixating on the other package warning, given that a participant
had initially fixated on one package warning (p = 0.933).
        Figure 14 measures the mean number of fixations outside the two package
warnings in relation to the sequence number of the choice set in the experimental task.
Again, we distinguish between choice sets with and without identical package warnings.




                                                                                               31
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo




FIGURE 14. MEAN NUMBER OF FIXATIONS OUTSIDE OF PACKAGE WARNINGS IN RELATION
     TO SEQUENTIAL ORDER AND THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF IDENTICAL PACKAGE

                                 WARNINGS IN THE CHOICE SET


        As Figure 14 shows, participants made substantially more fixations on areas
outside the package warnings when they were confronted with choice sets with identical
warnings. The excess number of fixations declined during the course of the experimental
task, as the sequence number n increased. In a linear regression of the number of non-
warning fixations as a function of the type of choice set and sequence number, with fixed
effects for each participant, all of the main effects and interactions were significant at the
level p < 0.05.
        We thus conclude that smokers’ initial fixations were primarily focused on the
warnings of the two packages in the binary choice set. These patterns of initial fixation
were independent of the presence or absence of identical package warnings in the choice
set. However, smokers confronted with choice sets containing identical warnings made
significantly more subsequent fixations on package elements outside of the initial
fixations on package warnings. These fixation patterns point to a cognitive process in


                                                                                               32
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                        Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


which our smokers first assessed the two package warnings and, if they were identical,
spent additional effort distinguishing between the two packages on the basis of other
package characteristics.

                               D. Violators versus Non-Violators

        As summarized in Table 3, we performed six non-parametric tests of various
conditions imposed by models of context-free additive or lexicographic utility. Of the 97
participants in our experiment, 63 (64.9%) passed all six tests, while 34 (35.1%) violated
at least one of the six conditions. We termed the latter group the violators and the former
group the non-violators. Here, we report on differences between these two groups.
        We found no significant differences between violators and non-violators in mean
age, the proportion of females, the proportion of students, or the proportion that
attempted to quit in the past year. We found that 5 (14.7%) of 34 violators and 3 (4.8%)
of 63 non-violators had no college education, but the difference was of borderline
statistical significance (Pearson chi squared, p = 0.089). We calculated a two-component
version of the Fagerström test for nicotine dependence (Heatherton et al. 1991), summing
the respective 3-point scores for time to first cigarette and number smoked daily. The
respective mean values were 1.65 for violators and 1.95 for non-violators, where the
maximum score of 6 means the highest degree of addiction. The observed difference in
means was not significant (p = 0.307).
        We addressed the possibility that the apparent violations of additive utility or
lexicographic preferences observed in a minority of our study participants were in fact a
consequence of context-dependent preferences. To that end, we compared the total
number of right-sided choices N Right (where 12 ≥ N Right ≥ 0 ) among violators and non-

violators of our six tests. The mean value of N Right was 6.882 among the 34 violators,

which was significantly greater than the mean value of 6.000 among the 63 non-violators.
(In a two-sided t-test of group means with unequal variances, p = 0.004.) These findings
suggested that the apparent violations of additive utility or lexicographic preferences
were at least in part due to positioning effects.




                                                                                                33
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        For both violators and non-violators of our six tests, Figure 15 graphs the mean
number of right-sided choices N Right as a function of the sequence number of the choice

set. Throughout the experimental task, from the first three to the last three choice sets,
violators clicked more frequently on the right side of the computer screen than non-
violators. Moreover, we observed no significant relation between the sequence number n
and the number of right-sided choices. (In a linear regression of study participants’ binary
right-versus-left choices against sequence number with fixed effects for each participant,
p = 0.385.)




   FIGURE 15. MEAN NUMBER OF RIGHT-SIDED CHOICES IN RELATION TO SEQUENTIAL
                ORDER FOR VIOLATORS AND NON-VIOLATORS OF TESTS 1–6


        To determine whether ordering effects contributed to the apparent violations of
additive and lexicographic utility, for each of the 97 participants we measured the
absolute distance between the first and last choice set in each of our six tests. The
underlying logic was that the larger the distance, the more susceptible would participants
be to learning or fatigue effects. For example, for test 1 in Table 3, we calculated the



                                                                                              34
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


absolute number of choice sets shown to each participant between set E and set K. The
mean distances were 6.02 sets for violators and 6.75 sets for non-violators. (In a two-
sided t-test of group means with unequal variances, p = 0.692.) Except for test 3, where
the mean distance between sets A and I was 5.08 for violators and 6.75 for non-violators
(p = 0.093), we found no significant differences between violators and non-violators.
         These findings further support the conclusion that positioning effects, but not
ordering effects, contributed to the apparent violations of at least one of the tests of
additive utility and lexicographic preferences observed in 34 of the 97 smokers in our
study.
         Moreover, we found that violators had significantly longer response times than
non-violators. Specifically, the mean response time was 5.470 seconds among the
violators (standard error 0.329) and 3.848 seconds among the non-violators (standard
error 0.137, p < 10–5). We found that this significant difference in response times
persisted even when we took our measure of divergence in utility Δ û into account. In a
weighted linear regression of response time as a function of Δ û and an indicator variable
for violator status, the effect of the latter variable was a 1.655-second increase in
response time (standard error 0.333, p < 10–6).
         Finally, we found that violators made significantly more eye fixations than non-
violators. Specifically, the mean number of fixations per choice set was 20.363 among
the violators (standard error 1.257) and 12.447 among the non-violators (standard error
0.494, p < 10–8). Moreover, violators spent more time on each fixation. Specifically, the
mean duration per fixation was 178 ms among the violators (standard error 3.0 ms) and
169 ms among the non-violators (standard error 1.8 ms, p = 0.018). Linear regression
models controlling for screen sequence gave nearly identical results.



                                         III. Discussion

                                       A. What We Found

         In a discrete choice experiment, we asked 97 Uruguayan cigarette smokers to
choose the less risky alternative among 12 pairs of cigarette packages with varying



                                                                                               35
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                     Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


warnings and background colors. Some of the participants described the warnings as
disgusting (“me da asco”) and frightening (“me da miedo”), and others had trouble even
viewing them (“no la puedo ni mirar”). Nonetheless, nearly all were able to make choices
that satisfied the basic axioms of rational decision-making, including transitivity and the
weak axiom of revealed preference. What’s more, the majority of participating smokers
made choices that satisfied six separate tests for the presence of lexicographic
preferences. These smokers, the tests showed, used the package warnings to decide which
cigarette was less risky, and relied on background colors only to break ties.
        To shed light on the cognitive processes underlying the participants’ apparent
lexicographic preferences, we focused on their differential responses to two types of
binary choice sets – those in which both cigarette packs had identical warnings and those
in which each pack had a distinct warning. We found that smokers spent significantly
more time making a decision in the former case than in the latter. Utilizing the technique
of eye tracking, we found that smokers initially approached both types of choice set in the
same manner. They first fixed their gaze on the warnings on each of the two cigarette
packs in the binary choice set shown on the computer monitor. Thereafter, their gaze
patterns diverged. We observed significantly more fixations on non-warning elements of
each cigarette package when the two packages had identical warnings. The observed
sequence of eye fixations was consistent with a lexicographic choice strategy.
        We investigated how contextual effects might explain why some smokers did not
pass all six tests for lexicographic preferences. Even though the number of eye fixations
and the total time to make a decision declined as the smoker was shown successive
choice sets on the computer screen, there was no evidence of order-dependent
preferences. We did find, however, that those smokers who did not pass all six tests for
lexicographic preferences – whom we called the “violators” – exhibited a significantly
greater preference for choosing packs on the right side of the computer screen.

                                    B. What We Did Not Do

        In this experiment, we asked each participant which cigarette package was less
risky for his health. We did not ask him which product he would buy. We chose
perception of the product’s riskiness as an endpoint to avoid the complexities of



                                                                                             36
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                         Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


interpretation inherent in intent to purchase, which would entail such additional
intervening factors such as price and perceived cigarette taste.
          When we subjected our discrete choice data to a series of increasingly concise
conditional logit models, we found that the estimated parameters were consistent with a
lexicographic utility function. This finding alone did not prove that the typical smoker in
our sample in fact had lexicographic preferences. It merely supported the conclusion that
the estimated weights in the typical smoker’s additive utility function did not exclude
lexicographic utility. Routine fitting of parametric utility models to discrete choice data
may mask the presence of underlying lexicographic decision strategies that can only be
detected by non-parametric comparisons of the responses to individual choice sets, as we
have done here.
          When it comes to risk perception, we found evidence of lexicographic preferences
over choice sets with two variable attributes: cigarette package warnings and background
color. We did not establish that cigarette smokers have lexicographic preferences over all
cigarette pack attributes.
          Our finding that the violators of at least one of our six tests had a significantly
greater preference for packages on the right side of the computer screen does not
demonstrate that a right-sided positioning bias was the cause of the apparent violations of
rationality. Their coincidence may be the result of some other unobserved factor that
induces some smokers to make irrational choices and also to click on the right half of the
screen.
          While we found no evidence that smokers’ preferences changed during the course
of the experimental task, we did observe that the response time and the number of eye
fixations declined with successive computer screens. One alternative explanation for the
latter decline is learning. That is, as information on package attributes continues to
accumulate in working memory, it becomes increasingly unnecessary to verify package
attributes visually. An alternative explanation is fatigue (Campbell et al. 2015, Day et al.
2012, Czajkowsk, Giergiczny, and Greene 2014).
          We have focused on two specific sources of context-dependent preferences –
what we have termed positioning effects and ordering effects. There may be others
embedded in our smokers’ choices, such as when the utility of a cigarette package


                                                                                                 37
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                       Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


depends on which package it is compared to. We observed suggestive evidence, in fact,
that the utility component of the light brown background color uB ( Light Brown ) was

enhanced when a package with a light brown background was juxtaposed against a
package with a dark brown background. Such context-dependent preferences can be
present even in experiments with only binary choice sets, but they may not be identifiable
without imposing models with strong parametric assumptions.
        We are hardly the first investigators to find that decision-makers use
lexicographic strategies to choose among alternatives with multiple attributes (Colman
and Stirk 1999, Tversky and Sattah 1979, Slovic 1975, Tversky, Sattah, and Slovic 1988,
Rosenberger et al. 2003, Yee et al. 2007). Lexicographic heuristics are among the non-
compensatory strategies employed by decision makers to simplify the complexity of a
decision problem (Ford et al. 1989, Gilbride and Allenby 2004, Montgomery and
Svenson 1976, Tversky 1972, Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996). While Ford and
colleagues (Ford et al. 1989) suggested that non-compensatory strategies are more
prevalent in complex tasks with large choice sets and multiple attributes, we found
evidence of lexicographic preferences in a binary choice experiment with just two
attributes. In our study, the set X of all cigarette packages, as well as the extended set Y of
all cigarette packages in all possible contexts, are finite. Accordingly, the lexicographic
strategy observed here is consistent with the maximization of a utility function
representing a complete, transitive binary preference relation. In short, it adheres to the
rules of rational decision-making.
        Nor are we the first investigators to use the technique of eye tracking in the field
of tobacco research. Others have used the technique to study which portions of the
cigarette package individuals tend to focus on or avoid (Maynard et al. 2014, Krugman et
al. 1994, Meernik et al. 2016, Kessels and Ruiter 2012, Shankleman et al. 2015, Munafo
et al. 2011, Strasser et al. 2012). Our study follows a strand of research attempting to use
the sequence of eye fixations – rather than simply the total number and duration of
fixations – to elucidate information on search patterns (Russo and Rosen 1975). In that
sense, our research strategy is part of a larger field of process tracing methods (Ford et al.
1989, Payne 1976).




                                                                                               38
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


                         C. How Can Addicted Smokers Be Rational?

        We asked each participant how many cigarettes he smoked daily, and when did he
smoke his first cigarette after arising in the morning. These two questions are components
of the widely recognized Fagerström test for nicotine dependence (Heatherton et al.
1991), where they are each scored on a scale from 0 to 3. We summed these two scores to
create an abbreviated Fagerström score ranging from 0 to 6. Based upon this abbreviated
score, we found that those smokers who passed all six tests for rational, lexicographic
preferences were no less addicted than those who failed at least one of the tests. Within
the strict confines of their addiction, they acted rationally.
        In a now famous 1978 article, Thomas Schelling described a model of choice in
which “everyone behaves like two people, one who wants clean lungs and long life and
another who adores tobacco… The two are in continual contest for control.” (Schelling
1978) The first of the two competing personas makes repeated attempts to quit smoking.
In our sample, 29 percent tried unsuccessfully to quit in the past year. The first persona
also acknowledges that his behavior is dangerous. In our sample, 94 percent agreed that
smoking causes lung cancer. The second persona, by contrast, engages in a compulsive,
ritualized behavior often driven by strong cravings for a cigarette. In our sample, 60
percent had a cigarette within one hour of arising in the morning.
        As part of the continual contest for control, the first persona employs a variety of
strategies to dominate the second one. As Thaler and Shefrin noted in their seminal 1981
paper on the “two-self economic man,” “many smokers pay more for their cigarettes by
buying them by the pack instead of the carton – it helps enforce a self-imposed ration
such as one pack a day.” (Thaler and Schefrin 1981)
        The second persona in turn employs an array of self-protective strategies to
suppress the first one. In the retrospective think-aloud at the close of the experimental
task, our smokers offered examples of such protective strategies. In an illustration of the
strategy of self-exempting denial (Chapman, Wong, and Smith 1993), one participant
commented, “The image is impressive, but I feel that these things won’t happen to me, so
they don’t even affect me.” (“Te da una impresión esa imagen, pero creo que son cosas
que a mi no me van a pasar, entonces ni me afectan.”) Another similarly commented,
“What happens to me is that I’m not going to get these diseases, or at least for many


                                                                                              39
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                      Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


years, so they don’t affect me.” (“Lo que me pasa es que esas enfermedades no me van a
pasar, o por lo menos no dentro de muchos años, así que ni me afectan.”)
        In an illustration of the masking strategy, one participant said, “I always cover the
images, and that way I pass over them rapidly.” (“Yo siempre tapo las imágenes, por eso
las pasé rápido.”) And another said, “When I buy a pack, I cover it. I don’t even look at
it.” (Yo cuando compro una caja la tapo. Ni la miro.”) And still another said, “I always
looked the other way.” (“Siempre miré para el otro lado.”)
        Uruguay, a Spanish-speaking country in South America with about 3 million
inhabitants, instituted a nationwide anti-smoking campaign in 2005 (Abascal et al. 2012,
Triunfo, Harris, and Balsa 2016). In 2009, as part of the campaign, the government issued
a “single presentation rule,” barring the marketing of multiple versions of the same brand,
such as Silver, Blue, or Lights. The basis for such a policy was the presumption that such
brand names misleadingly implied reduced harm.
        From the viewpoint of the first persona in the Schelling-Thaler-Shefrin dual-self
model, the smoker’s reliance on such colors as silver or blue is irrational. From the
viewpoint of the second persona, who operates under the constraints of addiction, color
becomes a product attribute within a rational set of preference rules over cigarette
packages. Here, we confirmed the findings of numerous other studies that smokers’
perceptions of risk are in fact influenced by package colors (Hammond et al. 2014,
Wakefield, Germain, and Durkin 2008, Bansal-Travers et al. 2011, Doxey and Hammond
2011, Harris et al. 2017).
        From 2005–2009, during the course of Uruguay’s tobacco control campaign, the
proportion of pregnant women who were smoking at the start of their pregnancy dropped
from about 25 to 15 percent. From 2007–2013, the proportion of women who had
subsequently quit by the third trimester of pregnancy increased from about 15 to 43
percent. Yet among those women who quit during pregnancy and got pregnant again,
nearly half had resumed smoking by the start of the subsequent pregnancy (Harris, Balsa,
and Triunfo 2015). The oscillation between two states is consistent with Schelling’s
ongoing battle for control between the two personas. Unstable steady states were a
predictable feature of the Becker-Murphy model (Becker and Murphy 1988).




                                                                                              40
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                            Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


          D. Are Our Results Consistent with a Drift Diffusion Model of Choice?

        Economists and neuroscientists have accumulated considerable evidence in
support of a drift diffusion model of choice (Krajbich, Oud, and Fehr 2014, Ratcliff and
McKoon 2008). In the tradition of satisficing models that offer alternatives to
neoclassical utility maximization, the drift diffusion model (DDM) emphasizes the costs
and benefits of acquiring additional information during the decision-making process.
Most of the evidence supporting DDM comes from data on response times in binary
choice experiments, although there are some results from eye tracking in binary and
ternary choice settings (Krajbich and Rangel 2011, Krajbich, Armel, and Rangel 2010).
        The basic idea underlying DDM is that the state of processing of information
during decision-making is represented by a latent variable that drifts over time. In a
binary choice setting, the decision-maker stops further information processing and makes
a choice when the drifting state variable reaches one of two barriers. In particular, when a
decision-maker is faced with a binary choice set { x, x′} , DDM predicts that his response

time will be inversely related to u ( x ) − u ( x ′ ) . If the characteristics of the two choices

strongly favor one of them, the velocity of drift toward the barrier is higher and the
response time is shorter.
        Our findings in Figure 12 support the DDM-predicted inverse relation between

response time and the estimated divergence in utility Δ û = û ( x ) − û ( x′ ) , where û ( x )

and û ( x′ ) were derived from our conditional logit models of Table 4. Our results in

Figure 11 go beyond this predicted inverse relation to specifically support a lexicographic
strategy of information acquisition. We find that response times are longer when the two
warnings are the same, so that uW ( w) = uW ( w′ ) and Δu thus narrows down to

 uB ( b) − uB ( b′ ) . By contrast, we found that response times were no longer when the

warnings were distinct and the colors were the same. The smokers in our experiment
tended to stop searching for more information and click on the perceived less risky
package once they encountered a distinction between the two package warnings.




                                                                                                     41
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                                  Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        In some experimental tests of the DDM, incorrect choices are also associated with
increased response times (Ratcliff and McKoon 2008, Fudenberg, Strack, and Strzalecki
2017). In these experiments, there is generally an exogenous, observable standard to
determine whether a choice is incorrect. Here, we have used the basic axioms of rational
choice – WARP and transitivity – as well as the basic conditions underlying additive and
lexicographic utility, as standards to test whether a choice is “incorrect.” We find that
violators of one of these standards likewise have longer response times.

                               E. What About Stochastic Preferences?

        In our theoretical section, we did not formally develop general stochastic versions
of our additive or lexicographic utility functions. The fundamental question here is not
whether one could do so, but whether such formalisms would add anything substantive to
the data analysis and interpretation.
        When we ran the conditional logit models reported in Table 4, we were implicitly
assuming that the decision-maker’s utility function had an extra additive error term with
an i.i.d. type I generalized extreme value distribution. We used the estimated logit
coefficients to test the hypothesis that the resulting additive utility model was consistent
with lexicographic preferences. We also used the logit specification to test the relation
between response time and the estimated divergence in utility between the two choices.
        The specification of a stochastic version of a more general – but not necessarily
additive – lexicographic utility function would get us into unnecessary trouble. In our
deterministic definition above, the package x = ( w, b) is preferred to the package

x′ = ( w′, b′ ) , that is, u ( x ) ≥ u ( x′ ) , when either: (i) uW ( w) > uW ( w′ ) or (ii)

uW ( w) = uW ( w′ ) and uB ( b) ≥ uB ( b′ ) . Now suppose that we append an additive

Fichnerian error term to the deterministic utility u ( x ) . If the distribution function of the

error term has a density on the real line, then the condition uW ( w) = uW ( w′ ) in our

deterministic definition would have a vanishing probability. Accordingly, we would
instead have to specify a lexicographic semi-order (Tversky 1969, Manzini and Mariotti
2012) in which the decision maker is indifferent between two distinct package warnings
if their corresponding utility difference is too small. In our notation, a smoker prefers

                                                                                                          42
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                         Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo



x = ( w, b) to x′ = ( w′, b′ ) when, for some number θ > 0 , either: (i) uW ( w) − uW ( w′ ) > θ ;

or (ii) uW ( w) − uW ( w′ ) ≤ θ and uB ( b) ≥ uB ( b′ ) . That leaves us with another parameter

θ that, so far as we can determine, cannot be identified from our data.
        One may object that, without a formalization of stochastic preferences, we cannot
determine whether the violators identified in tests 1–6 in Table 3 actually made rational
choices that were contaminated by random noise. Nor can we determine whether the non-
violators actually made irrational choices that were masked by random noise. Such an
objection, we think, borders on vacuous. The real issue is that the apparent violators did
not make random errors. Instead, they systematically clicked on the right of the computer
screen. One of our objectives in future research is to find out why.

                               F. Where Do We Go From Here?

        While we reported on the number of fixations on the package warning, we did not
distinguish between fixations on the image and text of the warning. In future research, we
plan to study the relative importance of fixations on image versus text.
        We found that the response time and the total number of fixations declined as the
smoker was shown successive choice sets on the computer screen. In future research, we
plan to study whether these observations are more consistent with learning or fatigue.
        Studies utilizing eye tracking during a discrete choice experiment have not always
found a strong relation between fixations and preferences (Balcombe et al. 2017).
Researchers have recognized the difficulty of identifying the causal relations between
fixation and choice solely from the data on the joint distribution of these two endogenous
variables (Krucien, Ryan, and Hermens 2017, Shimojo et al. 2003). In top-down control
of visual attention, preferences determine eye movements. In our context, the
experimental participant tends to look at the cigarette package he eventually chooses.
Under bottom-up control, by contrast, fixations drive preferences. Repeatedly looking at
the warning enhances the probability that the pack will be chosen (Orquin and Mueller
Loose 2013). In future research, we plan to develop instruments that distinguish between
these two causal pathways in an attempt to further elucidate the eye-mind link (Reichle
and Reingold 2013).



                                                                                                  43
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                     Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo




                                         REFERENCES

Abascal, W., E. Esteves, B. Goja, F. Gonzalez Mora, A. Lorenzo, A. Sica, P. Triunfo, and
        J. E. Harris. 2012. "Tobacco control campaign in Uruguay: a population-based
        trend analysis." Lancet 380 (9853):1575-82. doi: S0140-6736(12)60826-5 [pii]
10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60826-5.
Agranov, Marina, and Pietro Ortoleva. 2017. "Stochastic Choice and Preferences for
        Randomization." Journal of Political Economy 125 (1):40-68.
Aizaki, Hideo. 2012. "Basic functions for supporting an implementation of choice
        experiments in R." Journal of Statistical Software 50 (c02):1-24.
Australian Government. 2011. "Tobacco Plain Packaging Regulations 2011: Select
        Legislative Instrument 2011 No. 263, pursuant to theT obacco Plain Packaging
        Act 2011." Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011L02644
        (https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2011L02644).
Balcombe, Kelvin, Iain Fraser, Louis Williams, and Eugene McSorley. 2017. "Examining
        the relationship between visual attention and stated preferences: A discrete choice
        experiment using eye-tracking." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
        144 (December):238-257. doi: 10.1016/j.jebo.2017.09.023.
Bansal-Travers, M., D. Hammond, P. Smith, and K. M. Cummings. 2011. "The impact of
        cigarette pack design, descriptors, and warning labels on risk perception in the
        U.S." Am J Prev Med 40 (6):674-82. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2011.01.021.
Becker, G.S., and K.M Murphy. 1988. "A theory of rational addiction." Journal of
        Political Economy 96 (4):675-700.
Campbell, Danny, Marco Boeri, Edel Doherty, and W. George Hutchinson. 2015.
        "Learning, fatigue and preference formation in discrete choice experiments."
        Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 119 (November):345-363.
Chapman, S., W. L. Wong, and W. Smith. 1993. "Self-exempting beliefs about smoking
        and health: differences between smokers and ex-smokers." Am J Public Health
        83 (2):215-9.




                                                                                             44
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


CICT. 2016. Tabaco : Advertencias con imágenes. Base de datos de MERCOSUR.
        http://www.cictmercosur.org/esp/galeria.php: Comisión Intergubernamental para
        el Control del Tabaco del MERCOSUR.
Colman, Andrew M., and Jonathan A. Stirk. 1999. "Singleton bias and lexicographic
        preferences among equally valued alternatives." Journal of Economic Behavior
        & Organization 40:337-351.
Czajkowsk, Mikolaj, Marek Giergiczny, and William H. Greene. 2014. "Learning and
        Fatigue Effects Revisited: Investigating the Effects of Accounting for
        Unobservable Preference and Scale Heterogeneity." Land Economics 9 (2):324-
        351.
Day, Brett, Ian J. Bateman, Richard T. Carson, Diane Dupont, Jordan J. Louviere, Sanae
        Morimoto, Riccardo Scarpa, and Paul Wang. 2012. "Ordering effects and choice
        set awareness in repeat-response stated preference studies." Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 63 (1):73-91.
Doxey, J., and D. Hammond. 2011. "Deadly in pink: the impact of cigarette packaging
        among young women." Tob Control 20 (5):353-60. doi: tc.2010.038315 [pii]
10.1136/tc.2010.038315.
Fehr, Ernst, and Antonio Rangel. 2011. "Neuroeconomic Foundations of Economic
        Choice—Recent Advances." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (4):3-30. doi:
        doi=10.1257/jep.25.4.3.
Ford, J. Kevin, Neal Schmitt, Susan L. Schechtman, Brian M. Hults, and M.L. Doherty.
        1989. "Process tracing methods: contributions, problems and neglected research
        issues." Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 43 (1):75-117.
Fudenberg, Drew, Philipp Strack, and Tomasz Strzalecki. 2017. Stochastic Choice and
        Optimal Sequential Sampling. Working Paper, Available at Social Science
        Research Network: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2602927.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, and Daniel G. Goldstein. 1996. "Reasoning the fast and frugal way:
        Models of bounded rationality." Psychological Review 103 (4):650-669. doi:
        10.1037/0033-295X.103.4.650




                                                                                            45
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


Gilbride, Timothy J., and Greg M. Allenby. 2004. "A Choice Model with Conjunctive,
        Disjunctive, and Compensatory Screening Rules." Marketing Science 23 (3):391-
        406. doi: 10.1287/mksc.1030.0032.
Gruber, J., and B. Koszegi. 2001. "Is addiction rational? Theory and evidence."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4):1261-1303.
Hammond, D., C. White, W. Anderson, D. Arnott, and M. Dockrell. 2014. "The
        perceptions of UK youth of branded and standardized, 'plain' cigarette
        packaging." Eur J Public Health 24 (4):537-43. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckt142.
Harris, J. E., G. Ares, M. Gerstenbluth, L. Machin, and P. Triunfo. 2017. "Impact of plain
        packaging of cigarettes on the risk perception of Uruguayan smokers: an
        experimental study." Tobacco Control. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2017-
        053639.
Harris, J. E., A. I. Balsa, and P. Triunfo. 2015. "Tobacco control campaign in Uruguay:
        Impact on smoking cessation during pregnancy and birth weight." J Health Econ
        42:186-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.04.002.
Heatherton, T.F., L.T. Kozlowski, R.C. Frecker, and K.O. Fagerstrom. 1991. "The
        Fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance
        Questionnaire." British Journal of Addiction 86 (9):1119-1127.
Hey, John D. 2001. "Does Repetition Improve Consistency?" Experimental Economics 4
        (1):5-54.
Holmqvist, Kenneth, Marcus Nyström, Richard Anderson, Richard Dewhurst, Halszka
        Jarodzka, and Joost van de Weijer. 2011. Eye Tracking: A comprehensive guide to
        methods and measures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, F. R., B. Kanninen, M. Bingham, and S. Ozdemir. 2007. "Experimental Design
        for Stated Choice Studies (Chapter 7)." In Valuing Environmental Amenities
        Using Stated Choice Studies: A Common Sense Approach to Theory and Practice,
        edited by B.J. Kanninen, 159-202. Dordrecht: Springer.
Kessels, L. T., and R. A. Ruiter. 2012. "Eye movement responses to health messages on
        cigarette packages." BMC Public Health 12:352. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-
        352.




                                                                                            46
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


Kohli, Rajeev, and Kamel Jedidi. 2007. "Representation and Inference of Lexicographic
        Preference Models and Their Variants." Marketing Science 26 (3):380-399.
Krajbich, I., C. Armel, and A. Rangel. 2010. "Visual fixations and the computation and
        comparison of value in simple choice." Nat Neurosci 13 (10):1292-8. doi:
        10.1038/nn.2635.
Krajbich, I., and A. Rangel. 2011. "Multialternative drift-diffusion model predicts the
        relationship between visual fixations and choice in value-based decisions." Proc
        Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 (33):13852-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1101328108.
Krajbich, Ian, Bastiaan Oud, and Ernst Fehr. 2014. "Benefits of Neuroeconomic
        Modeling: New Policy Interventions and Predictors of Preference." American
        Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 104 (5):501-506.
Krucien, Nicolas, Mandy Ryan, and Frouke Hermens. 2017. "Visual attention in multi-
        attributes choices: What can eye-tracking tell us?" Journal of Economic Behavior
        & Organization 135 (March):251–267.
Krugman, Dean M., Richard J. Fox, James E. Fletcher, Paul M. Fischer, and Tina H.
        Rojas. 1994. "Do adolescents attend to warnings in cigarette advertising? An eye-
        tracking approach." Journal of Advertising Research (Nov/Dec):39-52.
Lahey, Joanna N., and Douglas Oxley. 2016. "The Power of Eye Tracking in Economics
        Experiments." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 106 (5):09–
        313.
Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti. 2012. "Choice by lexicographic semiorders."
        Theoretical Economics 7 (1):1-23. doi: 10.3982/TE679.
Maynard, O. M., A. Attwood, L. O'Brien, S. Brooks, C. Hedge, U. Leonards, and M. R.
        Munafo. 2014. "Avoidance of cigarette pack health warnings among regular
        cigarette smokers." Drug Alcohol Depend 136:170-4. doi:
        10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.01.001.
Meernik, C., K. Jarman, S. T. Wright, E. G. Klein, A. O. Goldstein, and L. Ranney. 2016.
        "Eye Tracking Outcomes in Tobacco Control Regulation and Communication: A
        Systematic Review." Tob Regul Sci 2 (4):377-403. doi: 10.18001/TRS.2.4.9.




                                                                                            47
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


Montgomery, Henry, and Ola Svenson. 1976. "On decision rules and information
        processing strategies for choices among multiattribute alternatives "
        Scandinavian Journal of Psychology 17 (1):283-291.
Moodie, C., J. Hoek, J. Scheffels, K. Gallopel-Morvan, and K. Lindorff. 2018. "Plain
        packaging: legislative differences in Australia, France, the UK, New Zealand and
        Norway, and options for strengthening regulations." Tob Control. doi:
        10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2018-054483.
Munafo, M. R., N. Roberts, L. Bauld, and U. Leonards. 2011. "Plain packaging increases
        visual attention to health warnings on cigarette packs in non-smokers and weekly
        smokers but not daily smokers." Addiction 106 (8):1505-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-
        0443.2011.03430.x.
Orquin, Jacob L., and Simone Mueller Loose. 2013. "Attention and choice: A review on
        eye movements in decision making." Acta Psychologica 144 (1):190-206.
Parr, Victoria, Tan Benits, Patrick Eli, and Kyle Miller. 2011. Market Research to
        Determine Effective Plain Packaging of Tobacco Products. Sydney, Australia:
        GfK Blue Moon.
Payne, John W. 1976. "Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making:
        An information search and protocol analysis." Organizational Behavior and
        Human Performance 16 (2):366-387.
Ratcliff, Roger, and Gail McKoon. 2008. "The Diffusion Decision Model: Theory and
        Data for Two-Choice Decision Tasks." Neural Computation 20 (4):873–922.
Reichle, E. D., and E. M. Reingold. 2013. "Neurophysiological constraints on the eye-
        mind link." Front Hum Neurosci 7:361. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00361.
Reutskaja, Elena, Rosemarie Nagel, Colin F. Camerer, and Antonio Rangel. 2011.
        "Search Dynamics in Consumer Choice under Time Pressure: An Eye- Tracking
        Study." American Economic Review 101 (2):900-926.
Rooderkerk, Robert P., Harald J. Van Heerde, and Tammo H.A. Bijmolt. 2011.
        "incorporating Context effects into a Choice model." Journal of Marketing
        Research 48 (4):767-780.
Rosenberger, Randall S., George L. Peterson, Andrea Clarke, and Thomas C. Brown.
        2003. "Measuring dispositions for lexicographic preferences of environmental


                                                                                            48
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                    Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


        goods: integrating economics, psychology and ethics." Ecological Economics 44
        (1):63-76.
Russo, J.E., and L.D. Rosen. 1975. "An eye fixation analysis of multialternative choice."
        Memory & Cognition 3 (3):267-276.
Ryan, M., N. Krucien, and F. Hermens. 2018. "The eyes have it: Using eye tracking to
        inform information processing strategies in multi-attributes choices." Health
        Econ 27 (4):709-721. doi: 10.1002/hec.3626.
Salvucci, Dario D., and Joseph H. Goldberg. 2000. "Identifying fixations and saccades in
        eye-tracking protocols." In ETRA '00 Proceedings of the 2000 symposium on Eye
        tracking research & applications edited by Andrew T. Duchowski, 71-78. New
        York: ACM.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1978. "Egonomics, or the art of self-management." American
        Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 68 (2):290-294.
Shankleman, M., C. Sykes, K. L. Mandeville, S. Di Costa, and K. Yarrow. 2015.
        "Standardised (plain) cigarette packaging increases attention to both text-based
        and graphical health warnings: experimental evidence." Public Health 129
        (1):37-42. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2014.10.019.
Shimojo, S., C. Simion, E. Shimojo, and C. Scheier. 2003. "Gaze bias both reflects and
        influences preference." Nat Neurosci 6 (12):1317-22. doi: 10.1038/nn1150.
Slovic, Paul. 1975. "Choice between equally valued alternatives " Journal of
        Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 1 (3):280-287.
        doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.1.3.280.
Strasser, A. A., K. Z. Tang, D. Romer, C. Jepson, and J. N. Cappella. 2012. "Graphic
        warning labels in cigarette advertisements: recall and viewing patterns." Am J
        Prev Med 43 (1):41-7.
Thaler, Richard H., and H.M. Schefrin. 1981. "An economic theory of self-control."
        Journal of Political Economy 89 (21):392-406.
Tobii AB. 2016. Tobii Studio User's Manual Version 3.4.5:
        https://www.tobiipro.com/siteassets/tobii-pro/user-manuals/tobii-pro-studio-user-
        manual.pdf.




                                                                                            49
Smokers’ Rational Lexicographic Preferences                   Harris, Gerstenblüth and Triunfo


Tobii Technology. 2011. Tobii T60 & T120 Eye Tracker: User Manual Revision 4.0.
        Stockholm: Tobii Technology AB, https://www.ssllc.com/images/uploads/Tobii
        T120 Eye Tracker - User Manual.pdf.
Triunfo, P., J. Harris, and A. Balsa. 2016. "[Evaluation of Uruguay's antismoking
        campaign: progress and challenges at ten years]." Rev Panam Salud Publica 40
        (4):256-262.
Trueblood, J. S., S. D. Brown, A. Heathcote, and J. R. Busemeyer. 2013. "Not just for
        consumers: context effects are fundamental to decision making." Psychological
        Science 24 (6):901-8. doi: 10.1177/0956797612464241.
Tversky, Amos. 1969. "Intransitivity of preferences." Psychological Review 76 (1):31-
        48. doi: 10.1037/h0026750
Tversky, Amos. 1972. "Elimination by aspects: A theory of Choice." Psychological
        Review 79 (4):281-299. doi: DOI:10.1037/h0032955
Tversky, Amos, and Shmuel Sattah. 1979. "Preference trees." Psychological Review
        86:542-573.
Tversky, Amos, Shmuel Sattah, and Paul Slovic. 1988. "Contingent weighting in
        judgment and choice." Psychological Review 95:371-384.
Tversky, Amos, and Itamar Simonson. 1993. "Context-depedent preferences."
        Management Science 39 (10):1179-1189.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1988. The Health Consequences of
        Smoking - Nicotine Addiction: A Report of the Surgeon General. Rockville MD:
        Centers for Disease Control, Office on Smoking and Health.
Wakefield, M. A., D. Germain, and S. J. Durkin. 2008. "How does increasingly plainer
        cigarette packaging influence adult smokers' perceptions about brand image? An
        experimental study." Tob Control 17 (6):416-21. doi: 10.1136/tc.2008.026732.
Yee, Michael, Ely Dahan, John R. Hauser, and James Orlin. 2007. "Greedoid-Based
        Noncompensatory Inference " Marketing Science 26 (4):532-549.




                                                                                           50
