                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INTRAHOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION ALLOCATION AND DEMAND FOR AGENCY:
               A TRIPLE EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION

                                          Uzma Afzal
                                        Giovanna D'Adda
                                        Marcel Fafchamps
                                           Farah Said

                                       Working Paper 24977
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24977


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2018




We thank Doug Bernheim, Muriel Niederle, Glenn Harrison, John Quiggin, Emily Breza,
Giacomo De Giorgi, Pedro Vicente, Catia Batista, James Berry, Silvia Prina, and Erlend Berg for
their useful comments. We also benefitted from comments from participants to the CIRPEE
Workshop on Social Identity and Social Interactions in Economics (Quebec City, April 2016),
and to the WZB "Field Days" Conference (Berlin, June 2016), as well as from seminar
participants at Stanford University, Georgia State University, the University of Oregon, and Nova
University in Lisbon. Funding for this study was provided by the International Growth Centre
(IGC) and by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24977.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Uzma Afzal, Giovanna D'Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, and Farah Said. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intrahousehold Consumption Allocation and Demand for Agency: A Triple Experimental
Investigation
Uzma Afzal, Giovanna D'Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, and Farah Said
NBER Working Paper No. 24977
August 2018
JEL No. D13,D91,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

We conduct two lab experiments and one field experiment to investigate demand for consumption
agency in married couples. The evidence we uncover is consistent across all three experiments.
Subjects are often no better at guessing their spouse's preferences than those of a stranger, and
many subjects disregard what they believe or know about others' preferences when assigning
them a consumption bundle. This confers instrumental value to individual executive agency
within the household. We indeed find significant evidence of demand for agency in all three
experiments, and this demand varies with the cost and anticipated instrumental benefit of agency.
But subjects often make choices incompatible with pure instrumental motives – e.g., paying for
agency even when they know their partner assigned them their preferred choice. We also find
female subjects to be quite willing to exert agency even though, based on survey responses, they
have little executive agency within their household. We interpret this as suggestive of pent-up
demand for agency, and indeed we find that female demand for agency falls as a result of an
empowerment intervention.

Uzma Afzal                                      Marcel Fafchamps
Lahore School of Economics                      Freeman Spogli Institute
Lahore                                          Stanford University
Pakistan                                        616 Serra Street
uzmaafzal1@gmail.com                            Stanford, CA 94305
                                                and NBER
Giovanna D'Adda                                 fafchamp@stanford.edu
Department of Economics, Management
and Quantitative Methods (DEMM)                 Farah Said
University of Milan                             Lahore School of Economics
Via Conservatorio 7                             Lahore
20122 Milan                                     Pakistan
Italy                                           farahz3@gmail.com
giovanna.dadda@unimi.it
1       Introduction
Much of the economic literature on intrahousehold consumption takes allocative efficiency
between spouses as starting point. Without information on individual preferences over
consumption bundles, however, it is difficult to test consumption efficiency directly. The
collective model of the household (e.g., Chiappori 1997, Browning and Chiappori 1998)
circumvents this difficulty by testing consumption efficiency using cross-equation restric-
tions on demand functions. The test ultimately relies on the idea that efficiency can be
achieved by giving each spouse an individual budget they can spend as they like (e.g.,
Browning et al. 1994, 2010, 2013, 2014). Bargaining models of the household (e.g., McEl-
roy and Horney 1981, Lundberg and Polak 1996) put more structure on the way by which
a particular allocation of consumption is reached. By doing so they derive predictions
about what extraneous factors determine the allocation of consumption between house-
hold members.1 They assume bargaining to be efficient, which ultimately requires that
spouses are fully informed about each other’s preferences, and that agreements between
them are costlessly enforced.
    In practice, the way by which households function departs from the organization struc-
ture that inspires both types of models: financial and real assets often are owned jointly,
not individually; and consumption decisions are typically taken in a sequential and de-
centralized manner that opens the door to coordination issues. For instance, individuals
encounter opportunities to make a consumption choice for another household member
without necessarily knowing their preferences. This may arise either because the consump-
tion good being offered is unfamiliar, the decision maker does not recall the preferences
of others, or these preferences have changed. Similar opportunities for miscoordination
occur within the household itself, e.g., someone prepares a family meal without knowing
whether it will be appreciated or not. It is also conceivable that the decision maker knows
the preferences of others but deliberately chooses to ignore them, either due to a pater-
nalistic motive (e.g., ‘this food is not good for you’), or out of disregards for others or a
desire to impose one’s will on them.
    When other members of the household cannot be relied on to make decisions that
maximize collective welfare, individual members may seek to gain agency over household
consumption choices that affect them (e.g., Glennerster et al. 2018). To this effect, they
may secure control over individual sources of income and saving (e.g., Anderson and Ba-
land 2002), even if doing so is inefficent and involves dissimulation (e.g., Jakiela and Ozier
2015, Kebede et al. 2016). Alternatively, they may seek control over consumption pur-
chases and household production activities. The latter strategies are particular relevant
in less developed economies where households count many members engaged in a large
range of home production activities (e.g., Fafchamps and Quisumbing 2008), in addition
to having multiple sources of monetary income. Control over household decisions may
take various forms, such as executive agency – making a decision alone – and consultative
agency – being consulted on decisions made by others.
    1
   E.g., distribution of assets upon divorce, control over household assets and finances, income earning
opportunities.



                                                   2
   Unfortunately there is little or no literature investigating whether household members
know each other’s preferences, and whether they respect these preferences when making
consumption choices for others. There is also little evidence regarding the demand for
executive agency over own consumption within and outside the household. Others not
respecting your preferences creates an instrumental motive for wanting agency. People
may also value agency for its own sake, independently from instrumental motivations. One
possibility, discussed in the empowerment literature, is that individuals – e.g., women –
have a pent-up demand for agency originating in their repressed desire to make their own
choices.
    The purpose of this paper is to offer new experimental evidence on these issues. We
test three main hypotheses: (1) household members know each other’s preferences over
individual consumption goods; (2) household members respect the preferences of others
when they are informed about them; and (3) individuals have a demand for agency, that
is: are they willing to pay for the certainty of getting the consumption bundle of their
choice; and does this demand increase with the risk of not getting one’s choice, i.e., is
demand for agency serving an instrumental motive.
    We design an original experiment to test these hypotheses and we implement it in
three different ways with Pakistani couples who have been married for some time. We
find evidence against hypotheses 1 and 2: household members often do not know the pref-
erences of their spouse or other household members; and even when they are informed
about these preferences, they often choose to ignore them. We do find evidence of will-
ingness to pay for agency, but demand for agency responds only weakly to the risk of
not getting one’s preferred consumption bundle. This suggests that demand for agency is
not solely driven by an instrumental motive: some subjects seem to value agency for its
own sake. The fact that informed subjects often make inefficient consumption choices for
others similarly signals a demand for power, that is, a desire to make choices for others.
    This paper is related to the existing literature in multiple ways. In addition to the
literature already mentioned, a number of papers have experimentally examined willing-
ness to pay for agency in games between spouses (e.g., Iversen et al. 2011, Jakiela and
Ozier 2015, Mani 2011). In these experiments, agency has instrumental benefits and these
studies do not focus on demand from pure agency. A related literature looks at preference
for agency in decision-making processes outside of the household. Results suggests that
individuals value their decision power beyond its instrumental value (Güth and Weck-
Hannemann 1997, Fehr et al. 2013, Bartling et al. 2014, Owens et al. 2014). Individuals
have also been shown to prefer fair decision processes, over and above the fairness of the
allocation (Bolton et al. 2005).2 Our study is the first, to the best of our knowledge, to
experimentally look at preference for agency within and across households.
    A large related literature looks at the efficiency of household decisions. Many papers,
relying on natural, field, and laboratory experiments, show that income pooling fails, a
situation that implies inefficient consumption choices (Duflo and Udry 2004, Kebede et
   2
    More generally, a large literature on incentives and sanctions demonstrate the presence of control
aversion among some individuals (for an example, see Falk and Kosfeld, 2006).



                                                  3
al. 2014, Castilla 2015, Chen 2013, Munro et al. 2008, Iverson et al. 2006).3 In the same
vein, several experiments have varied the amount of information available to household
members and found evidence of opportunism (Ambler 2015, Castilla and Walker 2012,
Hoel 2015, de Laat 2014, Castilla 2014).4 A number of authors have documented the
negative efficiency consequences of mismatched preferences between spouses (Schaener
2015, Ashraf et al. 2014, Carlsson et al. 2009, Fiala 2015). Our contribution to this
literature is to identify another possible source of inefficiency, namely disregard for others’
preferences within and across households.
    Regarding procedural gender equality, a number of studies find that inefficiency in
household decisions is lower when control over resources is more egalitarian between men
and women (Deer and Twyman 2012, Fiala 2017, Ashraf 2009). In an experiment over
risky decisions by spouses, de Palma et al. (2009) show that the balance of power within
the household is malleable. On these themes, our contribution is twofold. First, we
clarify that procedural equality is not just about bargaining weights per se; it is also
related to the way agency is allocated within the household. Second, we offer a novel
experimental design to investigate whether people value agency and why. The approach
is designed to distinguish the different motives behind willingness to pay for agency. One
such motive is others’ imperfect knowledge of one’s own preferences. We deal with this
motive by varying the amount of information given to participants about their partner’s
preferences. Another motive is the partner’s willingness to respect one own preferences,
which lowers the need to pay for agency when the partner is informed. We tackle this
issue by measuring these choices directly.
    The paper is organized as follows. To provide a stronger motivation for our research,
we start in Section 2 by offering evidence of the unequal distribution of executive and
consultative agency within the households we study. We then detail in Section 3 the
design of our sequence of experiments. We also describe our testing strategy, building
on a simple model of instrumental demand for agency. Empirical evidence from two
sets of experimental sessions is discussed in Section 4. Addtional evidence from a field
experiment is presented in Section 5, while Section 6 concludes. A detailed description of
the experimental protocols is given in the Online Appendix.


2       Descriptive statistics on agency
To better motivate our research, we begin by documenting how individual agency is
distributed between married men and women in our study population. We select subjects
whose livelihoods are broadly representative of the bulk of the population in developing
    3
     Other income pooling tests are provided by Munro et al. (2008), Bobonis (2009), Robinson (2012),
and de Brauw et al. (2014), among others.
   4
     More generally, social preferences are shown to differ by gender. Eckel and Grossman (1998) provide
experimental evidence that women are more selfless than men; that they exhibit solidarity and are even
more generous when dealing with women than with men (Eckel and Grossman, 2001). Dasgupta and Mani
(2015) find that while men feel entitled to use endowments they have earned for private consumption,
women do not.


                                                   4
countries, i.e., living in large households with multiple income generating activities but
a relatively low level of consumption and income. In such populations, decisions over
everyday consumption are likely to impact consumption welfare more than in prosperous
societies where individual welfare depends more on durables and other large expenditures.
To further strengthen the relevance of our findings, we focus on a country – Pakistan
– where intrahousehold agency is often viewed as problematic and where women are
traditionally destined to remain under the control of an adult male, typically their father
or husband.
    Survey questionnaires were administered to individuals from our experiments. The
protocol used to recruit experimental subject will described in more details in Section 3.2.
For now we simply present a few descriptive statistics on agency as a way of motivating
the experimental design.5 The data we are presenting comes from questions administered
to individual respondents by an independent enumerator firm. Due to the private and
subjective nature of the questions being asked, interviews of female respondents were
conducted face-to-face by female enumerators only. Care was taken to ensure that the
respondents knew their responses would remain confidential.
    We document the distribution of agency between men and women using questions
aimed at capturing two different aspects: the power to make decisions autonomously,
which we call executive agency; and being consulted in household decisions, which we
call consultative agency.6 Consultative agency allows individuals to inform the decision
maker about their preferences.
    Executive agency is measured by asking whether the respondent has to ask for per-
mission when making decisions ranging from small consumption choices – e.g., buying ice
cream for children – to major financial decisions – e.g., purchasing a durable good. Con-
sultative agency is measured by asking respondents the extent to which their preferences
and opinions are taken into account when the household makes decisions ranging from
children’s education and social visits, to the purchase of household goods and investment
decisions. For presentation purposes, they are grouped into categories based on similarity
of the decision.
    Figure A1 in Appendix A presents summary statistics on the need to ask for permission
before making different types of decisions. Averages are given for women (Panel A and
B), and men (Panel C and D) for each of our two laboratory experiments – denoted as
LAB1 and LAB2 in what follows. Each bar represents the share of respondents answering
that they need to ask for permission before making a decision. Decisions are sorted by
order of economic importance. Two main findings emerge from the Figures. First, there is
a large difference in the need to ask for permission between men and women: 62% to 73%
of women in the LAB1&2 samples have to ask for permission, compared to only 6% and
45% of their male partners (p = .000). Second, the need to ask for permission is increasing
   5
     For the purpose of another research project, we asked identical questions to non-experimental subjects
from the same study population. Their answers, not reported here to save space, are very similar,
suggesting that the details of the experimental recruitment process can be ignored for the sake of the
descriptive statistics reported here.
   6
     The full list of agency questions is presented in Appendix B. The table also specifies from which
samples we collect each measure.


                                                    5
in the importance of the decision: the proportion of affirmative answers increases by 67
percentage points for women in the LAB1&2 samples. By comparison, the increase is
only 13 percentage points for the men. We see similar patterns among the women who
participated in the field experiment - the need to ask permission increases by more than
50 percentage points. These patterns support the idea that women have less executive
agency than men, particularly for important decisions.7
   Questions on consultative agency include the following decision categories: personal
consumption or finance; children’s education and health care; household investment; and
family planning. Figure A2 in Appendix A displays average answers to these questions
broken down by category. We see that women’s opinion and preferences are taken into
account to a lesser degree as the importance of the decision increases.


3     Experimental design
The logic behind our experimental design starts from standard economic theory. Individ-
uals have preferences over consumption bundles, with U i denoting the utility individual i
derives from their preferred bundle. When someone else, say j, chooses a bundle for i, the
utility U
        ei that i expects to receive depends on the probability that j chooses i’s preferred
bundle. If i is not certain to receive their preferred bundle, this creates an instrumental
motive for i to exercise agency: i is willing to pay to obtain their preferred bundle instead
of letting j choose for them.8
    To implement this idea, each subject i is invited to select among possible consump-
tion bundles, to be consumed on the spot. Another person j is also invited to select a
consumption bundle for i. Subject i is then offered a chance to pay something to ensure
that they receive their selection. We expect i’s willingness to pay for agency to be higher
when the instrumental value of agency is larger – e.g., when j has little information about
i’s preferences and is less likely to respect those preferences.
    To capture this variation, we first vary j’s relationship with i. In some treatments, j is
a spouse or close household member; in others j is a stranger. We expect a stranger to be
less informed about i’s preferences, and less concerned about choosing the wrong bundle
for i. Second, we vary the information j is given about ı́’s preferences. We expect an
informed j to be more likely to accomodate i’s preference when j cares about i – e.g., is a
close relative or is otherwise altruistic. Hence the effect of information on accomodating
i’s stated preferences should be larger between close relatives than among strangers. The
experiment is designed to test these intermediate predictions directly.
   Demand for agency may, however, be repressed among certain individuals – e.g.,
women – either through the threat of retribution or through the internationalization of
social norms. In the latter case, individuals internalize their dependent status and punish
   7
     Regression analysis with individual fixed effects confirms that women are more likely to report having
to ask for permission when decisions are more important.
   8
     Note that risk aversion is not necessary to generate demand for agency: all that is needed is that
consumption bundles are strictly ranked by i – i.e., are not perfect substitutes.


                                                    6
themselves for infringing them – e.g., through guilt or shame. Alternatively, repressed in-
dividuals may not even conceive that they could have their own free will, a phenomenon
that leads to a failure of aspiration (e.g., Alan and Artac 2016). Many policies advocated
to empower women seek to reduce the threat of retribution directly – e.g., by seeking
to reduce domestic violence or by penalizing sexual harrassment and rape (e.g., biju rao
papers, erica?). Others focus on changing social norms and aspirations through informa-
tion campaigns (e.g., AEA paper on Turkish school intervention) or the media (e.g., La
Ferrara telenovelas).9 What matters for our purpose is that, when certain individuals’
agency is repressed, they will refrain from expressing a demand for agency. We test this
idea by comparing willingness to pay for agency between men and women, within and
across households. If women’s agency is repressed, we expect them to be less willing to
pay to get their own choice, irrespective of whether the instrumental value of agency is
high or not.
    It is also conceivable, however, that women have a pent-up demand for agency. This is
more likely to occur if repression is not internalized but is due to the fear of retribution. If
such case, removing the possibility of retribution may encourage women to demand more
agency than men, as a way of compensating for otherwise repressed aspirations. Pent-up
demand for agency may even lead women to insist on having their choice even when the
instrumental value of that choice is nihil. To allow the expression of pent-up demand
for agency, we design the experiment in such a way that j does not know whether or
not i chooses to exert agency. To achieve this, we place male and female subjects in two
different rooms with no communication between them during the whole duration of the
experiment. Given that Pakistani society generally favors gender segregation, this turned
out to be unproblematic. We also organize the experiment around the choice of a good
– e.g., a food or drink or an individualized item – to be consumed by the subject alone.
This precludes sharing the good with others within or outside the household, thereby
making it impossible for subjects to compensate outside the lab for those decisions they
made within it. It also makes it possible for subjects to hide, if they so wish, the nature
of what they consumed – and thus whether or not they decided to overrule what j had
chosen for them.
    By an inverse reasoning, individuals who have plenty of executive agency – e.g., male
household heads in our study area – may insist on exerting power over others’ consumption
choices, even menial ones. This would lead them not to accomodate the preferences
of their wife or female dependents, and of women more generally. To investigate this
possibility, we compare j’s failure to accomodate i’s preferences between men and women,
within and across households.
   Having outlined the general principles behind our experimental design, we now discuss
the details of each of the three specific implementations presented in this paper. The first
two are laboratory experiments; the third is part of a randomized controlled trial.
  9
    See also Krutikova and Dercon (20XX) and Dercon et al (20XX) on inteventions aimed at raising
aspirations.




                                               7
3.1    The first laboratory experiment
The first experiment (LAB1) was conducted in April 2015 in the city of Chakwal, Pakistan.
There were 15 sessions with a total of 336 subjects. We invited female participants in
a microfinance RCT and some of their neighbor to come to a makeshift lab with their
husband. Those who could not bring their husband were told to come accompanied
by the adult male with the greatest power over her household’s finances. 74.4% of the
participants came with their spouse; 14.88% with their son and 10.72% with other male
household members (for instance, brother, brother-in-law).
    Upon arrival, men and women were sent to a separate room. Each male and female
subject was then matched with a partner in the other room. Half of the women were
matched with the male household member they came with; the other half were matched at
random with a male participants coming from another household. Subject pairs assigned
to a stranger partner are referred as part of the Stranger Match treatment; the others are
referred to as the Family Match treatment. Subjects in the Stranger Match treatment
are never told the identity of the person they are matched with.
    Each subject is then invited to taste each of three possible fruit juices, upon which
they rank them by order of preference and pick one to be their preferred choice. Subjects
are then asked to guess how their partner ranked the three juices. Half of the subjects
are then informed how their partner actually ranked the juices, and they are asked to
pick a juice for the partner. The rest of the subjects are not told their partner’s rankings
and have to pick a juice without having that information. Subjects are then told that a
coin flip would determine whether they receive the juice they picked, or the juice picked
by their partner. Before tossing the coin, however, subjects are offered the opportunity
to instead have half a glass of the juice they picked for themselves. To measure altruism
between partners, we also conduct three standard redistributive games: a dictator game;
an ultimatum game; and a reverse dictator game. We combine answers to the three games
to construct an index of altruism towards the partner. Detailed experimental protocol is
presented in the Online Appendix A1.
   This design allows us to test the following hypotheses:

 H1 Do subjects know the preferences of their partner? This is achieved by comparing
    actual juice rankings with those guessed by the partner.

H2a Do subjects respect the preferences of their partner? If they do not, this indicates a
    desire to override the partner’s choice – i.e., a demand for power over the consump-
    tion of others. We investigate this in two ways: (1) we test whether uninformed
    subjects pick for their partner what they guess is their partner’s preferred juice;
    and (2) we test whether informed subjects pick for their partner what they have
    been told is their partner’s preferred juice. We also breakdown the marginal effect
    of information depending on whether the subject initially guessed correctly or not.

   We can also test a series of hypotheses regarding demand for agency:


                                             8
H3a Do subjects have a demand for agency? We investigate this by observing what
    proportion of subjects elects to receive half a glass of their juice pick.
H3b Is there pent-up demand for agency or repressed demand for agency among women?
    This test is achieved by comparing demand for agency between men and women,
    within and across households. If female demand for agency is repressed by the
    husband or male head of household, but women have pent-up demand for agency, we
    should observe more willingness to pay for agency in the Stranger Match treatment
    since, in this case, retribution is less likely, given the physical separation of men and
    women in the experiment.
H3c Does the demand for agency increase with the risk of not getting one’s choice? To
    test this hypothesis, we first predict the probability that the subject’s ranking will
    be respected by their partner (i.e., H2a). Predictors include the various treatments
    –e.g., Stranger Match, Informed treatment – as well as the nature of the relationship
    between subject and partner – e.g., spouse or other relative. We then test whether
    there is more demand for agency when the predicted probability of getting one’s
    preferred pick is low.


3.2    The second laboratory experiment
The second lab experiment (LAB2) was conducted in April 2017 in 15 different villages
in Faisalabad district in Pakistan. A total of 30 lab sessions were conducted with 358
married couples.
   The design and general testing strategy remained the same as LAB1. However, a
number of modifications were introduced to verify the robustness of our initial findings
and to introduce other sources of exogenous variation for identification purposes. The
details of the experimental protocol are given in the Online Appendix A2. The main
modifications are the following:

  1. The consumption bundle was expanded to include three food items and three bev-
     erages. The purpose of expanding the number of choices was to increase statistical
     power. Furthermore, the range of foods and beverages on offer was more varied
     than in the first experiment, so as to increase the utility cost of not getting one’s
     choice.
  2. Unlike in the first experiment, we no longer asked subjects to rank the available
     options and separately pick a consumption bundle – the top ranked item was taken
     as the subject’s choice. The purpose of this modification was to simplify this part
     of the experimental design so as to make time for other features.
  3. We diversified Stranger Matches to also include Same Sex partners and matching
     with the Computer.
  4. All subjects played two games: one with their family partner; and one with one
     of the three stranger categories – e.g., Opposite Sex Stranger (OSS); Same Sex

                                             9
     Stranger (SSS); or Computer Match (CM). In half of the sessions subjects start
     with the Family Match; the other half starts with the Stranger Match. One third
     of the subjects are assigned to OSS, one third to SSS, and one third to CM. At the
     end of the session, we used a coin toss to randomly select one of the two games to
     determine what the subject consumes. A second coin toss determined whether the
     first agency or the second agency question determines their consumption bundle.
     This ensured that both agency decisions in both games are fully incentivized.
  5. Subjects were asked to guess the food and drink rankings of their spouse and their
     randomly assigned partner, but unlike in LAB1 guessing correctly is now incen-
     tivized: those who guess the preferred food and drink of the spouse or partner
     receive PKR100; those who guess only one of them receive PKR50. Others receive
     0. Subject were then asked to select a consumption bundle for their partner – ex-
     cept in the Computer Match treatment for which this decision is too artificial. The
     computer, however, selects a bundle at random for each of its assigned partners.
  6. As in the first experiment, some subjects were informed of the preference rankings of
     their partner before choosing a bundle for them. This did not apply to the Computer
     Match treatment.
  7. The choice between a coin toss and half a glass was replaced by the following:
     Subjects were first told that they will receive the bundle selected for them by their
     partner, but they can forfeit a fraction of their show-up fee to get their own choice.
     Subjects were asked to make this decision for one of three possible forfeited amounts
     – 5PKR, 20PKR and 50PKR – equally randomized across subjects. Once subjects
     had made this choice, they were told what their partner has selected for them, and
     they were asked again if they wanted to pay (e.g., 5PKR, 20PKR or 50PKR) to get
     what they had themselves selected.
  8. We used a dictator game to measure altruism towards each of the two partners – the
     Family Match and the Stranger Match. Participants matched with the computer
     only played the dictator game with respect to their Family Match.

   With incentivization we have a stronger test of hypothesis H1: we can now investigate
whether guesses improve when subjects are compensated for making a correct guess. By
incentivizing subjects to guess correctly we aim to eliminate the incentive to purposely
misreport what they believe to be their partner’s preferences. Hence this yields a more
accurate test of demand for power in the uninformed case.
    Regarding demand for agency, the presence of a wider range of partners not only
introduces more variation in the predicted risk of not getting one’s choice (H3b), it also
permits to investigate whether the sex of the partner affects pent-up or repressed demand
for agency. The new design also makes it possible to directly test demand for pure agency:

H3d Do subjects have a demand for pure agency and, if so, does this demand varies
    systematically with the subject’s gender and that of their partner? This test is im-
    plemented by investigating what proportion of subjects are willing to pay to receive

                                           10
      their selected bundle even when the food or drink that their partner selected for
      them is identical to what they selected for themselves. Demand for pure agency is
      a preference over the process by which a consumption bundle is selected, indepen-
      dently of the instrumental value of agency. Someone with a pent-up demand for
      agency may, under the protection of the experiment, pay to personally decide what
      they consume, without any interference from anyone.


3.3    The field experiment
In an effort to verify the external validity of our lab findings, we implemented a simplified
version of our design as a field experiment. Subjects are clients of a rural microfinance
institution participating to the randomized controlled trial of a microfinance product with
credit and savings characteristics (see Afzal et al. 2016 and Afzal et al. 2018 for details).
This means that the subject population is similar to that of lab experiments 1 and 2, i.e.,
primarily middle-aged women and their husband. The RCT spanned a period of one year,
with a baseline survey at the beginning and an endline survey at the end. The experiment
was conducted with 1991 respondents, 80% of whom were married.
    In the baseline survey we told participants that, as a token of our appreciation for
their participation in the RCT, at endline we would offer them a small monetary reward
plus one of three possible leather items engraved with initials of their choice. The three
items to choose from were: a woman’s purse; a man’s wallet; and a child pencil case.
The items were chosen to be relatively similar and of similar value, but to be desirable
to induce potential competition between spouses. To further reinforce competition, the
items were gendered – i.e., for an adult man or woman – except for the pencil case which
can be regarded as a household public good from the point of view of the spouses. Initials
were added to make the item individual-specific, so as to minimize resale and gifting the
good to someone else.
    A female enumerator asked each female participant to choose one of these three objects
and to tell us which initials to inscribe on it – e.g., her initials on the purse, her husband’s
initials on the wallet, or her child’s initials on the pencil case. The same question was
separately asked to the husband by another enumerator. No further action was taken at
baseline.
    One year later at endline, we revisited both husband and wife and offered them the
following choices. We reminded the husband of the item he had chosen at baseline, and
we asked him to confirm or revise his choice. We told him that a coin toss would decide
whether the household would receive his preferred item or his wife’s preferred item. We
then asked him whether he wished to delegate the final choice of item to his wife. To
those who refused, we asked whether they were willing to delegate the choice to their
wife in exchange for a monetary transfer. Two price levels (50 PKR and 200 PKR) were
offered to those who refused.
   We separately told each wife that a coin toss would determine whether we offer her



                                              11
household the item she had chosen at baseline, or the item her husband has just selected.10
We told the wife that she could secure her chosen item by forfeiting a fraction of the
monetary compensation for participating in the study. Two separate price levels were
offered, and responses are recorded for both. These choices were offered to each female
participant even if her husband decided to delegate the choice to her. We then revealed
whether her husband had delegated the choice to her, in which case the female participant
received what she selected and forfeited nothing. If the husband had not delegated, we first
selected one of the two price levels using a coin toss. If the coin toss yielded a decision not
to pay for executive agency, we proceeded to a second coin toss to determine whether the
offered item was her choice or her husband’s. Otherwise the female participant forfeited
the selected amount from her participation fee, and received the item of her choice.
    This design allows us to test hypotheses H3a and H3b. For the latter we use the fact
that, with a one year interval between the two surveys, there is ample time for spouses to
share information about their baseline choices. We also observe altruism in the baseline
choice: since the items are gender-specific, altruistic husbands can select the purse and
altruistic wives can select the wallet. Each spouse can also select the pencil case for one
of their children. The novelty of this design is that it allows investigating demand for
power as follows:

H2b Are husband willing to pay for power over their wife’s consumption? We investigate
    this question by examining the proportion of husbands who refuse to delegate the
    choice of item to their wife, and by testing whether this refusal can be reversed by
    the offer of a monetary transfer.


4      Empirical results
Before presenting our experimental results, we provide summary evidence on the study
population. All our female subjects are adult women in the Pakistan Punjab. Most of
them are married and have children. Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. The
average female subject is 39 years old and about half are literate. Subjects belong to
a household with an average monthly expenditure of little less than Rs. 19000 ($190).
Except for the LAB1 sample, which consists of micro-enterprise loan borrowers, more
than three-quarters of the LAB2 and field experiment samples are housewives. A little
under 75% of all three samples consist of women who are married to the household head.
    We now report on our analysis of LAB1 and LAB2. The field experiment is discussed
in the next section. Empirical results are presented in the order in which the various
hypotheses were introduced in the previous section.
  10
    Efforts were made during data collection to prevent communication between husband and wife while
these two separate interviews were ongoing. Given the logistical difficulty of preventing communication
between spouses in a field setting, we cannot however rule out that communication took place between
some of the participants.




                                                  12
               Table 1: Descriptive statistics on the RCT and LAB samples

                                           LAB1                     LAB2                 FIELD
                                    n       mean            n        mean         n       mean
 Age                                336      38.283         716       36.110      1991     39.358
 Can read and write                 324      0.633          716       0.483       1991     0.494
 Average monthly household          336      14405.8        716       14291.15    1991     18474.04
 expenses (PKR)
 Self employed (females)            156      0.263          358       0.139       1991     0.114
 Housewives (females)               156      0.372          358       0.874       1991     0.740
 Head of the household (fe-         168      0.095          358       0.003       1991     11.904
 males)
 Spouse of the household 168                 0.744          358       0.732       1991     0.743
 head (females)
 Note: Reporting values for female respondents in the field experiment (only).


4.1     Knowledge of others’ preferences
We first examine hypothesis H1, that is, whether subjects can accurately guess the rank-
ings of other subjects. We compare these guesses to three benchmarks: random guesses;
optimal guesses; and perfect foresight. Random guesses ascribe a probability for each
ranking equal to the frequency of that ranking among subjects. It represents a lower
bound on guessing accuracy – subjects should be able to do better than that. Perfect
foresight means the subject predicts perfectly the entire rankings of their assigned part-
ner. Subjects may approach this benchmark when asked to guess the rankings of a spouse
or family member. When subjects are uninformed about the specific preferences of their
assigned partner, the optimal guess is to pick the single most common rankings in the
study population, perhaps differentiated by gender (Eckel 2016). For instance, since 75%
of subjects prefer soft drinks to other beverages, guessing ‘soft drink’ will be right 75%
of the time when matched with an unknown subject. This assumes that subjects have
some idea of what items are most popular among other participants – but it does not
require knowledge of all probabilities, only of the mode of each distribution. Subjects
may approach this benchmark when they guess the rankings of a stranger. Finally, for
those subjects matched with a computer in LAB2, we expect them to do no better than
the random guess benchmark.
    In LAB1, subjects rank three items. Since guessing the top and bottom-ranked items
automatically implies a guess about the third, guessing accuracy only takes three values:
0, 1, or 2 correct guesses. In LAB2, subjects rank three items twice – a food item and a
beverage – and the maximum number of correct guesses is 4.11
   Figures 1 and 2 displays guessing accuracy in LAB1 and LAB2, respectively. In Fig-
ure 1, we see that LAB1 subjects do better than random guesses, but not by much.
This confirms that the consumption items selected for this experiment are not strongly
  11
   Except for in the Computer Match where subjects only guess the computer’s top ranked items. This
mechanically limits the number of correct responses subjects can give to 2 instead of 4.


                                                  13
differentiated – which agrees with the observation that reported preferences are less differ-
entiated than in the LAB2 experiment. We also note that when guessing the preferences of
a stranger, subjects do less well than our optimal benchmark – possibly because subjects
are unsure about the modal preference. Some subjects do better than optimal guessing
when matched with a spouse of family member, suggesting that they have information
about their specific preferences. But we are far from perfect foresight: more than 40% of
LAB1 subjects are unable to guess the top or bottom ranked item of their family member.
    In contrast, LAB2 guesses are much better than random (Figure 2). This is probably
because guessing is incentivized and preferences are more contrasted than in LAB1: 74%
of subjects prefer the same dish and 76% prefer the same beverage. Subjects do not
outperform optimal guessing, however: only 14 to 17% of subjects manage to correctly
guess their partner’s rankings, compared to 20% with optimal guessing.
    To test whether differences between partner matchings are statistically significant, we
regress guess quality on matching type. Since LAB1 subjects only play once while LAB2
subjects play twice, we have more observations for LAB2 subjects. To facilitate hypothesis
testing, we include fictitious observations for random guess and optimal uninformed guess,
and we use random guesses as the omitted treatment category. In this manner, coefficients
on matching dummies can be interpreted as the percentage improvement over random
matching.
   Results are presented in Table 2. Estimates for LAB1, presented in column 1, confirm
that subjects in both matching treatments do significantly better than random guessing:
the coefficients are both statistically significant. Optimal matching does best on aver-
age, but its coefficient is not statistically different from that of either family or stranger
matching. We also note that women are better able to predict the preferences of their
partner.
    Results for LAB2 are qualitatively similar: subjects do better than random matching
when paired with a human subject – not with the computer.12 Subjects fail to achieve
the optimal guessing benchmark on average, and the shortfall is statistically significant
whenever subjects are matched with a partner of the opposite sex, whether family mem-
ber of stranger. Only when matched with a same sex partner is guessing accuracy not
statistically different from optimal guessing. In LAB2 female subjects are not better at
predicting their partner’s rankings.
    Taken together, these results indicate that individuals in our sample population know
relatively little about the specific preferences of their family members: they are about
equally bad at guessing the preference rankings of a family member as they are guessing
that of a stranger. This implies that agency over own consumption may have instrumental
value, particularly for individuals who do not have the modal preference.
 12
      See earlier footnote.




                                             14
4.2    Respect for others’ preferences
We now turn to hypothesis H2a. To recall, the sequencing of the experiment is as follows:
subjects are asked to guess the preference rankings of their partner; half of the subjects are
then informed of the preference rankings reported by their partner; and finally subjects
select a consumption bundle for their partner. From the choices made by uninformed
subjects, we can investigate whether participants pick for their partner what they guess
is their partner’s preferred bundle. From the choices made by informed subjects, we can
investigate whether participants pick for their partner what they have been told is their
partner’s preferred bundle. In both cases, we are testing whether participants choose for
their partner a consumption bundle that they believe – or know – to be their partner’s
preferred bundle.
    We take not respecting the partner’s preferences as a sign of demand for power. What
this demand for power means has to be understood within the context of the experiment.
A dominant individual accustomed to imposing his or her will on others may seek to do the
same within the experiment – for them it is ‘business as usual’. It is also conceivable that
individuals who normally have little ability to impose their will on others, take advantage
of the experiment to do so – thereby revealing a ‘pent-up’ demand for power.
    Results are presented in Table 3. In addition to female and stranger dummies inter-
acted with each other, we also include the amount given by the subject to his/her partner
in the dictator game, and the amount received by the subject from his/her partner in the
same game. We regard the amount given as proxying for altruism towards the partner.
We include the amount received from the partner as possible proxy for the altruism that
the subject expects from the partner – since subjects only discover what they receive from
their partner at the end of the experiment, our measure is likely to contain measurement
error.
    In column 1 we show estimates for uninformed participants in LAB1 and LAB2, re-
spectively. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the subject picks for the
partner what they guessed the partner prefers. For LAB1, 73% of male subjects matched
with their spouse pick for their partner what they guess their partner prefers. This pro-
portion falls by 12 percentage points for males matched with a female stranger, but the
difference is not statistically significant. In contrast, women are on average 17 percentage
points less likely to select what they guess is their partner’s preferred juice – a difference
that is statistically significant at the 5% level. A similar – though less precisely estimated
– coefficient is found for female subjects matched to a stranger. Take together this evi-
dence suggests that most male participants respect what they believe to be their spouse’s
preferences. But among female participants, who were shown in Section 2 to have less
executive agency than their husband, a few may take advantage of the experiment to
impose their choice on a male partner – which would indicate pent-up demand for power.
We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that women are accustomed to decide what
people eat at home and thus regard selecting food for others as their privilege. Either
way, the evidence suggests slightly more demand for power among female participants.
   In the second panel of Table 3 we report corresponding estimates for LAB2 subjects,


                                             15
combining choices of food and drink. Among LAB2 uninformed male subjects, 82% pick
the item that they guess their wife (or female family member) prefers. This proportion
falls by 10% for their wife – a difference that is statistically significant at the 1% level.
This finding is similar to what was found for LAB1. Women are also less likely to pick
their best guess when matched with a stranger male, but this difference is not statistically
significant. This confirms that demand for power by women is directed towards males, a
finding that is in line with pent-up demand for power over men. Other coefficients are
not significant.
    In column 2 of Table 3 we report coefficient estimates for informed participants. Here
the dependent variable equals 1 if the subject picks for the partner what the partner
ranked highest. For LAB1 subjects, we find that 61% of male subjects accomodate the
preference of a female family member, but only 35% of them accomodate the preference of
a female stranger – a difference of 26 percentage points, significant at the 5% level. The
corresponding frequency for female subjects matched with a family member is a lower
55%, again suggesting that they are less likely to respect the preferences of their male
partner – consistent with pent-up demand for power. But women are more likely respect
the preferences of a male stranger. The differences between male and female subjects are
not statistically significant, however.
    A similar pattern is observed for LAB2 subjects: 77% of informed men pick their
spouse’s preferred food compared to 65% of women – a difference that is statistically
significant at the 1% level. We also find that male subjects pay less respect to the
preferences of strangers – significantly so for strangers of the opposite sex.
    To refine our analysis, we examine the effect of information depending on whether the
subject initially guessed the preferred item of the partner or not. We have seen that many
uninformed participants pick for their partner a bundle different from what they believe
their partner wants. From the previous subsection, we also know that many subject guess
wrong. Given this, it is conceivable that subjects pick for their partner a good that they
erroneously believe to be different from what the partner likes. Informing these subjects
of their partner’s true preferences could induce them to revise their selection away from
what the partner likes, i.e., when informed they would be less likely to pick what their
partner wants. For those subjects with pent-up demand for power, information could help
reduce the frequency with which they respect their partner’s preferences. We do not an-
ticipate a similar effect among subjects who correctly guessed their partner’s preferences,
except perhaps for a positive confirmation effect: providing information confirms what
the partner selected and comforts the subject in their choice.
    To investigate these possibilities, we estimate the effect of the information treatment
on the probability that the subject picks their partner’s preferred bundle, conditional
on whether the subject guess the partner’s top choice or not. Results are presented in
Table 4. We find that, among LAB1 subjects who guess wrong, information increases
the probability of picking the partner’s choice. But the increase is only significant among
male subjects matched with a family member.13 Among female subjects, the effect of
information on picking the correct bundle is never significant, suggesting that women
 13
      For stranger matching, the effect is smaller in magnitude and only significant at the 10% level.


                                                     16
who guess wrong do not adjust their choice once informed of their mistake.
    Among subjects who guess right, information has a more contrasted effect. We again
find that male subjects matched with a family member are significantly more likely to
pick the correct bundle. But male subjects matched with a stranger and female subjects
matched with a family member are, if anything, less likely to pick the right juice if they see
their initial guess confirmed in the information treatment. The effect is large in magnitude
although not statistically significant. The contrast between the response to information
between male and female subjects in the family matching is again consistent with pent-up
demand for power directed towards male family members.
   Some of these findings are replicated in the LAB2 experiment. We see that, on av-
erage, information significantly improves selection quality. We again find that men who
guessed wrong revise their choice to accomodate a female family member’s top choice.
The magnitude of the difference is large – 27.4% – and it is statistically significant. In
contrast, women who guess wrong are no more likely to pick their male family member’s
preferred item when informed than when uninformed. This does not mean that female
subjects never respond to information: when matched with a male stranger, they revise
their choice relative to their initial guess. But it means that they disregard the information
they have been given when matched with a male relative.
    For subjects who correctly guess the preference of their partner, providing information
should in principle have no effect on choice – except perhaps a positive confirmation effect.
This is indeed what we find to male subjects in LAB1: they are 24 percentage points more
likely to pick the correct juice when informed. In contrast, female subjects who guessed
right are less likely to pick the correct juice when informed, suggesting that they revise
their choice negatively. This pattern, although large in magnitude, is not statistically
significant. It is also not replicated in LAB2, where we find no systematic effect of
information on picking the correct item for the partner.
    Taken together, these results indicate that male and female participants to the experi-
ment behave in different ways: female participants are less likely to respect the top choice
of a male partner, suggesting a demand for power, that is, the desire to override the food
preference of a male family member. We do not observe a similar behavior among men, at
least within the confines of our food-and-drink experiment. It remains to be seen whether
this pattern would repeat for larger decisions outside the traditional domain of women.


4.3    Demand for agency
We now turn to the part of the experiment that investigates willingness to pay for agency.
We start with hypotheses H3a and H3b. Demand for agency by gender and matching
type is shown in Table 5 for the LAB1 and LAB2 experiments, pooling the informed and
uninformed treatments. In LAB1, demand for agency equals 1 if the subject refuses the
coin toss and prefers to receive half a glass of his/her preferred juice – and 0 otherwise.
In LAB2, demand for agency equals 1 if the subject prefers to incur a monetary reduction
of their showup fee than receiving the food and drink that the partner has selected for
them – and 0 otherwise.

                                             17
    We first note that a sizeable proportion of subjects in both experiments are willing
to pay for agency: 23% in LAB1 and 26% in LAB2. The answer to hypothesis H3a is
thus yes. There are, however, differences in pattern by gender and matching type across
the two experiments. In LAB1, women are slightly less likely to demand agency when
matched with a family member, but much less likely to do so when matched with a male
stranger. The latter difference is statistically significant. Other pairwise differences are
not. Why women would be less willing to exert agency when matched with an anonymous
stranger is unclear given that, by experimental design, the identity of the stranger, who
sits in another room, is never revealed and the risk of retribution is negligible. We check
the robustness of this finding below.
    Results from the LAB2 subjects are more consistent with expectations. All subjects
demand agency more often when matched with a stranger, who subjects may expect to
be less familiar with their specific preferences. For men, the magnitude of the difference
is fairly small, but it is statistically significant relative to family matching. The difference
is larger for women, 40% of whom prefer to forfeit part of their showup fee to receive the
food and drink of their choice rather than something selected by a stranger or a computer.
We also note a large significant difference in willingness to pay for agency between male
and female LAB2 subjects, across all matching types: female subjects are on average 56%
more likely to pay for agency than men. Finally, subjects of both genders are less likely
to pay for agency when matched with a stranger of the same sex instead of the opposite
sex, but the difference remains largest for women.
    LAB2 subjects are given the opportunity to reject the random choice made by a
computer. The reason for including this treatment is the concern that subjects may be
reluctant to challenge the choice made by another subject, e.g., out of courtesy or for fear
of offending them. If this is an issue, we expect more rejection of computer choices since
they do not involve human intervention and the computer cannot possibly be ‘offended’
by rejection. We find no evidence of such concerns: the subjects’ propensity to reject the
choice of the computer is not larger than that of a stranger of the opposite sex. This
offers reassurance that observed willingness to pay for agency is not self-censored.
    To throw more light on the LAB1 results on demand for agency among women, we take
advantage of a feature specific to the LAB1 experiment, namely, that all subjects play an
ultimatum game against their assigned partner. Since the game is played using a strategy
method, we know each subject’s response to all possible offers – and we do not have to
worry about endogeneity of rejection with respect to the amount offered. Rejection in the
ultimatum game results in a monetary loss equal to the offer made. We can thus use the
propensity to reject a partner’s offer as an alternative measure of demand for agency.
   Results are shown in Table A1. To err on the side of caution, we only use the 318
subjects who demonstrate a clear understanding of the ultimatum game, but similar
results are obtained if we use all subjects.14 We see that, as in Table 5, LAB1 subjects
  14
     Participants were asked to answer three hypothetical questions where player 1 allocated a hypothetical
amount and player 2 either accepted or rejected the allocation. Participants were given a score of 1 if
they could correctly identify the amount Player 1 and Player 2 would go home with in each of the three
test questions, 0 otherwise.



                                                    18
are less likely to challenge an offer made by a stranger. But we also find a massively
higher proportion of rejections among women than men, irrespective of matching type:
while only 36% of men reject at least one hypothetical offer made by an accompanying
family member, 86% of women do so. Similarly, 29% of men reject at least one offer made
by a stranger while the corresponding frequency among women is 78%. These findings
mirror what we find for LAB2 subjects in Table 5, providing suggestive evidence that the
LAB1 results in Table 5 may be a aberration.
    To recap, we find that female subjects often display a higher willingness to pay for
agency than men, providing some support for hypothesis H3b. Whether this captures
pent-up demand is unclear: we cannot rule out the possibility that women in the study
population feel entitled to reject any food selection imposed by men, as they are used
to exert agency on food preparation at home. The evidence from the ultimatum game
nonetheless suggest that female demand for agency goes beyond protecting a small re-
served domain of autonomy from husband interference. The evidence for pent-up demand
for agency is even more compelling when combined with earlier results on higher demand
for power among female subjects.
     Next we investigate hypothesis H3c, that is, whether demand for agency varies with
its instrumental value. To this effect, we test whether subjects are more willing to pay for
agency when the expected gain is larger. As we have seen, subjects are often unaware of
their partner’s preference rankings – and even when they are aware of them, they often
choose to ignore them. Having executive agency over own consumption can thus increase
the likelihood of receiving one’s preferred bundle. The question is whether subjects are
more willing to pay when the chance of getting their preferred bundle is lower.
    To test this hypothesis, we construct a variable proxying for the expected instrumental
value of ex ante agency Abi . How this proxy is constructed is described in detail in Ap-
pendix B. We then regress ex ante demand for agency on this proxy variable. Estimation
results are presented in Table 6. We see that in LAB2 subjects are significantly more
likely to pay for ex ante agency when its instrumental value is high for the choice of food.
In both LAB1 and LAB2 the instrumental value of the choice of drink is not statistically
significant. The cost of agency, which is varied randomly across subjects in the LAB2
experiment, has the expected sign and is borderline significant. These findings are con-
sistent with the idea that demand for agency is at least partly driven by instrumental
considerations.
    We nonetheless find that gender and matching type dummies remain strong predic-
tors of Abi , suggesting the presence of systematic variation in demand for agency that is
not driven by its instrumental value. In particular we observe that men matched with
strangers are more likely to exert agency than men matched with their spouse or family
member. The results also confirm our earlier finding in Table 5 that women are more
likely to exert agency than men in all stranger matching types.
   To investigate the fundamental nature of demand for agency, we investigate hypothesis
H3d using data collected in LAB2 only. In that experiment, we first ask subjects whether
they wish to pay to ensure they receive the food and drink they have selected rather than
what their partner has selected for them. Answers from this question were used to produce

                                            19
Tables 5 and 6. We then tell subjects what their partner has actually selected for them
and we ask them again if they still wish to pay to have what they themselves selected.
We refer to answers to the first and second question as ex ante and ex post demand for
agency, respectively. If demand for agency is driven solely by instrumental considerations,
we should observe no demand for agency when the partner’s choice matches the subject’s.
On the other hand, when the partner’s choice is revealed to be different, we should observe
an increase in ex post demand for agency relative to Table 5. In contrast, if subjects
demand agency for its own sake, they may be willing to pay to get what they selected,
even if it is the same as what their partner selected for them.
    Table 7 reports the proportion of subjects who demand ex post agency. What we
observe does not suggest that demand for ex post agency is solely driven by instrumental
considerations. Among subjects whose partner selected the correct food and drink, 11%
nonetheless elicit to pay for agency. At the same time, 83% of subjects (100% - 17% – see
column 1 row 1) refrain from exercising agency when they know that what the partner
has selected is not what they prefer. In fact, only 53% of subjects who demanded agency
ex ante still demand it ex post after discovering that their partner has not selected their
preferred food and drink. This suggests reluctance in going against a specific decision
made by someone else after having been informed of that decision. We also find that,
among those subjects who did not demand agency ex ante, only 4% of those who discover
their partner got them the wrong food and drink decide to pay a small fee to get their
preferred bundle. Furthermore, about the same proportion of subjects insists on exerting
agency even when the partner gets their food or drink right. On the other hand, among
those subjects who exerted agency ex ante, we find that 36% of them continue to exert
agency ex post even when they are getting the right food and drink from their partner.
These findings are difficult to reconcile with a pure instrumental value of agency: there
is too much demand for agency when the partner’s selection is correct, and not enough
when the partner is wrong.
    We nonetheless note that, in Table 7, ex post demand for agency falls when the partner
gets the correct food. To test this formally, we regress demand for ex post agency Api on
the actual value of agency – which is known by construction. The results, shown in Table
8, are not too dissimilar from those shown in Table 6: ex post demand Api increases with
the gain from agency and falls with the price of agency. But estimated coefficients are
smaller than what pure instrumental motivations would imply. We also find that female
subjects are much less likely to exert agency ex post, suggests reluctance in going against
someone else’s decision among women – and men matched with their wife. Men matched
with a stranger are less reluctant to exert ex post agency. This suggests that at least part
of the ex ante agency exercised by women in our experiment reflects pent-up demand for
agency, and that much of it is driven by non-instrumental considerations.
    Before turning to the evidence from the field experiment, it is worth pointing out that
a large proportion of subjects do not receive their preferred bundle. Part of this is due
to the fact that their partners either do not know their preferences or choose to ignore
them; part is due to the fact that subjects do not elicit to exercise agency primarily
when the expected or realized gains from agency are the largest. Put differently, subjects
are not particularly good at targeting agency to situations where they are least likely

                                            20
to receive their preferred choice. For instance, in LAB2, ex ante agency increases the
proportion of subjects who receive their preferred food and drink only from 48% to 62%.
More surprising, ex post agency reduces this proportion to 56% – primarily because many
women who choose to exert agency ex ante refrain from doing so ex post, even though their
partner selected the wrong bundle.15 This is quite remarkable given that, in the context of
the experiment, individual consumption choices are deeply shrouded from their partners.
To observe this, it must be the case that attitudes towards agency are internalized by
subjects and at least partly enforced through internalized roles and norms.


5      Evidence from a field experiment
In addition to the two lab experiments we have discussed, we ran a field experiment
focusing on similar issues that allowed us to test hypotheses 3b, 4a and 4b. The detailed
experimental protocol is given in the Online Appendix A3.16
    We first look at the gift selections made by husbands and wives. The purse is most
popular, being selected by 81% of women and 64% of men. The wallet comes second,
selected by 32% of men and 15% of women. Only 4% of men and women select the pencil
case. There is considerable overlap between the choices made: 73% of couples select the
same gift. Participants seem aware of this on average: 72% of women and 69% think their
spouse has made the same selection as them. These beliefs, however, are only true 59%
to 63% of the time, respectively. Morever, beliefs are not aligned across spouses: 57%
of couples both believe their selections are identical, 17% both believe they each selected
different things, and 27% have misaligned beliefs, i.e., one spouse thinks the other has
selected the same thing, and the other thinks the opposite. This means that in 43% of the
couples at least one spouse believes that they have selected different things. The creates
space for instrumental value of agency, which we capture with a dummy Mi equal to 1 if
individual i believes that his/her spouse has selected the same gift and 0 otherwise.
    In Table 9 we regress the husband’s refusal to delegate on Mi . We also include a dummy
Ti if i’s household was assigned to the microfinance treatment and 0 otherwise. Only 16
husbands opt for the coin toss and refuse to fully delegate the choice of gift to their wife,
providing little support for hypothesis H2b. Yet we find that a husband is significantly
more likely to delegate when he believes his wife selects the same gift as him – a finding
in line with the instrumental value of agency. It remains that 31% men believe their wife
selected a different gift, and only a small fraction of them refuse to delegate the gift choice
to their wife. In LAB1 and LAB2 we found that many subjects – including men – disregard
the stated preferences of their spouse. Here we find overwhelming willingness to delegate.
  15
     Without exercising agency, 52% of LAB2 female subjects would receive their preferred food and
drink. This proportion rises to 68% when ex ante agency is taken into account; but it falls back to 59%
with ex post agency instead. The corresponding proportions for men are 43%, 55% and 53% – confirming
that reluctance towards ex post agency is virtually non-existent among male subjects.
  16
     As is apparent in the Online Appendix A3, we also attempted to measure willingness to pay for
agency in a hypothetical, non-incentivized way. This attempt, however, yielded results that suggest the
questions were not fully understood or not taken seriously. They are omitted here.


                                                  21
A possible interpretation is that process matters: if male subjects are explicitly asked to
defer to their wife, many agree to do so – especially in the context of a female-oriented
microfinance intervention. But if they are not asked to defer, they happily impose their
own preferences. We also find that, among the 16 men who refuse to delegate, only 2 agree
to delegate in exchange for PKR50 and 3 for PKR200 – an amount equivalent to 40% of
the value of the gift. This suggests of those men who refuse to delegate, many are also
animated by motives other than instrumental and not amenable to financial compromise.
    In Table 10 we estimate a similar regression for women’s decision to forfeit money
so as to receive their preferred gift. Since each woman makes this decision twice – once
facing a price of PRK50 and once with PKR200 – the estimated regression combines both
decisions.17 Most women pay for agency: 77% when the price of agency is PKR50, 61%
when it is PKR200 (i.e., 40% of the full cost of the gift). These proportions are much
higher than the 28% of women who believe that their husband chose something else. We
nonetheless find support for the instrumental value of agency: a woman who believes her
husband chose the same gift as her is 4 percentage points less likely to pay for agency.
We also find responsiveness to the cost of agency.
    Regarding the effect of being offered the microfinance treatment, we see that women
invited to participate are 4 percentage points less likely to demand agency. Combined
with the observation that average demand for agency is high, we conclude that pent-up
demand for agency is high among participating women, but women empowered by the
microfinance intervention feel slightly less need to pay for agency. This interpretation
is consistent with the idea that empowerment reduces pent-up demand for pure agency.
Finally, we find that women who selected the pencil case are significantly more likely to
pay to make sure they get it. This latter finding is consistent with the empirical evidence
suggesting that women with more agency or financial power tend to spend more on their
children.


6      Conclusion
In this paper we have experimentally investigated demand for agency within households.
Using two lab experiments and one field experiment, we have tested specific hypotheses
regarding demand for agency and power without and across households. We have in-
vestigated whether individuals know and respect the preferences of others, and whether
subjects have pent-up demand for agency.
   Contrary to what is regularly assumed in much intrahousehold analysis, we find ev-
idence that spouses are often ill-informed about each other’s consumption preferences.
Also, they are often no better at guessing their spouse’s preferences than those of a ran-
dom stranger. We also find a surprisingly high propensity for subjects to disregard what
they believe or know about each others’ preferences. Women in particular are more likely
than men to disregard information about their male relative’s preferences. This is true
  17
    To allow for possible correlation between the two agency decisions, standard errors are clustered at
the individual level.


                                                  22
even though, given our setting, there is little reason to suspect subjects of wanting to
impose consumption choices on others ‘for their own good’ or to follow moral precepts.
We interpret this finding as suggestive of pent-up demand for power, that is, for imposing
on others a consumption bundle that knowingly deviates from their preferences.
    We find significant evidence of demand for agency in all three experiments. Some of
the observed variation can be explained by differences in the instrumental value of agency
or in the cost of exercising agency. But subjects often make choices that are incompatible
with a pure instrumental motive. In particular, we find many subjects willing to pay for
agency even when they are informed that the choice made by their partner is the same as
theirs. We take this evidence as suggesting a pure demand for agency, i.e., a willingness to
pay for having executive agency over consumption choices, irrespective of their material
consequences. These findings add to the experimental evidence that people do not just
have preferences over material outcomes (as captured by a utility function); they also
have preferences over the process by which these material outcomes are achieved. Much
of the existing evidence involves moral considerations – e.g., the willingness to punish
(e.g., Charness and Rabin 2002) or the desire to redistribute (e.g., Zizzo and Oswald
2001). In this paper, we find evidence of demand for agency for its own sake, not simply
to pursue a material goal.
    We set out to study pent-up demand for agency among Pakistani women, who are of-
ten believed to be under the domination of a male member of their household – e.g., their
father or their husband. The evidence we uncover suggests that relationship between gen-
der and agency is more complex than initially recognized. First, the fact that household
members often ignore – or choose to ignore – each other’s consumption preferences is a
surprising finding which, a priori, confers much instrumental value to individual executive
agency over own consumption. While demand for agency responds to the benefits and
costs of agency among both men and women, we also find female subjects in our study
population to be equally or more willing to exert agency than their male counterparts.
This is true in spite of the fact that, when asked about executive and consultative agency
within the household, our study population appears strongly patriarchal.
    What have we learned about demand for agency? Men and women seem to value mak-
ing consumption choices for themselves and others, over and beyond what these choices
imply for their own material consumption. The process by which consumption is decided
seems to be an important consideration for intrahousehold welfare – and this includes
women wanting to impose their choice on men nearly as much as men wanting to impose
their choice on women. To an economist, these tendencies are disturbing because they
imply that, even in relatively poor households such as those we study, people are willing
to reduce allocative efficiency in consumption simply to assuage a desire for power and
agency. More research is needed on preferences over process in intrahousehold decisions
and on their effect on material and subjective welfare.
   Results from the field experiment throw additional light on how ‘pent-up demand’ for
agency should be interpreted, at least in the context of our experiments. Based on survey
questions, the women in our study population have little executive agency within their
own household. Our experiments give them an opportunity to manifest a repressed desire


                                            23
to make choices for themselves – and others. Pent-up demand for power and agency is
thus a manifestation of lack of empowerment, a venting off steam, so to speak. It suggests
that, given the opportunity, individuals who have little say over household decisions that
affect them directly are willing to engage in inefficient actions – such as paying to receive
items that someone else had already selected for you, or deliberately forcing others to
consume things they do not prefer. Seen in this light, the patterns we document here are
reminiscent of those documented by Jakiela and Ozier (2015): the authors showed that
women prefer making a low return investment that is hidden from their spouse than a
high return investment that is observable to others in the household. When the evidence
is taken together with ours, it suggests that people who feel unempowered are willing to
make inefficient – and potentially destructive – choices in order to achieve a degree of
agency over their consumption. If this interpretation is correct, empowering women (and
other household members) should reduce pent-up demand for agency and power, and as a
result has the potential to reduce inefficiency in the intrahousehold allocation of resources.


References
Afzal, U., G. d’Adda, M. Fafchamps, S. Quinn, and F. Said (2017): ”Two Sides of the
Same Rupee? Comparing Demand for Microcredit and Microsaving in a Framed Field
Experiment in Rural Pakistan”, Economic Journal.
   Afzal, U., G. d’Adda, M. Fafchamps, S. Quinn, and F. Said (2018). ”When Nudge
Turns to Shove: A Field Experiment Adding Commitment Features to a Commitment
Savings Product”, Oxford University (mimeo)
   Alan, Sule and Seda Artac (2016). ”Mitigating the Gender Gap in the Willingness to
Compete: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment”, Department of Economics,
University of Essex (mimeo)
  Ambler, K., (2015). ”Don’t tell on me: Experimental evidence of asymmetric infor-
mation in transnational households”. Journal of Development Economics, 113: 52–69.
   Anderson, S., and J.-M. Baland (2002). ”The Economics of ROSCAs and Intrahouse-
hold Resource Allocation,âe The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), 963âe“995.
   Ashraf, N., (2009). “Spousal control and intra-household decision making: An exper-
imental study in the Philippines”. American Economic Review, 99(4): 1245–77.
   Ashraf, N., Field, E., Lee, J., (2014). ”Household Bargaining and Excess Fertility: An
Experimental Study in Zambia”. American Economic Review, 104: 2210–37.
    Bartling, Bjorn, Ernst Fehr, & Holger Herz, (2014). ”The intrinsic value of decision
rights”. Econometrica, 82 (6): 2005-2039.
   Bobonis, G.J., (2009). ”Is the Allocation of Resources within the Household Efficient?
New Evidence from a Randomized Experiment”. Journal of Political Economy, 117(3):
453–503.
   Bolton, Gary, Jordi Brandts, and Axel Ockenfels, (2005). ”Fair procedure: evidence

                                             24
from games involving lotteries”. The Economic Journal, 115: 1054-1076.
   de Brauw, A., Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J., Roy, S., (2014). ”The Impact of Bolsa
Famı́lia on Women’s Decision-Making Power”. World Development, 59: 487–504.
   Browning, Martin, Francois Bourguignon, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, and Valerie Lech-
ene (1994). ”Income and Outcomes: A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation”,
Journal of Political Economy, 102(6): 1067-96
  Browning, M. & P. A. Chiappori, (1998). ”Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: A
General Characterization and Empirical Tests,” Econometrica, 66(6): 1241-78, November.
    Browning, Martin, Pierre-André Chiappori & Valérie Lechene, (2010). ”Distributional
Effects in Household Models: Separate Spheres and Income Pooling,” Economic Journal,
120(545): 786-99, 06.
   Browning, Martin, Pierre-André Chiappori & Arthur Lewbel, (2013). ”Estimating
Consumption Economies of Scale, Adult Equivalence Scales, and Household Bargaining
Power,” Review of Economic Studies, 80(4): 1267-1303.
    Browning, Martin & Chiappori, Pierre-André & Weiss,Yoram, (2014). Economics of
the Family, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
   Carlsson, F., Martinsson, P., Qin, P., Sutter, M., (2009). ”Household Decision Making
and the Influence of Spouses’ Income, Education, and Communist Party Membership: A
Field Experiment in Rural China”, SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 1395246
   Castilla, C., (2014). ”What’s yours is mine, and what’s mine is mine: Bargaining
power and income concealing between spouses in India”. Working paper.
   Castilla, C., (2015). ”Trust and Reciprocity between Spouses in India”. American
Economic Review, 105(5): 621–624.
   Castilla, C., Walker, T., (2013). ”Is Ignorance Bliss? The Effect of Asymmetric Infor-
mation between Spouses on Intra-Household Allocations”, American Economic Review,
103(): 263–68
   Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin (2002). ”Understanding Social Preferences with
Simple Tests”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 817–69
   Chen, J.J., (2013). ”Identifying non-cooperative behavior among spouses: Child out-
comes in migrant-sending households”. Journal of Development Economics, 100(1): 1–18.
  Chiappori, Pierre-Andre (1988). ”Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: A Com-
ment”, International Economic Review, 29(4): 791-96, November
   Chiappori, Pierre-Andre (1991). ”Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: A Rejoin-
der”, International Economic Review, 32(3): 761-62, August
   Chiappori, Pierre-Andre (1997a). ”Collective Models of Household Behavior: The
Sharing Rule Approach”, in Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Developing Countries:
Methods, Models and Policy, Lawrence Haddad, John Hoddinott and Harold Alderman
(eds.), IFPRI, Washington D.C.


                                           25
  Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, (1997b). ”Introducing Household Production in Collective
Models of Labor Supply,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(1): 191-209, February.
   Dasgupta, Utteeyo, & Mani, Subha, (2015). ”Only Mine or All Ours: Do Stronger
Entitlements Affect Altruistic Choices in the Household”. World Development, 67: 363 -
375.
   Deer, Carmen D. and Twyman, J. (2012). “Asset Ownership and Egalitarian Decision
Making in Dual-headed Households in Ecuador”, Review of Radical Political Economics,
44(3): 313-20, September
    de Laat, J., (2014). ”Household allocations and endogenous information: The case of
split migrants in Kenya”. Journal of Development Economics, 106: 108–17.
   Dercon, Stefan & Pramila Krishnan, (2000). ”In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing
within Households in Rural Ethiopia,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(4): 688-727,
August.
    Duflo, Esther (2003). ”Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and
Intrahousehold Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review, 17(1): 1-25,
June.
   Duflo, E., Udry, C., (2004). ”Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d’Ivoire:
Social norms, separate accounts and consumption choices”. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 10498, May.
   Eckel, Catherine C. & Grossman, Phillip J. (1998). ”Are Women Less Selfish than
Men?: Evidence from Dictator Experiments”. The Economic Journal, 108(448), 726 -
735.
  Eckel, Catherine C. & Grossman, Phillip J. (2001). ”Chivalry and Solidarity in Ulti-
matum Games”, Economic Inquiry, 39 (2), 171 - 188.
   Eckel, Catherine (2016). ”Making Decisions for Others: The Consequences of Gender
Stereotypes”, Texas A&M (mimeo)
    Fafchamps, Marcel, Bereket Kebede & Agnes R. Quisumbing, (2009). ”Intrahousehold
Welfare in Rural Ethiopia,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 71(4): 567-99,
08.
    Fafchamps, Marcel & Agnes R. Quisumbing (2008). ”Household Formation and Mar-
riage Markets”, in Handbook of Development Economics Volume 4, T. Paul Schultz and
John Strauss (eds.), Elsevier.
   Fafchamps, Marcel & Quisumbing, Agnes, (2005). ”Assets at marriage in rural Ethiopia,”
Journal of Development Economics, 77(1): 1-25, June.
   Falk, Armin & Kosfeld, Michael, (2006). ”The hidden cost of control”, The American
Economic Review, 96 (5): 1611-1630.
   Fehr, Ernst, Holger Herz, & Tom Wilkening, (2013). ”The Lure of Authority: Moti-
vation and Incentive Effects of Power”. American Economic Review, 103 (4): 1325-1359.
   Fiala, N. (2017). “Business is tough, but family is worse: The role of family constraints

                                            26
on microenterprise development in Uganda”, The World Bank (mimeograph)
   Glennerster, Rachel, Claire Walsh, and Lucia Diaz-Martina (2018). A Practical Guide
to Measuring Women’s and Girls’ Empowerment in Impact Evaluations, J-PAL, Boston
   Guth, Werner & Hannelore Weck-Hannemann, (1997). ”Do people care about democ-
racy? An experiment exploring the value of voting rights”. textitPublic Choice, 91:
27-47.
    Hoel, J.B., (2015). ”Heterogeneous households: A within-subject test of asymmetric
information between spouses in Kenya”. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
118: 123–35.
   Iversen, V., Jackson, C., Kebede, B., Munro, A. & Verschoor, A. (2006). ”What’s
Love Got To Do With It? An Experimental Test of Household Models in East Uganda.”
Discussion Papers in Economics 06/01, Royal Holloway University of London.
   Iversen, V., Jackson, C., Kebede, B., Munro, A., Verschoor, A., (2011). ”Do Spouses
Realise Cooperative Gains? Experimental Evidence from Rural Uganda”. World Devel-
opment, 39(4): 569–78.
    Jakiela, P., Ozier, O., (2015). ”Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimen-
tal Evidence from Village Economies”. Review of Economic Studies, 83(1): 231–68
    Kebede, B.; Tarazona, M.; Munro, A. and Verschoor, A. (2014) “Intra-household
Efficiency: An Experimental Study from Ethiopia”, Journal of African Economies, 23(1):
105-50.
   Krupka, Erin and Roberto A. Weber (2013). ”Identifying Social Norms Using Co-
ordination Games: Why Does Dictator Game Sharing Vary?”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 11(3): 495–24, June
    Mani, A. (2011). “Mine, yours or ours? The efficiency of household investment deci-
sions: An experimental approach.: Working Paper.
   McElroy, Marjorie B. (1990). ”The Empirical Content of Narsh-Bargained Household
Behavior”, Journal of Human Resources, 25(4): 559-83
    Memon, A. S., Naz, S., Abbas, H., Zahid, J., Tabbasum, R., and Zeshan, M. (2014).
Alif Ailaan Pakistan District Education Rankings 2014. Alif Ailan.
   Munro, A., Bateman, I.J., McNally, T., (2008). ”The Family Under the Microscope:
An Experiment Testing Economic Models of Household Choice”. SSRN Scholarly Paper
No. ID 1138969.
   Owens, David, Zachary Grossman, and Ryan Fackler, (2014). ”The Control Premium:
A Preference for Payoff Autonomy”. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 91:
138-161.
   de Palma, A., Picard, N., Ziegelmeyer, A., (2009). ”Individual and couple decision
behavior under risk: evidence on the dynamics of power balance”. Theory and Decision,
70(2): 45–64.
   Qian, Nancy, (2006). ”Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of

                                          27
Sex-Specific Earnings on Sex Imbalance,” CEPR Discussion Papers 598
   Robinson, J., (2012). ”Limited Insurance within the Household: Evidence from a Field
Experiment in Kenya”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4): 140–64.
   Schaner, S., (2015). ”Do opposites detract? Intrahousehold preference heterogeneity
and inefficient strategic savings”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(2):
135–74
   Zizzo DJ, and Oswald AJ (2001). ”Are people willing to pay to reduce others’ in-
comes?”, Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 63-64: 39-62.




                                          28
Tables and Figures



                                       Figure 1. Cumulative distribution of guess quality in LAB1

                                  1
                                  .8
           Cumulative frequency
                                  .6
                                  .4
                                  .2
                                  0




                                       0               .5                  1                1.5                   2
                                                               Number of correct guesses

                                                      Random guess                     Guess of spouse
                                                      Guess of stranger                Optimal guess




                                       Figure 2. Cumulative distribution of guess quality in LAB2
                                  1
                                  .8
           Cumulative frequency
                                  .6
                                  .4
                                  .2
                                  0




                                       0               1                   2                 3                    4
                                                               Number of correct guesses

                                              Random guess                           Guess of spouse
                                              Guess of opp. sex stranger             Guess of same sex stranger
                                              Optimal guess




                                                                      29
Table 2. Ability to guess partner's preferences by matching type
                                                 LAB1                              LAB2
Matching type                                Coef.       t-stat.                Coef.         t-stat.
  Family member                              0.185         2.61 **              0.892         17.12     ***
  Stranger of opposite sex                   0.143         2.02 **              0.958         11.98     ***
  Stranger of same sex                         n.a.                             0.925         12.12     ***
  Computer                                     n.a.                            -0.381          -4.58    ***
  Optimal uninformed benchmark               0.262         4.54 ***             1.071         25.15     ***

   Female dummy                               0.054          1.14              -0.057         -1.63
   Intercept                                  0.586         12.46               1.354         38.95

Number of observations                 1008 (336)                        4296 (1432)

Notes: The dependent variable is the quality of the guess. In LAB1 it equals 1 if i correctly
guesses j's top and bottom ranked juice. In LAB2 it equals 4 if i has 4 correct guesses (i.e.,
correctly guesses j's top ranked food and drink and bottom ranked food and drink), 3 if i has 3
correct guesses, etc. The omitted match category is an artificial set of observations in which
each subject guesses the partner's preferences using population frequencies as probabilities. As
a result, coefficients can be interpreted as improvement over random guessing, e.g., the
intercept is the average quality of a random guess, and the coefficient of spouse/family member
shows by the improvement of the guess relative to random guessing. We also include optimal
guessing by an uninformed subject as benchmark to facilitate comparisons. Note that this
regression corresponds to one specific vector of random guesses. The absolute value of
coefficients changes with each draw, but relative values do not. Possible variation in the
significance of coefficients (relative to random) is discussed in the text.

IN LAB1 there are 336 subjects. For each of these observations, one random guess and one
optimal uninformed guess are then added, thereby adding 336 x 2 fictitious observations. In
LAB2 subjects appear twice: once matched with their family member, and once with a stranger,
threby making 1432 observations. For each of these observations, one random guess and one
optimal uninformed guess are then added, thereby adding 1432 x 2 fictitious observations. The
role of these fictituous observations is to allow an easy comparison of actual guesses to these
two benchmarks.
Standard errors are clustered at the pair level. T-statistics significant at the 10% level are shown
in bold.




                                              30
Table 3. Respect for partner's preferences
                                       Uninformed treatment               Informed treatment
                                       Does subject pick their            Does subject pick the
LAB1 -- juice choice                   best guess for partner?            partner's top rank?
    Gender of subject Maching                 Coef.        t-stat.               Coef.        t-stat.
    Male               Stranger              -0.117         -1.13               -0.262         -2.41 **
    Female             Family                -0.173         -2.19 **            -0.059         -0.75
    Female             Stranger              -0.162         -1.56               -0.061         -0.55

    Amount given in DG game                     0.076          0.05             -0.049         -0.29
    Amount received in DG game                 -0.027         -0.18              0.151          0.91
    Intercept                                   0.710          4.83              0.560          3.48

    N. observations                               170                             166

LAB2 -- food and drink choice
   Gender of subject Maching                    Coef.        t-stat.             Coef.        t-stat.
   Male                Opposite sex            -0.036         -0.70             -0.102         -1.98 **
   Male                Same sex                -0.061         -1.23              0.060         -1.21
   Female              Family                  -0.101         -3.40 ***         -0.124         -4.08 ***
   Female              Opposite sex            -0.663         -1.51             -0.061         -1.20
   Female              Same sex                -0.029         -0.63             -0.080         -1.50

    Amount given in DG game                    -0.021        -0.44               0.055         1.05
    Amount received in DG game                  0.041         0.85              -0.144        -2.40 **
    Drink dummy                                 0.036         1.61               0.049         1.94 *
    Intercept                                   0.819        18.41               0.787        16.28

    N. observations                               1216                           1216

Standard errors clustered at the pair level. t-statistics significant at the 10% shown in bold.
LAB2 observations include family matching observations plus stranger matchings; subjects
matched with a computer are not included since computers have no preferences. Furthermore,
observations for food and drinks are combined. This means in LAB2 there are four observations
per subject: food and drink for family matching; and food and drink for stranger matching --
except for subjects matched with a computer, in which case there are two observations per
subjects: food and drink for family matching. For uninformed subjects, the dependent variable
equals 1 if the subject picks their best guess of their partner's top ranked item, and 0 otherwise.
For informed subjects, the dependent variable equals 1 if the subject picks what they know to be
their partner's top ranked item, and 0 otherwise. In LAB1, the number of informed and
uninformed subjects differs slightly due to variation in the number of subject pairs across
sessions.




                                             31
Table 4. Marginal effect of information on choice, conditional on guessing the partner's top rank
                                             Initial guess (before receiving information):
                                         Subject guessed wrong          Subject guessed right
LAB1 -- juice choice
Frequency of correct choice              Sample average                Sample average
     When uninformed                            27.1%                         73.0%
     When informed                              41.4%                         69.9%
Marginal effect of information on
probability of correct choice                     dydx     t-stat.              dydx     t-stat.
     Overall                                     14.2%       2.05 **          -5.4%       -0.64
     Male subject/family match                   55.6%       5.37 ***         24.1%        1.73 *
     Male subject/stranger match                 -1.7%      -0.14            -19.4%       -1.10
     Female subject/family match                  4.2%       0.28            -21.1%       -1.47
     Female subject/stranger match               -0.4%      -0.28             -1.4%       -0.09

     N. observations                                 204                         132

LAB2 -- food and drink choice
Frequency of correct choice               Sample average                Sample average
    When uninformed                            24.3%                         87.0%
    When informed                              38.1%                         85.9%
Marginal effect of information on
probability of correct choice                     dydx     t-stat.              dydx     t-stat.
     Overall                                     13.7%      3.94 ***           -1.1%      -0.57
     Male subject/family match                   27.4%      4.16 ***            0.0%      -0.01
     Male subject/opposite sex match             15.4%      1.59               -1.2%      -0.19
     Male subject/same sex match                  4.3%      0.40                1.8%       0.41
     Female subject/family match                  4.5%      0.74               -3.8%      -0.99
     Female subject/opposite sex match           25.0%      2.36 **             1.6%       0.23
     Female subject/same sex match                6.1%      0.61               -2.4%      -0.47

     N. observations                                 803                       1629

Marginal effects are estimated using a regression of the dependent variable on a fully interacted set
of an informed treatment dummy, a gender dummy, and dummies for each matching type. In the
regression, standard errors are clustered by subject pair. The regression is estimated separately for
subjects who incorrectly guessed the top rank of their partner, and subjects who guessed correctly.
The marginal effects of the information treatment that are reported in the Table are obtained using
the 'margins, dydx' command in Stata. t-statistics significant at the 10% level or better are reported
in bold. In LAB2 observations for food and drinks are combined. This means that in LAB2 there
areup to four observations per subject: food and drink for family matching; and food and drink for
stranger matching -- except for subjects matched with a computer, in which case there are two
observations per subjects: food and drink for family matching.




                                                32
     Table 5. Willingness to pay for agency by gender and matching type

     LAB1 -- juice choice             matching type           t-stat vs
                                   family        stranger      family
           Male subject               29.8%         25.0%        -0.69
           Female subject             22.6%         13.1%        -1.61
           t-stat. female/male         -1.03         -1.99 **

     Number of observations              336             336

                                                                          matching type
     LAB2-- food & drink                        opposite sex    t-stat vs      same sex     t-stat vs                t-stat vs
                                   family         stranger       family        stranger      family     computer      family
           Male subject               16.2%          26.7%          2.23 **         24.2%       1.69 *     21.3%         1.16
           Female subject             22.3%          44.1%          4.27 ***        36.4%       2.73 **    41.7%         3.68 ***
           t-stat. female/male          2.16 **        3.26 ***                      1.91 *                 3.29 ***




33
     Number of observations              716             236                              264                         216

     In LAB1 willingness to pay for agency equals 1 if the subject prefers half a glass of their preferred to a coin toss. In LAB2
     willingness to pay for agency equals 1 if the subject forfeits a fraction of their show-up fee to receive their top food and drink
     instead of receiving the food and drink selected by their partner. T-statistics for pairwise tests are obtained by first estimating
     a regression of demand for agency on a fully interacted set of dummies for gender and matching type with standard errors
     clustered by subject pair. LAB2 subjects play twice: matched with a family member; and matched with a stranger of the
     opposite or same sex, or with the computer. The number of observations show the number of LAB2 subjects playing the
     different matching types.
Table 6. Testing demand for ex ante instrumental agency
                                              LAB1                          LAB2
Gain from agency (instrumented):           Coef.   t-stat.               Coef.   t-stat.
   Juice / food                           -0.069    -0.27                0.136     2.32 **
   Drink                                     n.a.                       -0.940    -0.35
Cost of agency                               n.a.                       -0.001    -1.66
Matching and gender:
   Gender             Maching
   Male               Opposite sex        -0.044    -0.65                0.094        2.06    **
   Male               Same sex               n.a.                        0.087        2.05    **
   Male               Computer               n.a.                        0.034        0.73
   Female             Family              -0.068    -0.99                0.070        2.44    **
   Female             Opposite sex        -0.160    -2.47 **             0.285        5.64    ***
   Female             Same sex               n.a.                        0.207        4.46    ***
   Female             Computer               n.a.                        0.241        4.58    ***

    Intercept                                 0.312       4.01           0.153        4.87

Number of observations                          336                          1432
The Table reports IV estimates of the effect of the expected gain from agency on
willingness to pay for agency. The dependent variables is as in Table 5. At the time of
making the decision, subjects do not know what the partner has selected for them.
Instruments include a fully interacted set of dummies for gender, informed
treatment, matching type, and own top rank. In LAB1 the predicted gain in the
probability of getting preferred juice varies between 8% and 44%, with a mean of 25%
(s.d. 9%). In LAB2 the predicted gain vary between 8% and 100% for both food and
drink, with an average of 36% (s.d. 24%) for food and 34% (s.d. 26%) for drink. The
cost of agency takes values 5, 20 and 50, equally randomized across subjects.
Standard errors a clustered at the pair level. t-statistics significant at the 10% level or
better are shown in bold. For all matching types, demand for agency in LAB2 tests as
significantly higher for female than male subjects.




                                              34
Table 7. Proportion of LAB2 subjects who demand ex post agency
    Food selected by partner is:      incorrect  incorrect      correct        correct        overall
    Drink selected by partner is:     incorrect    correct    incorrect        correct        overall
Proportion of subjects who demand agency after being informed of their partner's selection for them:
    All subjects                         17.2%      20.5%         12.2%         10.8%          14.0%
    N. obs.                                250         269          230            683          1432

    Male subjects                        17.7%         22.2%        12.7%         13.9%        16.1%
    N. obs.                                136           144          126           310          716

     Female subjects                       16.7%        18.4%        11.5%          8.3%         11.9%
     N. obs.                                 114           125          104          373           716
Proportion of subjects who demand agency after being informed of their partner's selection for them:
     Among subject who demanded agency before being informed of their partner's selection
     All subjects                          52.9%        61.8%        40.7%        35.5%          45.0%
     N. obs.                                  68            76           59          166           369
     Among subject who do not demand agency before being informed of their partner's selection
     All subjects                           3.9%          4.2%         2.3%         2.9%          3.2%
     N. obs.                                 182           193          171          517          1063
Notes: Each percentage is the proportion of LAB2 subjects willing to pay for agency after having been
informed of their partner's food and drink selection for them. Subjects only make one decision
combining food and drink. The top panel reports these proportions for all subjects and by gende,
depending on whether the partner selected the correct food and drink or not. The bottom panel
breaks down these proportions between subjects who demanded agency ex ante -- i.e., before being
informed of their partner's selection for them -- and those who did not.




                                            35
Table 8. Testing demand for ex post pure agency
                                             LAB2
Gain from agency (actual)                 Coef.        t-stat.
   Food                                   0.077          3.56 ***
   Drink                                 -0.004         -0.21
Cost of agency                           -0.002         -3.89 ***
Martching and gender:
   Gender            Maching
   Male              Opposite sex         0.138          3.15 ***
   Male              Same sex             0.066          1.78 *
   Male              Computer             0.025          0.64
   Female            Family              -0.017         -0.78
   Female            Opposite sex         0.039          1.04
   Female            Same sex            -0.008         -0.25
   Female            Computer             0.049          1.24

    Intercept                                0.139       6.23

Number of observations                          1432
The Table reports OLS estimates of the effect of the actual gain
from agency on willingness to pay for agency. The dependent
variables equals 1 if the subject forfeits a fraction of the show-
up fee to receive their top ranked food and drink, and 0
otherwise. At the time of making the decision, subjects know
what the partner has selected for them. The cost of agency
takes values 5, 20 and 50, equally randomized across subjects.
Standard errors a clustered at the pair level. t-statistics
significant at the 10% level or better are shown in bold.




                          36
Table 9. Husband's willingness to delegate in the field experiment
                                                                   Coef.        t-stat.
   Husband's preference=choice he expects wife to make             0.010          2.17 **
   Treated dummy                                                   0.000         -0.01
   Intercept                                                       0.985       191.53

Number of observations
Notes: The Table reports OLS estimates of the effect of the actual loss from
delegation on willingness to delegate. The dependent variables equals 1 if the subject
is willing to delegate the choice of gift to his wife, and 0 otherwise. At the time of
making the decision, subjects do not know what the partner has selected for them,
but they have been asked to make a guess. The main regressor of interest equas 1 if
the preference of the husband is equal to the choice he expects his wife to make. t-
statistics significant at the 10% level or better are shown in bold.




                                            37
Table 10. Testing demand for ex ante instrumental agency in the field experiment
                                                         Coef.          t-stat.
     Instrumental value of agency                      -0.039            -2.01 **
     High cost of agency dummy                         -0.160          -14.92 ***
     Treated dummy                                     -0.039            -2.01 **
Preferences (purse is omitted category)
     Wallet                                             0.010             0.40
     Pencil case                                        0.178             5.28 ***
     Intercept                                          0.814           35.55

Number of observations                                         3982
Note: The Table reports OLS estimates of the value and cost of agency on
willingness to exert agency. The dependent variables equals 1 if the subject is
willing to forfeit part of a monetary participation fee, and 0 otherwise. Subjects
make two separate decisions, one for which the cost of agency is PKR50 (the
default); and the other for PKR200 (High cost of agency dummy=1). At the time of
making the decision, subjects do not know what the partner has selected for them,
but they have been asked to make a guess. The instrumental value of agency equals
1 if the preference of the wife is equal to the choice she expects her husband to
make. Standard errors a clustered at the subject level. t-statistics significant at the
10% level or better are shown in bold.




                                    38
Appendix A          Executive and Consultative Agency

  Figure A1: Share of respondents who need permission, by decision importance




                                      39
40
 Notes: Apart from the sale of jewellery represented by the bar labelled ‘jewellery’, all other questions
refer to requiring permission for purchase of the mentioned item. In LAB2, we also ask about permission
to visit friends in town or invite them home, The graph also shows 95% confidence intervals for each bar.




                                                   41
Figure A2: Share of female respondents reporting opinion taken into account: Field
experiment only




Notes: Decision categories are as follows: ‘own outcomes’ includes decisions regarding respondents’ med-
ical care, decision to work for earned income, and decision to borrow money from a MFI; ‘social visits’
include decisions to visit family members, ‘children outcomes’ refers to decisions regarding boys’ school-
ing, decisions regarding girls’ schooling, decision regarding children’s marriage and decisions regarding
children’s medical care; ‘financial decisions’ include purchase of electronic appliances for the household,
decisions about repairs of the house and decisions regarding the sale or purchase of the house; and ‘family
planning’ includes decisions about family planning.




                                                    42
   Appendix B: Proxying the instrumental value of agency
    By experimental design subject i receives their preferred bundle with probability 1
when exerting agency. In LAB1, a coin toss determines whether a subject receives their
selected juice or the juice selected for them by their partner. Let dki equal 1 if the partner
selects i’s preferred good k and 0 otherwise. The realized value of agency Ri for good k
is thus:
                                             1
                                        Rik = (1 − dki )
                                             2
where k only takes one value – juice. In LAB2, the subject receives the food and drink
their partner chooses for them, unless they pay for agency. The value of agency is then:

                                          Rik = 1 − dki

for k = {food,drink}. When deciding whether to exert agency or not, subject i does
not know dki , but they can form an expectation of the probability that dki = 1. Let this
probability be written E[dki ] = pki . The instrumental value of agency is thus the ex ante
predicted value of Rik :

                                 Vik = E[Rik ]
                                       1
                                     =   (1 − pki ) in LAB1
                                       2
                                     = 1 − pki in LAB2

    As demonstrated earlier, pki varies systematically with experimental treatments (e.g.,
matching type and information treatment) and characteristics of subject i (e.g., gender,
preference ranking) – e.g., because they affect the partner’s knowledge of i’s preference
ranking and their willingness to accomodate them. To capture this we estimate a regres-
sion model of the form:
                               XXXX
                         dki =                Dm Dn Drik Dgi + eki                    (1)
                                  m   n   r   g


where the Ds ’s are categorical variables for matching type m, information dummy n,
preference ranking of i for good k denoted rik , and gender of i denoted gi . Let pbki denote the
expected value of dki predicted from the above estimated regression, estimated separately
for LAB1 and LAB2 and for each good k. This value can then be used to obtain an
estimate Vbik of Vik for each experiment and consumption good. Equivalently, we can
regress model (1) directly on Rik to obtain an estimate of E[Rik ]. In LAB1 Vbik varies
between 8% and 44% (50% is the maximum feasible), with a mean of 25% (s.d. 9%). In
LAB2 it varies between 8% and 100% for both food and drink, with an average of 36%
(s.d. 24%) for food and 34% (s.d. 26%) for drink.
   Ex ante demand for agency Abi can then be written as:
                            X                  XX
                  Abi = α +     βk Rik + γCi +        Dm Dgi + ui                            (2)
                                  k                   m   g



                                               43
where Ci denotes experimental variation in the price of agency (only in LAB2) and where
the
P realized
    P P P   value of agency Rik is instrumented using Vbik . This is equivalent to using
  m   n   r   g Dm Dn Dri Dgi as instruments in equation (2). Gender and matching type
dummies are included as controls because they may affect agency directly – for instance
because women are reluctant to impose their own choice when matched with a male family
member.
   We also estimate a version of model (2) for ex post agency Api :
                              X                  XX
                   Api = α +      βk Rik + γCi +        Dm Dgi + ui
                               k                 m   g


Here no instrumentation/prediction is required since, by construction, i knows Rik when
deciding Api .




                                          44
Online Appendix A: Experimental
protocols
A1. First laboratory experiment
At the time of invitation, all couples were given basic information on the experiment
and details on the time, date, and expected duration of the session (2-3 hours).18 Each
couple was also informed of the compensation and expected earnings from participation:
a participation fee of Rs. 1000 ($10) (i.e., Rs. 2000 per couple), provided that they stayed
for the entire duration of the session; and additional earnings of at most Rs. 1000 ($10).
Informed consent was collected from all participants before the start of each session, and
payments were made individually and privately at the end. Male questionnaires were not
administered at the time of the RCT survey, thus data on males was collected at the time
of the experiment.


Recruitment

Half of the LAB1 female subjects (98) are drawn in 2014 from among clients of a microfi-
nance organization (the National Rural Support Programme, henceforth NRSP) partici-
pating in a randomized controlled trial (RCT). NRSP offers microenterprise loan products
in urban and peri-urban areas of Bhakkar and Chakwal in the Pakistan Punjab and tar-
gets its financial products towards middle-aged married couples. Our initial intent was to
recruit all of the LAB1 sample from the RCT sample in the Chakwal district. This proved
impossible, however, because many invited households declined to participate due to time
constraints. To make up for the shortfall, the LAB1 sample include randomly selected
couples from the same muhallas – or geographical clusters – where the RCT households
reside.19
    Women are invited to participate with their husband. In case the woman is unmarried
or the husband is absent, the subject is invited to come accompanied by the adult male
with the greatest power over household’s finances.
  18
      Each experimental session was held in a central location, at less than 20 minutes drive via public
transport from any of the sampled muhallas. To facilitate participation by employed subjects, in particular
men, we held sessions over the weekend.
   19
      More precisely, we first randomly selected from the list of female RCT participants within each
muhalla one subject to be invited to the experiment. Muhallas were used as sampling units to limt the
flow of information between participants of different sessions. We then invited to the same session one
couple from every 3rd household living on the same street as the RCT invitee. These two steps were
repeated until we found enough couples to participate in the session. 58% of the LAB1 sample is from
the original RCT sample, and the remaining 42% are randomly selected pairs from the same muhallas.




                                                    45
Sequence of events during experiment sessions

  1. Upon arrival, subject pairs are assigned to their respective gender-specific room.
     74.4% of the participants came with their spouse; 14.88% with their son and 10.72%
     with male household members (for instance, brother, brother-in-law).

  2. Each subject pair is randomly assigned to a matching treatment: either with spouse/household
     member they came with; or with stranger of opposite gender. 50.6% of the partici-
     pants were paired with family member and 49.4% are paired with a stranger.

  3. Each subject in the stranger matching treatment is assigned a partner; this is done
     without replacement, which means that all subjects in the stranger treatment have
     one partner and one partner only; by construction, the partner is not the household
     member they came with

  4. Half of the subjects are randomly assigned to the information treatment. The
     randomization is done by pair ID codes assigned at the start of the treatment.

  5. No contact is allowed between subjects of opposite genders during the entire exper-
     iment. Men and women are seated in separate rooms

  6. Subjects of the same gender are seated in compartments separated by cardboard
     sheets. Contact between subjects in the same room is strongly discouraged but not
     impossible.

  7. Preference game is always played first in each session.

       • Subjects taste small samples of the three juice flavors.
       • Subjects rank the three flavors by order of preference.
       • Subjects pick the flavor they want to receive a full glass of.
       • Subjects guess the preference ordering of their partner.
       • Subjects in the information treatment are informed of the preference order of
         their partner.
       • Subjects pick the flavor they want their partner to receive a full glass of.
       • Subjects choose whether to take half-a-glass of their selected flavor, or 50%
         chance of a full glass of their selected flavor and 50% chance of a full glass of
         the flavor selected for them by their partner.
       • A coin toss determines which flavor the subject receives.
       • Subjects consume the juice.




                                           46
 8. Subjects play the Dictator (D), Taking (T) and Ultimatum (U) activities. The order
    of play is randomized across sessions as follows:

                                Game Order     Session No.
                                  D-T-U          7,11,15,
                                  D-U-T           3,5,9
                                  T-U-D             1
                                  T-D-U             4
                                  U-D-T           2,6,8
                                  U-T-D           10,13

 9. The last activity is played. This is always the norms elicitation activity. Subjects
    answer two incentivized questions about financial autonomy of women. The two
    questions are answered twice; once the answers are matched to the spouse and once
    the answers are matched to a random stranger sitting in the next room. Subjects
    receive a fixed payoff of Rs. 250 for every question matched to a person sitting in
    the next room. Question about an ordinary purchase (scarf) is always asked before
    the question on investment decision. The order in the which answer is matched to
    either the household member or stranger is randomised. This order of matching is
    as follows:
                      Answers Matched to:          Session No.
                  Household member, Stranger 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15
                  Stranger, Household member  2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14

10. Show-up fee + pay off from randomly selected activity (DG/TG/UG/norms) is
    paid to each participant in cash. The participants are provided this case in white
    envelopes and in privacy.




                                         47
    We reproduce below the full protocol used in the experiment. The text below was read
in Urdu to all participating subjects during the experiment. Square brackets [] contain
instructions for enumerators.


Introduction to the community
Thank you [Community Head name or NRSP representative?], for organizing this meeting
and allowing us to be here.
    Also, thank you all for taking the time to be here today. My name is [experimenter’s
name], and I will be facilitating this meeting. Helping me today, we also have here
[introduce everyone]. Before we start, we would like to give you Rs     as a compensation
for your time. These Rs       are not a part of the activity and are yours to keep.
   Purpose

   • Today, we will conduct several activities in your community.

   • The purpose of these activities is to better understand how people in this community
     make decisions.

   • The results of the study may eventually be published in a scientific article or part
     of a book.

   • It is not part of a development project of any sort.

   • Your community and other communities around [Province name] were selected to
     participate from a large group of potential communities.


Activities
We will perform several tasks here today. At the end of all the tasks, we will draw a
number from this hat [show numbers and hat]. Each number represents one of the tasks
that you will have performed, number 1 for task 1, number 2 for task 2, and so on. The
number that is drawn will determine which task is paid to you. This means that every
task that you play today has the same chance of being paid to you. So you have to be
careful to choose exactly what you want for each task, because that decision can be the
one that determines your payment at the end. Is this clear to everyone? Do you have
questions on this?
    For our activities, we will select 20 participants. In a moment, I will explain how we
select the participants. Before that, I want to make some general comments. Participants
will be performing some tasks in exchange for real money that they will be able to take
home. You should understand that this is not my money. It is money given to me by
Oxford University, to use to conduct a research study.



                                           48
   • We only need 20 individuals to participate in these tasks. Thus, unfortunately, not
     all of you will be able to participate.

   • We will have a lottery to determine who will participate.

   • To complete the lottery, we will write down your name and the name of your spouse
     on a piece of paper and then, fold the paper in half.

   • Next, you will place your folded piece of paper in a bag.

   • This means that we need one piece of paper for each couple present here today.

   • We will then ask one of you to draw 10 pieces of paper from the bag containing the
     names.

   • Those whose names are drawn will stay here and participate in the tasks, while the
     others will go home.

   Is this clear to everyone? Does anyone have any questions on how we will select the
20 participants?
    Please note that the meeting may take 3-4 hours, so if you think you will not be able
to stay that long please let us know now.


Consent
   • Before we begin, I will explain the basic activities we will do together, and the rules
     that we will follow.

   • [Read Consent Statement]

   If you wish to participate, please say, “I do.” If you do not wish to participate, please
advise us. You will be free to leave then. You will not be able to stay in the activity
room(s) if you do not wish to participate.
   [Random draw of names]
   Those of you, whose names have not been called, can leave now. Thank you all for
taking the time to come today.
   [After people have left]
  You will be matched with a partner for some of the tasks that you will perform today.
Who your partner is depends on a random draw.

   • We will now ask one member of each couple to draw a card from this bag [Hold bag
     up and show its content].

   • The bag contains 5 yellow cards and 5 green cards.

                                            49
   • If you draw a yellow card, we will give you and your spouse a yellow name tag to
     wear. If you draw a green card, we will give you and your spouse a green name tag
     to wear.
   • The color of the card you draw will determine who your partner is for some of the
     tasks today.

   We will explain more about your partner later, but for now we will go around the
room for the random draw and to distribute the name tags.
   [After people have been assigned to the spouse or stranger matching]
   We will now take all women to one room, and all men to another room. Please follow
[Assistant’s name] if you are a woman, or [Assistant’s name] if you are a man.
   [Take the selected participants into the rooms and have them sit.]
   [To the participants]


Introduction to participants
Welcome, and thank you again.

   • Before we proceed any further, let me stress something that is very important.
     Many of you were invited here without understanding very much about what we
     are planning to do today. If at any time you find that this is something that you do
     not wish to participate in for any reason, you are of course free to leave at anytime.
     If you do choose to leave, you won’t be able to come back into the activity room(s)
     until everyone if finished performing all the activities.
   • Before we start, please make sure your mobile phones are switched off, to avoid
     interruptions during the meeting.
   • If you have heard about activities that have been conducted here in the past you
     should try to forget everything that you have been told. These are completely
     different tasks.
   • Please also be advised, there are no right or wrong choices, so you should choose
     whatever you think is best for yourself and not look at your neighbor’s choices. It
     is important to remember that not everyone will win the same amount in the task.
     Everyone will still receive the  payment for participation, regardless of how much
     you win in the task
   • We are about to begin. It is important that you listen as carefully as possible to the
     instructions, because only people who understand the tasks will actually be able to
     perform them. I will run through some examples to make sure you understand.
   • You cannot ask questions out loud or talk about the tasks with anyone else while
     we are here together.

                                            50
   • If you have questions at any time during the meeting, please raise your hand and
     ask, and we will come to you and answer them in private.

   • I will read through a script to explain all the activities that we will perform here
     today. As you may know, these activities are conducted in other localities beside
     this one, so it is very important that people in every locality receive exactly the
     same information, and this is the reason why I must read from this script.

   NO TALKING

   • I will now say something very important. You cannot ask questions out loud or talk
     about the tasks with anyone else while we are here together.

   • If you need to ask a question at any time, please raise your hand and I will come to
     you so I can answer your question privately.

   • I will explain the tasks, do demonstrations, and let you practice the tasks before
     we perform them for real. These demonstrations and practices are to help you
     understand the rules and clarify any questions.

   • Please be sure that you obey these rules because it is possible for one person to spoil
     the tasks for everyone by talking in front of the group. If this happens, we will not
     be able to continue forward with the tasks today and you will not be paid for the
     tasks.

   • Is this clear to everyone? Does anyone have any questions so far about what will go
     on today?

    [If anyone asks a question out loud, explain again that all questions must be asked in
private]
   REAL PAYMENT

   • In today’s activities, you will have the opportunity to receive a cash payment. The
     amount that you will receive depends on your decisions and on the decisions of
     others. It also depends on what task is selected to be paid.

   • Remember that at the end of all the activities, we will draw a number from a hat.
     That number will determine for which task you will be paid. This means that each
     task that you perform has the same chance of being selected to be paid.

   • Remember also, that in addition to what you will earn from the activities, each
     of you will receive    for participating in today’s meeting. This money is yours,
     regardless of what happens during the activities. It will be paid to you in cash
     together with your earnings from the activities.

   • It is real money, which you will be allowed to keep for yourself or do what you wish.
     This money will paid to you in cash at the end of the meeting.

                                            51
   • During the activities you will make your decisions using paper slips [show slips],
     each representing 100 Rs. These paper slips will be converted into cash when you
     get paid at the end of the meeting.

   CONFIDENTIALITY

   • Your decisions and your payment are private and confidential. Nobody, apart from
     a member of our team will know what you earned, and he/she will not tell anyone.
   • You all have a dark bag. You will have to make your decisions inside the bags, so
     that nobody else can see what you decide.


Instructions for preferences game (Task 1)
We are now ready to begin a task. Let me remind you that you may not ask questions or
talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you may raise your hand
and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your question privately. This
is NOT the same task that you just performed, so be sure to listen to the instructions
carefully.
    Who will be your partner in this task? You remember that earlier we asked you to
draw a card. Half of you drew yellow cards, the other half drew green cards. Your partner
for this task is determined by the color of the card you drew.

   • Those of you who drew a green card will be paired with a stranger in the other
     room. None of you will know exactly with whom you are paired. Only [researcher’s
     name] knows who is matched with whom, and she/he will never tell anyone. [If this
     is not the first task: Your partner in this task is the same as the one in the previous
     task.]
   • Those of you who drew a yellow card will be paired with their spouse in the other
     room.

   Do you have questions on who your partner will be in this task? If you have questions,
please raise your hand and I will come to you to answer your question privately.
   [If this is not the first task: Your partner for this task is the same as the one for the
previous task(s). That is, for those of you who drew a green card, your partner will be
the same stranger in the other room that was paired with you in the previous task(s),
while for those of you who drew a yellow card, your partner will be your spouse in the
other room.]


Part 1:

I have here three different flavors of juice – apple, pineapple and orange. Before we begin
this task, I would like you to taste each of these flavors and rank them on the basis of

                                            52
how much you like them. You should rank your favored flavor as number 1, your second-
favored flavor as number 2, and your least favored flavor as number 3. You cannot rank
two flavors equally. My assistant(s) will offer you a sample of the three flavors of juice, and
then you should write down your ranking on the sheet we will provide you. [Distribute
a sheet with pictures of the 3 fruits, subjects should write a number next to each fruit
representing the ranking.]
   Does anyone have any questions? Please raise your hand and my assistant or I will
come and address your query.


Part 2:

Your partner in the other room has also been asked to rank the three flavors of juice. We
would like you to guess your partner’s ranking. We will now distribute a sheet, where you
can write your guess. We will give you Rs.        for guessing correctly! This money will
be paid to you at the end of all activities, on top of your earnings from the task that is
randomly selected to be paid.


Part 3:

Now, we will distribute to half of you a sheet, containing the ranking given by your
partner. The others will not know how your partner ranked the juice flavors.
   [The experimenter and assistants distribute to a randomly selected half of participants
(half from each group) the partner’s ranking sheet.]
   Now I would like for you to make two decisions:

   • Choose what flavor you would like to consume.

   • Choose a flavor for your partner to consume. It does not have to be the same flavor
     that you choose for yourself, nor it must necessarily be your partner’s preferred
     flavor, if you know it.

   • In the other room, your partner is being asked to do the same.

   • There is a fifty percent chance that you will be given the flavor that you chose
     for yourself, and a fifty percent chance that you will be given the flavor that your
     partner chose for you. Similarly, your partner has a fifty percent chance to be given
     the flavor that he or she chose for him or herself, and a fifty percent chance to be
     given the flavor that you chose for him or her.

   • Neither you nor your partner will be able to exchange the juice you are given with
     anyone else.

    Shall we begin? Does anyone have any questions? Please raise your hand and my
assistant or I will come and address your query.

                                              53
   We will now distribute a decision sheet, where you can mark your choices [Distribute
a decision sheet, with space to record one choice for the subject and one for the partner]
   Please fill in your choice in the sheet of paper in front of you and fold it to let us know
you are done. My assistants and I will come and collect your decision sheet.


Part 4:

We will now call you one by one to the back of the room and give you your juice. We will
fill a large glass of juice for you [Show glass: the glass should be opaque, so that others
cannot see how much juice is in it]. Remember, there is a fifty percent chance that you
will get your favorite flavor, and a fifty percent chance that you will get the flavor that
your partner picked for you. How will we decide if you’ll get your favorite flavor or your
partner’s pick? We will toss a coin when we come to you. If the coin toss yields heads,
then you will be given your favorite flavor; if tails, your partner’s pick.
   When we call you to give you your juice, before knowing whether you’ll get your
favorite flavor or your partner’s pick for you (i.e. before tossing the coin), we will give
you the opportunity to make sure you get your favorite flavor.
    How? If you are willing to give up some of the juice, we will give you your favorite
flavor of juice for sure. So, if you choose to have your favorite juice for sure, you will be
given only half a glass of it. If instead you choose to have your favorite juice with a fifty
percent chance, or your partner’s pick with a fifty percent chance, then you’ll be given a
full glass of it.
   We will now call you one by one.
    [At individual meetings] Here I have the piece of paper with your ranking of the juice
flavors, another piece of paper with your partner’s pick for you, and a coin that I will toss
to determine if you will get one full glass of your favorite flavor or of your partner’s pick.
    Would you like me to toss the coin and get a full glass of juice, or would you like to
get your half a glass of your favorite flavor for sure? [record decision and implement it].


Instructions for dictator game (Task 2)
[Note: before each session, the order of tasks 1-3 is randomized]
   We are now ready to begin another/the first task. Let me remind you that you may
not ask questions or talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you
may raise your hand and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your
question privately. [If this is not the first task] This is NOT the same task that you just
performed, so be sure to listen to the instructions carefully.

   • This task is performed by pairs of individuals. Each pair is made up of a Player 1
     and a Player 2. We will play two rounds of this task.


                                             54
   • Each of you will perform this task with someone from the other room.

   • Who your partner is depends on the color of the card you drew earlier, as I will
     explain to you shortly.

   • [researcher’s name] will provide $10 to Player 1 in each pair of players..

   • Player 1 must decide how to divide this money between himself or herself and Player
     2. Player 1 may allocate between $0 and $10 to Player 2.

   • Player 2 takes home whatever Player 1 allocates to them, and Player 1 takes home
     whatever he or she does not allocate to Player 2.

    Who will be your partner in this task? You remember that earlier we asked you to
draw a card. Half of you drew yellow cards, the other half drew green cards. Your partner
for this task is determined by the color of the card you drew.

   • Those of you who drew a green card are paired with a stranger in the other room.
     None of you will know exactly with whom you are paired. Only [researcher’s name]
     knows who is matched with whom, and she/he will never tell anyone.

   • Those of you who drew a yellow card are paired with your spouse in the other room.

   Do you have questions on who your partner is for this task? If you have questions,
please raise your hand and I will come to you to answer your question privately.
    [If this is not the first task: Your partner for this task is the same as the one for the
previous task(s). That is, for those of you who drew a green card, your partner is the
same stranger in the other room that was paired with you in the previous task(s), while
for those of you who drew a yellow card, your partner is your spouse in the other room.]
   We now run through 5 examples to show how the task might be performed.
    [Notes: the researchers and assistants work through the examples and test questions
with paper slips, each representing a 100 Rs note, on a flat surface with a line drawn on it
demarcating the areas assigned to Players 1 and 2. Each of the examples presented below
is presented either as an example or used as a test question as required. If more test
questions are needed the researcher or assistant begin again with the first example above.
The script below is written assuming that 6 more examples were given, 3 presented as
test scenarios/practice rounds, i.e., the subjects are asked questions about the amounts
the subjects would take home. The 11 examples/tests – 5 above, 6 below – cover the full
set of possible choices for Player 1.]

  1. Here is the $10. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $9 to Player 2. Then,
     Player 2 will go home with $9 and Player 1 will go home with $1 ($10 minus $9
     equals $1).



                                             55
  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $2 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $2 and Player 1 will go home with $8 ($10 minus
     $2 equals $8).

  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $5 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $5 and Player 1 will go home with $5 ($10 minus
     $5 equals $5).

  4. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $7 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $7 and Player 1 will go home with $3 ($10 minus
     $7 equals $3).

  5. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate zero to Player
     2. Then, Player 2 will go home with zero and Player 1 will go home with $10 ($10
     minus zero equals $10).

   [The experimenter and assistants hand out two envelopes for each subject. Each
envelope features the subject’s ID. The two envelopes are of different color. Moreover,
Player 1’s [2’s] envelope has a 1 [2] written on it.]
    We will now practice the task together. You will first practice the task as Player 1.
You have been handed two envelopes. The yellow [or other color] one with 10 paper slips
in it is the one that determines Player 1’s payment. The other envelope, the blue [or
other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will determine the payment to
Player 2. As we work through the following examples, please put the paper slips into the
empty envelope as indicated by the examples. We will walk around the room to check if
your allocation matches the one from the example. This is important, because it allows
us to make sure that everyone understands the task and how to make the decision.
   Here are some more examples [The experiment assistants go around the room to check
that subjects correctly place the paper slips into the envelopes. The experimenter explains
the task again if mistakes are discovered]:

  1. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $10 to Player 2. Please place the paper
     slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. How much will Player 2
     go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with? [Player 2 will go home
     with $10 and Player 1 will go home with zero ($10 minus $10 equals zero).]

  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $4 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?
     [Player 2 will go home with $4 and Player 1 will go home with $6 ($10 minus $4
     equals $6).]

  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate $6 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?


                                            56
      [ Player 2 will go home with $6 and Player 1 will go home with $4 ($10 minus $6
      equals $4).]

  4. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate $1 to Player 2. Please place the paper
     slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this case, how much
     will Player 1 go home with? [$9] And how much will Player 2 go home with? [$1]

  5. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate $8 to Player 2. Please
     place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this
     case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$2] And how much will Player 2 go
     home with? [$8].

  6. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate $3 to Player 2. Please
     place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this
     case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$7]. And how much will Player 2 go
     home with? [$3].

   • [Before each session, the order of rounds is randomly determined] You will all per-
     form one round as player 1 and one round as player 2. You will first perform the
     task as Player 1 [or 2, depending on randomization], and then perform the task as
     Player 2 [or 1].

   • We don’t know yet whether you will be paid for this task, nor whether you will be
     paid for your decisions as Player 1 or as Player 2. How will we choose whether to
     pay you for this task, and whether to pay you as Player 1 or Player 2? After we
     have finished performing all the tasks, we will first draw a number from the hat
     [show again numbers and hat] to determine which task will be paid. If we draw the
     number 1 from the hat, then it means that this task is the one selected to be paid.
     If so, we will toss a coin: if heads come up then you will be paid as Player 1; if tails
     come up, we will pay you as Player 2.

    [For Player 1s] You will now perform the task as Player 1. You have been handed
two envelopes. The yellow [or other color] one with 10 paper slips in it is the one that
determines your payment. The other envelope, the blue [or other color] one, is empty and
the paper slips you put in it will determine the payment to Player 2. Please put the paper
slips you want to give to player to the empty envelope. Please make sure your choice is
not observed by others in the room. You must now wait while the rest of the players,
finish performing the task. [If Player 1 is selected to be the first role to be played] Then
we will play the second round of this task, where you are Player 2.
   [The experimenter and assistants collect the envelopes.]
   [For Player 2s] You will now perform the task as Player 2. Player 1 in the other room
who has been matched with you has allocated a sum of money to you. After we finish
performing all the activities, if this task and the role of Player 2 is the one selected to be
paid I will pay you what Player 1 has allocated to you.


                                             57
    We will now perform another task/We will now take a break. [Researcher’s name] will
pay you for this task [point to the pile of envelopes to demonstrate the amount] after we
finish all the tasks, if this task is the one selected to be paid.


Instructions for taking game (Task 3)
We are now ready to begin another/the first task. Let me remind you that you may not
ask questions or talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you
may raise your hand and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your
question privately. [If this is not the first task: This is NOT the same task that you just
performed, so be sure to listen to the instructions carefully.]

   • This task is performed by pairs of individuals. Each pair is made up of a Player 1
     and a Player 2. We will play two rounds of this task.

   • Each of you will perform this task with someone from the other room.

   • Who your partner will be depends on the color of the card you drew earlier, as I
     will explain to you shortly.

   • [researcher’s name] will provide $10 to Player 2 in each pair of players..

   • Player 1 (not Player 2) decides how to divide this money between himself or herself
     and Player 2. Player 1 must allocate between $0 and $10 to himself, leaving the
     rest for player 2.

   • Player 2 takes home whatever Player 1 leaves them with, and Player 1 takes home
     whatever he or she does not leave to Player 2.

    Who will be your partner in this task? You remember that earlier we asked you to
draw a card. Half of you drew yellow cards, the other half drew green cards. Your partner
for this task is determined by the color of the card you drew.

   • Those of you who drew a green card will be paired with a stranger in the other
     room. None of you will know exactly with whom you are paired. Only [researcher’s
     name] knows who is matched with whom, and she/he will never tell anyone. [If this
     is not the first task: Your partner in this task is the same as the one in the previous
     task.]

   • Those of you who drew a yellow card will be paired with their spouse in the other
     room.

   Do you have questions on who your partner will be in this task? If you have questions,
please raise your hand and I will come to you to answer your question privately.


                                            58
   [If this is not the first task: Your partner for this task is the same as the one for the
previous task(s). That is, for those of you who drew a green card, your partner will be
the same stranger in the other room that was paired with you in the previous task(s),
while for those of you who drew a yellow card, your partner will be your spouse in the
other room.]
   We will now run through 5 examples to show you how the task might be performed:
    [Notes: the researchers and assistants work through the examples and test questions
with paper slips, each representing a 100 Rs note, on a flat surface with a line drawn on it
demarcating the areas assigned to Players 1 and 2. Each of the examples presented below
is presented either as an example or used as a test question as required. If more test
questions are needed the researcher or assistant begin again with the first example above.
The script below is written assuming that 6 more examples were given, 3 presented as
test scenarios/practice rounds, i.e., the subjects are asked questions about the amounts
the subjects would take home. The 11 examples/tests – 5 above, 6 below – cover the full
set of possible choices for Player 1.]

  1. Here is the $10 given to Player 2. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $9 to
     Player 2. Then, Player 2 will go home with $9 and Player 1 will go home with $1
     ($10 minus $9 equals $1).

  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $2 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $2 and Player 1 will go home with $8 ($10 minus
     $2 equals $8).

  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $5 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $5 and Player 1 will go home with $5 ($10 minus
     $5 equals $5).

  4. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $7 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with $7 and Player 1 will go home with $3 ($10 minus
     $7 equals $3).

  5. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave zero to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with zero and Player 1 will go home with $10 ($10
     minus zero equals $10).

   [The experimenter and assistants hand out two envelopes for each subject. Each
envelope features the subject’s ID. The two envelopes are of different color. Moreover,
Player 1’s [2’s] envelope has a 1 [2] written on it.]
    We will now practice the task together. You will first practice the task as Player 2.
You have been handed two envelopes. The blue [or other color] one with 10 paper slips
in it is the one that determines Player 2’s payment. The other envelope, the yellow [or
other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will determine the payment to
Player 1. As we work through the following examples, please put the paper slips into the
empty envelope as indicated by the examples. We will walk around the room to check if

                                            59
your allocation matches the one from the example. This is important, because it allows
us to make sure that everyone understands the task and how to make the decision.
   Here are some more examples [The experiment assistants go around the room to check
that subjects correctly place the paper slips into the envelopes. The experimenter explains
the task again if mistakes are discovered]:

  1. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $10 to Player 2. Please place the paper slips
     into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. How much will Player 2 go
     home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with? [Player 2 will go home
     with $10 and Player 1 will go home with zero ($10 minus $10 equals zero).]

  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $4 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?
     [Player 2 will go home with $4 and Player 1 will go home with $6 ($10 minus $4
     equals $6).]

  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to leave $6 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?
     [Player 2 will go home with $6 and Player 1 will go home with $4 ($10 minus $6
     equals $4).]

  4. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to leave $1 to Player 2. In this case, how much will
     Player 1 go home with? [$9] And how much will Player 2 go home with? [$1]

  5. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to leave $8 to Player 2. Please
     place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this
     case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$2] And how much will Player 2 go
     home with? [$8].

  6. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to leave $3 to Player 2. Please
     place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this
     case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$7]. And how much will Player 2 go
     home with? [$3].

   • [Before each session, the order of rounds is randomly determined] You will all per-
     form one round as Player 1 and one round as Player 2. You will first perform the
     task as Player 1 [or 2, depending on randomization], and then perform the task as
     Player 2 [or 1].

   • We don’t know yet whether you will be paid for this task, nor whether you will be
     paid for your decisions as Player 1 or as Player 2. How will we choose whether to
     pay you for this task, and whether to pay you as Player 1 or Player 2? After we
     have finished performing all the tasks, we will first draw a number from the hat
     [show again numbers and hat] to determine which task will be paid. If we draw the

                                            60
      number 1 from the hat, then it means that this task is the one selected to be paid.
      If so, we will toss a coin: if heads come up then you will be paid as Player 1; if tails
      come up, we will pay you as Player 2.

   [For Player 1s] You will now perform the task as Player 1. You have been handed two
envelopes. The blue [or other color] one with 10 paper slips in it is the one that determines
Player 2’s payment. The other envelope, the yellow [or other color] one, is empty and the
paper slips you put in it will determine your payment. Please put the paper slips you
want to allocate to yourself in the empty envelope. Please make sure your choice is not
observed by others in the room. You must now wait while the rest of the players, finish
performing the task. [If Player 1 is selected to be the first role to be played] Then we will
play the second round of this task, where you are Player 2.
   [The experimenter and assistants collect the envelopes.]
   [For Player 2s] You will now perform the task as Player 2. Player 1 in the other
room who has been matched with you has left you with a sum of money. After we finish
performing all the activities, if this task and the role of Player 2 is the one selected to be
paid I will pay you what Player 1 has left you with.
    We will now perform another task/We will now take a break. [Researcher’s name] will
pay you for this task [point to the pile of envelopes to demonstrate the amount] after we
finish all the tasks, if this task is the one selected to be paid.


Instructions for ultimatum game (Task 4)
We are now ready to begin another/the first task. Let me remind you that you may not
ask questions or talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you may
raise your hand and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your question
privately. [If this is not the first task: This is NOT the same task that you just played,
so be sure to listen to the instructions carefully.]

   • This task is performed by pairs of individuals. Each pair is made up of a Player 1
     and a Player 2. We will play two rounds of this task.
   • Each of you will perform this task with someone from the other room.
   • Who your partner will be depends on the color of the card you drew earlier, as I
     will explain to you shortly.
   • [researcher’s name] will provide $10 to Player 1 in each pair of players..
   • Player 1 decides how to divide this money between him or herself and Player 2.
     Player 1 must allocate between $0 and $10 to himself, leaving the rest for Player 2.
   • Before hearing the offer made to them by Player 1, Player 2 has to state whether
     he or she would accept or reject each of the possible offers between $0 and $10 that
     Player 1 could have made.

                                             61
   • If Player 2 has stated that he or she would accept Player 1’s offer, then Player 2
     gets the amount of the offer and Player 1 gets the remainder. If Player 2 has stated
     that he or she would reject Player 1’s offer, then Player 1 and Player 2 receive no
     money for this task.

    Who will be your partner in this task? You remember that earlier we asked you to
draw a card. Half of you drew yellow cards, the other half drew green cards. Your partner
for this task is determined by the color of the card you drew.

   • Those of you who drew a green card will be paired with a stranger in the other
     room. None of you will know exactly with whom you are paired. Only [researcher’s
     name] knows who is matched with whom, and she/he will never tell anyone. [If this
     is not the first task: Your partner in this task is the same as the one in the previous
     task.]

   • Those of you who drew a yellow card will be paired with their spouse in the other
     room.

   Do you have questions on who your partner will be in this task? If you have questions,
please raise your hand and I will come to you to answer your question privately.
   [If this is not the first task: Your partner for this task is the same as the one for the
previous task(s). That is, for those of you who drew a green card, your partner will be
the same stranger in the other room that was paired with you in the previous task(s),
while for those of you who drew a yellow card, your partner will be your spouse in the
other room.]
   We will now run through 5 examples to show you how the task might be performed:
    [Notes: the researchers and assistants work through the examples and test questions
with paper slips, each representing a 100 Rs note, on a flat surface with a line drawn on it
demarcating the areas assigned to Players 1 and 2. Each of the examples presented below
is presented either as an example or used as a test question as required. If more test
questions are needed the researcher or assistant begin again with the first example above.
The script below is written assuming that 6 more examples were given, 3 presented as
test scenarios/practice rounds, i.e., the subjects are asked questions about the amounts
the subjects would take home. The 11 examples/tests – 5 above, 6 below – cover the full
set of possible choices for Player 1.]

  1. Here is the first example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $9 to Player 2. Now, before
     hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $9 from
     Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
     possible offers that Player 1 might have made, but we will not worry about that
     now.) Because Player 2 said he would reject $9, Player 1 goes home with nothing
     and Player 2 goes home with nothing.


                                            62
2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $9 to Player 2. Now, before
   hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $9 from
   Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
   possible offers that Player 1 might have made, but we will not worry about that
   now.) In this case, Player 1 goes home with $1 ($10 minus $9 equals $1) and Player
   2 goes home $9.

3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $2 to Player 2. Now, before
   hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $2 from
   Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
   possible offers that Player 1 might have made, but we will not worry about that
   now.) Because Player 2 said he would accept this offer, Player 1 goes home with $8
   ($10 minus $2 equals $8), and Player 2 goes home with $2.

4. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $2 to Player 2. But now,
   before hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $2
   from Player 1. (Player 2 also stated whether he would accept or reject each of the
   other possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about
   that now.) In this case, Player 1 goes home with nothing, and Player 2 also goes
   home with nothing.

5. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $5 to Player 2. Now, before
   hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $5 from
   Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
   possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that
   now.) Because Player 2 said he would reject an offer of $5 from Player, Player 1
   goes home with nothing and Player 2 goes home with nothing.

6. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $5 to Player 2. Now, before
   hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $5 from
   Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether they would accept or reject all the other
   possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that
   now.) In this case, Player 1 goes home with $5 ($10 minus $5 is $5) and Player 2
   goes home with $5.

7. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $7 to Player 2. Now, before
   hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $7 from
   Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
   possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that
   now.) Because Player 2 said he would accept an offer of $7, Player 1 goes home
   with $3 ($10 minus $7 equals $3). And Player 2 goes home with $7.

8. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $7 to Player 2. But now,
   before hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $7
   from Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the
   other possible offers that Player 1 might have made, but we will not worry about


                                         63
     that now.) In this case, Player 1 goes home with nothing, and Player 2 goes home
     with nothing.

  9. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $0 to Player 2. Now, before
     hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $0 from
     Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other
     possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that
     now.) Because Player 2 said he would accept $0 from Player 1, Player 1 goes home
     with $10 ($10 minus zero is $10) and Player 2 goes home with nothing.

 10. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 offers $0 to Player 2. But this time,
     before hearing about this offer, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of
     $0 from Player 1. (Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the
     other possible offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about
     that now.) In this case, Player 1 goes home with nothing and Player 2 goes home
     with nothing.

   [The experimenter and assistants hand out two envelopes for each subject. Each
envelope features the subject’s ID. The two envelopes are of different color. Moreover,
Player 1’s [2’s] envelope has a 1 [2] written on it.]
   We will now practice the task together.
    To practice the round of the task in which you have the role of Player 1, you have
been handed two envelopes. The yellow [or other color] one with 10 paper slips in it is
the one that determines what Player 1’s proposes to keep for him or herself. The other
envelope, the blue [or other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will
determine the offer you make to Player 2. As we work through the following examples,
please put the paper slips into the empty envelope as indicated by the examples. We will
walk around the room to check if your allocation matches the one from the example. This
is important, because it allows us to make sure that everyone understands the task and
how to make the decision.
   Here are some more examples [The experiment assistants go around the room to check
that subjects correctly place the paper slips into the envelopes. The experimenter explains
the task again if mistakes are discovered]:

  1. Imagine that Player 1 offers $10 to Player 2. Now, before hearing about this, Player
     2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $10 from Player 1. Player 2 has also
     stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible offers that Player 1
     could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then Player 1 goes home
     with nothing and Player 2 goes home with nothing.

  2. Imagine now that Player 1 offers $10 to Player 2. But this time, before hearing
     about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $10 from Player
     1. Player 2 has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible
     offers that Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then


                                             64
    Player 1 goes home with nothing ($10 minus $10 equals zero (nothing)) and Player
    2 goes home with $10.

 3. Imagine that Player 1 offers $4 to Player 2. Now, before hearing about this, Player
    2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $4 from Player 1. Player 2 has also
    stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible offers that Player 1
    could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then, Player 1 goes home
    with $6 ($10 minus $4 equals $6). And Player 2 goes home with $4.

 4. Imagine again that Player 1 offers $4 to Player 2. Now, before hearing about this,
    Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $4 from Player 1. Player 2
    has also stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible offers that
    Player 1 could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then, Player 1
    goes home with nothing. And, Player 2 goes home with nothing.

 5. Imagine that Player 1 offers $6 to Player 2. Now, before hearing about this, Player
    2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $6 from Player 1. Player 2 has also
    stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible offers that Player 1
    could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then Player 1 goes home
    with nothing and Player 2 goes home with nothing.

 6. Imagine that Player 1 offers $6 to Player 2. Now, before hearing about this, Player
    2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $6 from Player 1. Player 2 has also
    stated whether he would accept or reject all the other possible offers that Player 1
    could have made, but we will not worry about that now. Then Player 1 goes home
    with $4 ($10 minus $6 equals $4). And Player 2 goes home with $6.
    Test question formats:

 7. Suppose that Player 1 offers $1 to Player 2 and that, before hearing about this,
    Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $1. In this case, how much will
    Player 1 go home with? [$9] And how much will Player 2 go home with? [$1].

 8. And what if, before hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an
    offer of $1. In this case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [nothing] And how
    much will Player 2 go home with? [nothing]

 9. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 offers $8 to Player 2 and that, before
    hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept an offer of $8. In this
    case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$2] And how much will Player 2 go
    home with? [$8].

10. And what if, before hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an
    offer of $8. In this case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [nothing] And how
    much will Player 2 go home with? [nothing]

11. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 offers $3 to Player 2 and that, before
    hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would reject an offer of $3. In this


                                          65
     case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$0] And how much will Player 2 go
     home with? [$0]

 12. And what if, before hearing about this, Player 2 has stated that he would accept
     an offer of $3. In this case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [$7] And how
     much will Player 2 go home with? [$3]

    To practice the round of the task in which you have the role of Player 2, you have
been handed a decision sheet. The decision sheet shows you the 11 possible allocations
that Player 1 can offer to Player 2. For each possible allocation, Player 2 has to decide
whether he would accept that offer or not. If an offer is accepted, Player 1 and Player 2
are paid according to the corresponding allocation. If an offer is not accepted, then both
players are paid 0 for this task. Player 2 decides whether to accept or reject an offer by
ticking the yes or no box next to the offer.
     Now please practice the round of the task in which you have the role of Player 2 by
filling out the decision sheet, accepting or rejecting each possible offer made by Player 1.
We will walk around the room to check if you have any problems filling out the decision
sheet. This is important, because it allows us to make sure that everyone understands
the task and how to make the decision.

   • [Before each session, the order of rounds is randomly determined] You will all per-
     form one round as player 1 and one round as player 2. You will first perform the
     task as Player 1 [or 2, depending on randomization], and then perform the task as
     Player 2 [or 1].

   • We don’t know yet whether you will be paid for this task, nor whether you will be
     paid for your decisions as Player 1 or as Player 2. How will we choose whether to
     pay you for this task, and whether to pay you as Player 1 or Player 2? After we
     have finished performing all the tasks, we will first draw a number from the hat
     [show again numbers and hat] to determine which task will be paid. If we draw the
     number 1 from the hat, then it means that this task is the one selected to be paid.
     If so, we will toss a coin: if heads come up then you will be paid as Player 1; if tails
     come up, we will pay you as Player 2.

    [For Player 1s] You will now perform the task as Player 1. You have been handed
two envelopes. The yellow [or other color] one with 10 paper slips in it is the one that
determines what you propose to keep for yourself . The other envelope, the blue [or other
color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will determine the offer you make
to Player 2. Please put the paper slips you want to give to player to the empty envelope.
Please make sure your choice is not observed by others in the room. You must now wait
while the rest of the players finish performing the task. [If Player 1 is selected to be the
first role to be played] Then we will play the second round of this task, where you are
Player 2.
   [The experimenter and assistants collect the envelopes.]

                                            66
    [For Player 2s] You are a Player 2. Player 1 has allocated a sum of money to you. This
money is in an envelope filled by someone in the other room. Before you know Player 1’s
offer to you, tell me for each possible offer Player 1 could make whether you would accept
or reject it [ Hand subjects a sheet with different possible offer and have them select the
ones they will accept and those they will reject. Each decision sheet is marked with the
subject ID]. These decisions will determine what you actually receive once we see what
Player 1 has offered you. Please note that you will not get a chance to change your mind
after the envelope has been handed over. [Occasionally, when it seemed necessary, the
players were given the following reminder. . . ] Remember that Player 1’s offer is already
in an envelope. Nothing you decide now can change what is in it.
   Now please make your decisions by filling out the decision sheet, accepting or rejecting
each possible offer made by Player 1. Then fold the decision sheet in half, so that nobody
can see your choices, and we will come to collect them.
   [The experimenter and assistants collect the decision sheets, which depict graphically
the following allocations and questions:

  1. If Player 1 offered you $10 and kept $0 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  2. If Player 1 offered you $9 and kept $1 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  3. If Player 1 offered you $8 and kept $2 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  4. If Player 1 offered you $7 and kept $3 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  5. If Player 1 offered you $6 and kept $4 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  6. If Player 1 offered you $5 and kept $5 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  7. If Player 1 offered you $4 and kept $6 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  8. If Player 1 offered you $3 and kept $7 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

  9. If Player 1 offered you $2 and kept $8 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

 10. If Player 1 offered you $1 and kept $9 for him or herself would you accept or reject?

 11. If Player 1 offered you $0 and kept $10 for him or herself would you accept or reject?]

    We will now perform another tasks/We will now take a break. [Researcher’s name]
will pay you for this task [point to the pile of envelopes to demonstrate the amount] after
we finish all the tasks, if this task is the one selected to be paid.




                                            67
Instructions for Norm Elicitation game (Task 5)
For this task, I will read to you descriptions of a series of situations. These descriptions
correspond to situations in which one person, a woman, must make a decision. For each
situation, you will be given a description of the decision faced by the woman. After
I read to you the description of the decision, I will describe a choice that the woman
might have made, and you should decide whether making that choice would be “socially
appropriate” or “socially inappropriate” . or By socially appropriate, we mean behavior
that is consistent with moral or proper behavior, that is, behavior that most people agree
is the “correct” or “moral” thing to do. Another way to think about what we mean is
that, if someone were to make a socially inappropriate choice, then someone observing
the person’s behavior might think poorly of that person or even get angry at that person.
   In each of your responses, we would like you to answer as truthfully as possible,
based on your opinions of what constitutes socially appropriate or socially inappropriate
behavior.
    To give you an idea of how the experiment will proceed, we will go through an example
and show you how you will indicate your responses. I will now read to you an example of
a situation. These cards that I am holding illustrate the situation and the decision sheet.
[Experimenter illustrates the situation using a vignette, to make it easier for subjects to
understand the situation].
   Someone is at a local grocery store. While there, the person notices that someone
has left a wallet/bag on the counter. How appropriate would it be to take the wallet for
yourself?
   If this were the situation we asked you about in the study, you would indicate the
extent to which you believe taking the wallet would be ”socially appropriate” or ”socially
inappropriate” . Recall that by socially appropriate we mean behavior that most people
agree is the ”correct” or ”moral” thing to do.
    You should indicate your choice by filling the decision sheet [Hold up a reproduction
of the decision sheet, where the answers are pictured using smiley faces/thumbs up or
down]. As you can see, the decision sheet has four symbols on it:

   • 2 thumbs down, corresponding to “very socially inappropriate”

   • 1 thumb down, corresponding to “somewhat socially inappropriate”

   • 1 thumb up, corresponding to “somewhat socially appropriate”

   • and 2 thumbs up, corresponding to “very socially appropriate”.

   This is to help you recognize and remember what each of these options mean.
    For example, suppose you thought that taking the wallet was very socially inappro-
priate. Then, you would indicate your response by selecting the last symbol, the one with
the two thumbs down on the decision sheet.

                                            68
    Are there any questions about this example situation or about how to indicate your
responses? I will now read to you several situations, all dealing with decisions that a
woman might have to make. I will illustrate these situations using vignettes. For each
of the choices, I would like you to think whether making that choice is very socially
inappropriate, somewhat socially inappropriate, somewhat socially appropriate, or very
socially appropriate for a woman to make. To indicate your response, you would place a
check mark on the corresponding symbol on the decision sheet [Hold up reproduction of
decision sheet again].
   How will you get paid for this task? If this task is the one selected to be paid, we will
pay you Rs 250 for each of your answers that matches the answer of someone in the other
room, in addition to your participation fee. For instance, suppose the example situation
above is part of this task, and this task is selected to be paid.

   • Suppose your response was ”somewhat socially appropriate,”. Then you will receive
     Rs 250 for this question if the answer given by the person in the other room is also
     “somewhat socially appropriate”.

   • Suppose your response was “socially inappropriate”. Then you will receive Rs 250
     for this question if the answer given by the person in the other room is also “socially
     inappropriate”.

   Otherwise you would receive only the Rs 1000 participation fee.
   Who is the person in the other room, whose answers is compared to your to determine
your earnings from this task? It is a different person for each different question. We will
explain exactly who this person is when we present each situation.
   Do you have any questions? If you have any questions, please raise your hand and
wait for the experimenter to come to you.


Question 1

We will now describe the first situation.
   Imagine that a woman can buy a scarf for herself using money she has been given by
her parents as a gift. She wants to buy a scarf. Her husband offers to go and buy the
scarf for her. She can let the husband go shopping for her, or she can go herself. She
decides to go shopping by herself.
   How appropriate do you think it is for the woman to buy the scarf by herself? Do you
think her decision is very socially appropriate, somewhat socially appropriate, somewhat
socially inappropriate or very socially inappropriate? Tick the corresponding box in the
answer sheet in front of you.
    You will receive Rs 250 for this question only if your answer matches that of a randomly
selected person in the other room, different from your spouse.


                                            69
Question 2

I will now tell you about another situation, also dealing with a decision that a woman
might have to make. Again, I would like you to think whether making that choice is very
socially inappropriate, somewhat socially inappropriate, somewhat socially appropriate,
or very socially appropriate. To indicate your response, you would place a check mark on
the corresponding symbol on the decision sheet.
   Imagine that a woman is running a business from her home. At the end of the month,
she has some profits to re-invest. She can ask her husband to re-invest them for her, or
she can choose herself, without consulting him. She decides to re-invest her profits in
what she thinks best, without consulting her husband.
   How appropriate do you think it is for the woman to make the investment decision
on her own? Do you think her decision is very socially appropriate, somewhat socially
appropriate, somewhat socially inappropriate or very socially inappropriate? Tick the
corresponding box in the answer sheet in front of you.
    You will receive Rs 250 for this question only if your answer matches that of a randomly
selected person in the other room, different from your spouse.


Question 3

We will now describe another situation. This situation is the same as the first one, only
this time your payment for this question is determined in a different way, so pay attention.
   Imagine that a woman can buy a piece of clothing for herself, using money she has
been given by her parents as a gift. She wants to buy a scarf. Her husband offers to go
and buy the scarf for her. She can let the husband go shopping for her, or she can go
herself. She decides to go shopping by herself.
   How appropriate do you think it is for the woman to buy the scarf by herself? Do you
think her decision is very socially appropriate, somewhat socially appropriate, somewhat
socially inappropriate or very socially inappropriate? Tick the corresponding box in the
answer sheet in front of you.
   You will receive Rs 250 for this question only if your answer matches that of your
spouse in the other room. So note the difference with respect to the first question: there,
you would get paid if your answer matched that of a randomly selected person in the
other room, different from your spouse. Now, you will get paid for this question if your
answer matched that of your spouse in the other room.


Question 4

We will now describe another situation. This situation is the same as the second one,
only this time your payment for this question is determined in a different way, so pay
attention.


                                            70
   Imagine that a woman is running a business from her home. At the end of the month,
she has some profits to re-invest. She can ask her husband to re-invest them for her, or
she can choose herself, without consulting him. She decides to re-invest her profits in
what she thinks best, without consulting her husband.
   How appropriate do you think it is for the woman to make the investment decision
on her own? Do you think her decision is very socially appropriate, somewhat socially
appropriate, somewhat socially inappropriate or very socially inappropriate? Tick the
corresponding box in the answer sheet in front of you.
   You will receive Rs 250 for this question only if your answer matches that of your
spouse in the other room. So note the difference with respect to the first question: there,
you would get paid if your answer matched that of a randomly selected person in the
other room, different from your spouse. Now, you will get paid for this question if your
answer matched that of your spouse in the other room.


Final Instructions
We have now completed all the tasks. We will now draw one number from this bag to
determine which task will be paid [ask one participant to draw a number in front of all
other subjects. If task 2, 3 or 4 is drawn, then toss a coin to determine whether they will
be paid as Player 1 or 2].
   We will now call you one by one to give you your payment. Then you are free to leave.
    Thank you all very much for participating in today’s activities! Please don’t hesitate
to ask us questions if you have doubts before you leave.




                                            71
A2. Second Laboratory Experiment
The study population differs from that of LAB1, in that the experiments were carried out
in rural villages in Faisalabad, Punjab (Pakistan). This sample represents agriculture-
dependent, low-income households. We conducted 30 lab-in-field sessions in 15 rural
villages across Faisalabad. At the time of invitation, all couples were given basic infor-
mation on the experiment and details on the time, date, and expected duration of the
session (2-3 hours).20
   Each married couple was also informed of the compensation and expected earnings
from participation: a participation fee of Rs. 500 ($5) (i.e., Rs. 1000 per couple), provided
that they stayed for the entire duration of the session; and additional earnings of at most
Rs. 1000 ($10). Informed consent was collected from all participants before the start of
each session, and payments were made individually and privately at the end. Individual
surveys were conducted at the end of the experiment session. The sequence of events at
participant arrival was as follows:


Sequence of events during experiment sessions

   • Upon arrival, subject pairs are assigned to their respective gender-specific room.

   • No contact is allowed between subjects during the entire experiment. Men and
     women are seated in separate rooms. Respondents in the same room are seated
     in compartments separated by cardboard sheets. Contact between subjects in the
     same room is strongly discouraged but not impossible.

   • Each subject in the stranger matching treatment is assigned a partner; this is done
     without replacement, which means that all subjects in the stranger treatment have
     one partner and one partner only; by construction, the partner is not the household
     member they came with

   • Subjects in each session played each task one with the spouse and once with a
     ‘stranger’ as the partner. The stranger could be of three types - stranger of the
     opposite gender, stranger of the same gender, or paired with a ‘computer’ that uses
     numbers generated from a random number generating program. ‘Strangers’ were
     randomly allocated at the session level as follows:


               Stranger type                   Session No.
               Stranger: opposite gender       3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 28
               Stranger: same gender           1, 2, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 29, 30
               Computer                        5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 23, 25, 27
  20
    Each experimental session was held in a central location, at less than 10 minutes drive via public
transport




                                                 72
• Dictator task is always conducted first, with individuals playing as Player 1 or Player
  2 in random order. The dictator task has two rounds - one played with the spouse
  as a partner, one played with a ‘stranger’. In each round, Player 1 allocates a share
  of a Rs 1000 (≈ $10) endowment received from the research team to Player 2. The
  order of rounds is randomised as follows:


      Order of round                    Session No.
      Spouse round, then stranger round 1, 2, 5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17,
                                        18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29
      Stranger round, then spouse round 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 21, 22,
                                        25, 28, 30

• Preferences task is always played second. The task is played twice, once with the
  spouse as a partner and once with a stranger as the partner, with stranger type
  randomised on at a session level as summarized above. The following steps are
  taken in each round:

    1. Participants are given a menu of three food - biryani, chicken tikka boti and
       zarda (sweet rice), and three drink item - water, soft drink (coke), rooh afza
       (local sweet drink), to choose from for their lunch at the end of the session.
       Participants were asked to both highlight one food and one drink item they
       would like to consume and cross out the food and drink items that they do not
       want to consume.
    2. Participants are asked to guess their partner’s preferences, earning Rs 50 if
       they guess either the food or the drink correctly and Rs 100 if they guess both.
    3. Participants are asked to select a food and drink item for their partners to con-
       sume at lunch. Half of the subjects are randomly assigned to the information
       treatment, done by pair ID codes assigned at the start of the treatment. [This
       step is not conducted with those paired with a ’computer’.]
    4. Participants are asked to select from two options: either consume the food and
       drink the partner has selected for you OR pay a nominal cost (Rs 5/20/50,
       randomly drawn out) from their participation fee to consume their own choice
       for sure.
    5. One round - spouse or stranger pairing, will be selected at random and par-
       ticipant’s final choice will be implemented for serving lunch at the end of the
       session.

• A norms elicitation task is conducted. Respondents are asked to mark hypothetical
  decisions regarding spouse and others, against a scale of “appropriateness”. The
  order of questions is randomised.

• Participants are served lunch.

• Individual surveys are conducted

                                         73
• One round of the dictator task is randomly selected for payment via a coin toss.
  Participants receive a fixed participation fee + earnings from the dictator task.




                                      74
    We reproduce below the full protocol used in the experiment. The text below was read
in Urdu to all participating subjects during the experiment. Square brackets [] contain
instructions for enumerators.


Introduction to the community
Thank you all for taking the time to be here today. My name is [experimenter’s name],
and I will be facilitating this meeting. Helping me today, we also have here [introduce
everyone]. Before we start, we would like to remind you that we will give you       as a
compensation for your time, if you decide to participate. This      is not a part of the
activity and is yours to keep. We will give you     at the end of the meeting, together
with any other sum you will earn through the activities.
    Purpose: Today, we will conduct several activities in your community. The purpose
of these activities is to better understand how people in this community make decisions.
The results of the study may eventually be published or part of a book. It is not part
of a development project of any sort. Your community and other communities around
Faisalabad were selected to participate from a large group of potential communities.


Activities
We will perform several tasks here today. For these activities, we will select 24 partic-
ipants. In a moment, I will explain how we will select the participants. Before that, I
want to make some general comments. The participants will be performing some tasks
in exchange for real money that they will be able to take home. You should understand
that this is not my money. It is money given to me by Lahore School, to use to conduct a
research study. As we told you when we invited you to come here, the meeting may take
3 hours, so if you think you will not be able to stay that long without leaving please let
us know now. [Couples who cannot stay for the length of the meeting should leave before
they enter the lottery to participate. They do not get paid, as stated in the invitation]
Those of you who cannot stay can leave now. Thank you all for taking the time to come
today.

   • We only need 24 individuals to participate in these tasks. Thus, unfortunately, not
     all of you will be able to participate.

   • We will have a lottery to determine who will participate.

   • To complete the lottery, we will take the coupon you came with today, which has
     your name on, and fold the coupon in half.

   • Next, we will place your folded coupon of paper in this bag.

   • This means that we need one coupon for each couple present here today.



                                           75
   • We will then ask one of you to draw 12 pieces of paper from this bag containing
     your coupons.
   • Those whose names will be drawn will stay here and participate in the tasks, while
     the others will go home.
   • We will give another coupon to those of you who will not be drawn to participate
     today: this coupon will guarantee that you will participate, if you come to a future
     meeting
   • When we give you this coupon, we will show you the dates of the future meetings,
     so that you can tell us when you would like to come again

   Is this clear to everyone? Does anyone have any questions on how we will select the
24 participants?
   [Set aside the people with the coupons, collecting the coupons from them. Then
proceed with the random draw of names.]
   Those of you, whose names have not been called, can leave now. Thank you all for
taking the time to come today.
   [Pay show up fee to all subjects who have to leave (hand out pre-prepared envelopes
containing     to each individual in the couple and have them sign a receipt). Then, after
people have left, proceed]
    We will now ask you to draw a nametag from this bag. This nametag will determine
your ID for the activities. You are given an ID to preserve your anonymity: your name
will not be kept anywhere in our records, only your ID.


Consent
   • Before we begin, I will explain the basic activities we will do together, and the rules
     that we will follow.
   • Read Consent Statement:

   If you wish to participate, please say, “I do. If you do not wish to participate, please
advise us. You will be free to leave then. You will not be able to stay in the activity
room(s) if you do not wish to participate.
  You will be matched with a partner for some of the tasks that you will perform today.
We will explain more about your partner later.
   We will now take all women to one room, and all men to another room. Please follow
[Assistant’s name] if you are a woman, or [Assistant’s name] if you are a man.
   [Take the selected participants into the rooms and have them sit. The Assistant directs
each subject to her allocated seat.]
   Welcome, and thank you again.

                                            76
• Before we proceed any further, let me stress something that is very important.
  Many of you were invited here without understanding very much about what we
  are planning to do today. If at any time you find that this is something that you do
  not wish to participate in for any reason, you are of course free to leave at anytime.
  If you do choose to leave, you won’t be able to come back into the activity room(s)
  until everyone if finished performing all the activities.

• Before we start, please make sure your mobile phones are switched off, to avoid
  interruptions during the meeting.

• If you have heard about activities that have been conducted here in the past you
  should try to forget everything that you have been told. These are completely
  different tasks.

• Please also be advised, there are no right or wrong choices, so you should choose
  whatever you think is best for yourself and not look at your neighbor’s choices. It
  is important to remember that not everyone will win the same amount in the task.
  Everyone will still receive the  payment for participation, regardless of how much
  you win in the task

• We are about to begin. It is important that you listen as carefully as possible to the
  instructions, because only people who understand the tasks will actually be able to
  perform them. I will run through some examples to make sure you understand.

• You cannot ask questions out loud or talk about the tasks with anyone else while
  we are here together.

• If you have questions at any time during the meeting, please raise your hand and
  ask, and we will come to you and answer them in private.

• I will read through a script to explain all the activities that we will perform here
  today. As you may know, these activities are conducted in other localities beside
  this one, so it is very important that people in every locality receive exactly the
  same information, and this is the reason why I must read from this script.

NO TALKING

• I will now say something very important. You cannot ask questions out loud or talk
  about the tasks with anyone else while we are here together.

• If you need to ask a question at any time, please raise your hand and I will come to
  you so I can answer your question privately.

• I will explain the tasks, do demonstrations, and let you practice the tasks before
  we perform them for real. These demonstrations and practices are to help you
  understand the rules and clarify any questions.



                                         77
   • Please be sure that you obey these rules because it is possible for one person to spoil
     the tasks for everyone by talking in front of the group. If this happens, we will not
     be able to continue forward with the tasks today and you will not be paid for the
     tasks.

   • Is this clear to everyone? Does anyone have any questions so far about what will go
     on today?

    [If anyone asks a question out loud, explain again that all questions must be asked in
private].
   REAL PAYMENT

   • In today’s activities, you will have the opportunity to receive a cash payment. The
     amount that you will receive depends on your decisions and on the decisions of
     others. It also depends on what task is selected to be paid.

   • Remember that at the end of all the activities, we will draw a number from a hat.
     That number will determine for which task you will be paid. This means that each
     task that you perform has the same chance of being selected to be paid.

   • Remember also, that in addition to what you will earn from the activities, each of
     you will receive Rs 150 for participating in today’s meeting. This money is yours,
     regardless of what happens during the activities. It will be paid to you in cash
     together with your earnings from the activities.

   • It is real money, which you will be allowed to keep for yourself or do what you wish.
     This money will paid to you in cash at the end of the meeting.

   • During the activities you will make your decisions using paper slips [show slips],
     each representing 100 Rs. These paper slips will be converted into cash when you
     get paid at the end of the meeting.

   CONFIDENTIALITY

   • Your decisions and your payment are private and confidential. Nobody, apart from
     a member of our team will know what you earned, and he/she will not tell anyone.

   • We will put up these partitions between you every time you have to take a decision.
     You will make your decisions behind the partitions, so that nobody else can see
     what you decide.


Instructions for dictator game, round 1 (Task 1)
We are now ready to begin the first task. Let me remind you that you may not ask
questions or talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you may

                                            78
raise your hand and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your question
privately.
   INTRODUCTION

   • This task is performed by pairs of individuals. Each pair is made up of a Player 1
     and a Player 2.
   • Researcher [name] will provide Rs 1000 to Player 1 in each pair of players.
   • Player 1 must decide how to divide this money between him or herself and Player
     2. Player 1 must allocate between Rs 0 and the total Rs 1000 to Player 2.
   • Player 2 takes home whatever Player 1 allocates to him or her, and Player 1 takes
     home whatever he or she does not allocate to Player 2.
   • If spouse matching performed first: In this task, your spouse will be your partner.
   • If stranger matching performed first: In this task, your partner will be the [stranger
     of the same gender/stranger of the opposite gender/computer âe“ as randomized
     for the session] you were paired with in the previous task.
   • Notice, your partner will also be making a decision for the allocation of this money.
   • This means that you will all perform one round as Player 1 and one round as Player
     2. You will first perform the task as Player 1, and then perform the task as Player
     2.
   • How will we choose whether to pay you for this task, and whether to pay you as
     Player 1 or Player 2? After we have finished performing all the tasks, we will first
     draw a number from the hat [show again numbers and hat] to determine which task
     will be paid. If we draw the number 1 from the hat, then it means that this task is
     the one selected for payment. If so, we will toss a coin: if heads come up then you
     will be paid as Player 1; if tails come up, we will pay you as Player 2.
   • Is this clear to everyone? Please raise your hands if you have any questions and I
     will come and answer them privately.

   We will now run through 5 examples to show you how the task might be performed.
    [Notes: the researchers and assistants work through the examples and test questions
with paper slips, each representing a Rs 100 note. They also take from and place the paper
slips into two envelopes identical to the ones to be given to subjects, so as to demonstrate
fully what subjects have to do. Each of the examples presented below is presented either
as an example or used as a test question as required. If more test questions are needed
the researcher or assistant begin again with the first example above. The script below is
written assuming that 6 more examples were given, 3 presented as test scenarios/practice
rounds, i.e., the subjects are asked questions about the amounts the subjects would take
home. The 11 examples/tests, 5 above, 6 below, cover the full set of possible choices for
Player 1.]

                                            79
  1. Here is the Rs1000. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs900 to Player 2.
     Then, Player 2 will go home with Rs900 and Player 1 will go home with Rs100
     (Rs1000 minus Rs900 equals Rs100).
  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs200 to Player
     2. Then, Player 2 will go home with Rs200 and Player 1 will go home with Rs800
     (Rs1000 minus Rs200 equals Rs800).
  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs500 to Player
     2. Then, Player 2 will go home with Rs500 and Player 1 will go home with Rs500
     (Rs1000 minus Rs500 equals Rs500).
  4. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs700 to Player
     2. Then, Player 2 will go home with Rs700 and Player 1 will go home with Rs300
     (Rs1000 minus Rs700 equals Rs300).
  5. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate zero to Player
     2. Then, Player 2 will go home with zero and Player 1 will go home with Rs1000
     (Rs1000 minus zero equals Rs1000).

   [The experimenter and assistants hand out two envelopes for each subject. Each
envelope features the subject’s ID. The two envelopes are of different color. Moreover,
Player 1’s] envelope has a 1 [2] written on it.]
    We will now practice the task together. You will first practice the task as Player 1.
You have been handed two envelopes. The red [or other color] one with 10 paper slips
in it is the one that determines Player 1’s payment. The other envelope, the white [or
other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will determine the payment to
Player 2. As we work through the following examples, please put the paper slips into the
empty envelope as indicated by the examples. We will walk around the room to check if
your allocation matches the one from the example. This is important; because it allows
us to make sure that everyone understands the task and how to make the decision.
   Here are some more examples [The experiment assistants go around the room to check
that subjects correctly place the paper slips into the envelopes. The experimenter explains
the task again if mistakes are discovered]:

  1. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs1000 to Player 2. Please place the
     paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. How much will
     Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with? [Player 2 will
     go home with Rs1000 and Player 1 will go home with zero (Rs1000 minus Rs1000
     equals zero).]
  2. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs400 to Player
     2. Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?
     [Player 2 will go home with Rs400 and Player 1 will go home with Rs600 (Rs1000
     minus Rs400 equals Rs600).]

                                            80
  3. Here is another example. Imagine that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs600 to Player
     2. Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     How much will Player 2 go home with? And how much will Player 1 go home with?
     [Player 2 will go home with Rs600 and Player 1 will go home with Rs400 (Rs1000
     minus Rs600 equals Rs400).]

  4. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs100 to Player 2. Please place the paper
     slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision. In this case, how much
     will Player 1 go home with? [Rs900] And how much will Player 2 go home with?
     [Rs100]

  5. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs800 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     In this case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [Rs200] And how much will
     Player 2 go home with? [Rs800].

  6. Now try this one. Suppose that Player 1 chooses to allocate Rs300 to Player 2.
     Please place the paper slips into the blue envelope corresponding to this decision.
     In this case, how much will Player 1 go home with? [Rs700]. And how much will
     Player 2 go home with? [Rs300].

  We will now conduct the task for real. You will now perform the task as Player 1.
Remember, your partner in this round is:

   • If spouse matching performed first: your spouse

   • If stranger matching performed first: the [stranger of the same gender/stranger of
     the opposite gender/computer as randomized for the session] you were paired with
     in the previous task.

    You have been handed two envelopes. The yellow [or other color] one with 10 paper
slips in it is the one that determines your payment. The other envelope, the blue [or
other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it will determine the payment to
Player 2. Please put the paper slips you want to give to Player 2 in the empty envelope.
Please make sure your choice is not observed by others in the room.
    You must now wait while the rest of the players, finish performing the task. Then we
will play the second round of this task, where you are Player 2. [The experimenter and
assistants collect the envelopes.]
    [For Player 2s] You will now perform the task as Player 2. As Player 2, you have no
decision to make. Player 1 who has been matched with you has allocated a sum of money
to you. After we finish performing all the activities, if this task and the role of Player 2
is the one selected to be paid I will pay you what Player 1 has allocated to you.




                                            81
Instructions for dictator game, round 2
We will now perform another task. This task is the same as the previous one, except that
your partner for this task is:

   • If spouse matching performed second: your spouse
   • If stranger matching performed second: the [stranger of the same gender/stranger of
     the opposite gender/computer as randomized for the session] you were paired with
     in the previous task.

    Again, you will all perform one round as Player 1 and one round as Player 2. You will
first perform the task as Player 1, and then perform the task as Player 2.
    How will we choose whether to pay you for this task, and whether to pay you as Player
1 or Player 2? After we have finished performing all the tasks, we will first draw a number
from the hat [show again numbers and hat] to determine which task will be paid. If we
draw the number 2 from the hat, then it means that this task is the one selected for
payment. If so, we will toss a coin: if heads come up then you will be paid as Player 1; if
tails come up, we will pay you as Player 2.
    Do you have questions on the task? [If there are questions: repeat instructions from
introduction of task 1, and provide examples as needed].
    Let’s play the task for real. You have been handed two envelopes. The yellow [or
other color] one with 10 paper slips in it is the one that determines your payment. The
other envelope, the blue [or other color] one, is empty and the paper slips you put in it
will determine the payment to Player 2. Please put the paper slips you want to give to
Player 2 in the empty envelope.
   Please make sure your choice is not observed by others in the room.
    You must now wait while the rest of the players, finish performing the task. Then we
will play the second round of this task, where you are Player 2.
   [The experimenter and assistants collect the envelopes.]
    [For Player 2] You will now perform the task as Player 2. As Player 2, you have no
decision to make. Player 1 who has been matched with you has allocated a sum of money
to you. After we finish performing all the activities, if this task and the role of Player 2
is the one selected to be paid I will pay you what Player 1 has allocated to you.


Instructions for preferences game (Task 2)
We are now ready to begin with the second task. Let me remind you that you may not
ask questions or talk while you are here in the group. If you have any questions, you may
raise your hand and I (the enumerator) or my assistant(s) will come answer your question
privately. Please be sure to listen to the instructions carefully. This is NOT the same
task that you just performed, so be sure to listen to the instructions carefully.

                                            82
   • This task is performed by pairs of individuals.
   • Each of you will perform this task twice, once with your spouse (or your household
     member) and once with an anonymous partner.

    [Enumerator: There are three types of anonymous partners. Each session will have
only one kind. Please give instructions for the partner type according to the type specified
for that session.]

   • Stranger - other room treatment: You will be paired with a stranger in the other
     room i.e. of the opposite gender. None of you will know exactly with whom you are
     paired. Only [researcherâes name] knows who is matched with whom, and she/he
     will never tell anyone.
   • Stranger - same room treatment: You will be paired with a person in this room
     i.e. another male/female. Only [researcherâes name] knows who is matched with
     whom, and she/he will never tell anyone.
   • Computer treatment: You will be paired with the computer. This means that the
     partnerâes decisions will be the result of a random draw by the computer, which
     will appear on the computer screen and be communicated to the researcher.

   Do you have questions on who your partner will be in this task? If you have questions,
please raise your hand and I will come to you to answer your question privately.
   The decisions that you will take as part of this task concern what you would like to
have for lunch. We will be serving you lunch at the end of the session, to thank you for
spending part of your day with us.
   PART 1:
    I have three different food items here today: biryani (savory), chicken tikka boti and
zarda (sweet rice). I also have three different types of drinks: soft drink (coke), rooh afza
and water. Before we begin this task, please have a look at these food items (without
tasting) and select what kind of rice you would most like to eat and what you would like
to drink at lunch today. Please circle the food item and drink you would most prefer to
have for lunch today, and cross out the food item and drink that you would least prefer to
have for lunch today. You cannot rank two items equally. Once you have had a look at the
items, we will ask you record your ranking on the sheet we will provide you. Remember,
you may get for lunch the items that you circle. Distribute a sheet with pictures of the
3 (or as many) food items] Does anyone have any questions? Please raise your hand and
my assistant or I will come and address your query.
    [Subjects should circle=most preferred, cross-out=least preferred. The assistants col-
lect the ranking sheets. While the experimenter proceeds with Part 2, the assistant(s)
enters the rankings.]
   ROUND 1: Spouse preferences (randomize order between spouse and anonymous):
Your partner in this round is your family member, who you came with today. Your

                                             83
partner in the other room has also been asked to pick what food item and drink s/he
would like to have for lunch. We would like you to guess your partnerâes pick. We will
now distribute a sheet, where you can write your guess. Circle what you guess is your
partnerâes preferred food item and drink for lunch today. We will give you Rs. 50 for
correctly guessing the food or drink ranked as most preferred by your partner and Rs 100
if you guess both food and drink item preferred by your partner correctly. This money
will be paid to you at the end of all activities, on top of your other earnings from the
other tasks.
   [Distribute another sheet with pictures of the 2 food items and 3 drinks. Subjects
should circle=most preferred. The assistants collect the guessed partnerâes ranking
sheets. While the experimenter proceeds with Part 3, the assistant(s) enter the guessed
rankings.]
   PART 2 [KNOW PARTNERâeS RANKING treatment only]: Now, we will distribute
to you a sheet, containing the ranking given by your partner, capturing his or her own
preferences for the 3 foods items and 3 drinks.
   [The experimenter and assistants distribute to participants the partnerâes ranking
sheet. Provide this information to each participant with an odd number ID.]
   PART 3: Now I would like for you to:

   • Choose a food item and a drink for your partner to consume. It does not have
     to be the same items that you chose for yourself. [Say to KNOW PARTNERâeS
     RANKING treatment individuals only:] It also need not be the items your partner
     selected for him/herself, if you know them.

   • In the other room, your partner is being asked to do the same.

   • Your preferred food and drink are what you circled earlier.

   • Neither you nor your partner will be able to exchange the food item and drink you
     are given with anyone else.

    Shall we begin? Does anyone have any questions? Please raise your hand and my
assistant or I will come and address your query.
   We will now distribute a decision sheet, where you can mark your choice of what food
item and drink that you would like your PARTNER to consume
    [Distribute a decision sheet, with space to record one choice for food and one choice
for drink for the partner].
    Please circle the food item and the drink that you would like your PARTNER to
consume in the sheet of paper in front of you and fold it to let us know you are done. My
assistants and I will come and collect your decision sheet.
   ROUND 2- Anonymous partner preferences:



                                           84
    We will now repeat the activities we performed in round 1, only with a different part-
ner. Remember, your partner in this round is (Enumerator: please announce according
to the partner specified for that session),

   • Stranger other room treatment: a person sitting in the next room. We will never
     reveal to you who this person is, and we will never reveal to this person that you
     have been matched with them. This will be kept completely secret.
   • Stranger other room treatment: a person sitting in this room. We will never reveal
     to you who this person is, and we will never reveal to this person that you have
     been matched with them. This will be kept completely secret.
   • Computer treatment: the computer, whose decisions are determined by a program
     generating random numbers.

   [Computer treatment] The computer generated a random ranking of the food items
and drinks, selecting at random one most preferred food and drink and one least preferred
food item and drink. We have recorded that ranking.
   [Other matching treatments] Recall that in the previous round, we asked each partic-
ipant to rank the food items and drinks from most preferred to least preferred. We have
kept those rankings.
    We now would like you to guess your partnerâes ranking. We will distribute a sheet,
where you can write your guess. Circle what you guess is your partnerâes preferred food
item and drink. We will give you Rs. 50 for correctly guessing the food item or drink
ranked as most preferred by your partner and Rs 100 if you guess both food and drink
item preferred by your partner correctly. This money will be paid to you at the end of
all activities, on top of your earnings from the other tasks.
   [Distribute another sheet with pictures of the 3 food items and three drinks. Subjects
should circle=most preferred, cross-out=least preferred. The assistants collect the guessed
partnerâes ranking sheets. While the experimenter proceeds with Part 3, the assistant(s)
enter the guessed rankings. These guesses are compared with the actual partnerâes
ranking at the end of the session, when computing the payments]
   PART 3: Now I would like for you to:

   • For STRANGER SAME or OTHER ROOM ONLY: Choose a food item and a drink
     for your partner to consume. It does not have to be the same items that you chose
     for yourself. [KNOW PARTNERâeS RANKING treatment individuals only:] It
     also need not be the items your partner selected for him/herself, if you know them.
   • Your partner is being asked to do the same.
   • Your preferred food and drink are what you circled earlier.
   • Neither you nor your partner will be able to exchange the food item and drink you
     are given with anyone else.

                                            85
    Shall we begin? Does anyone have any questions? Please raise your hand and my
assistant or I will come and address your query.
    [For STRANGER SAME or OTHER ROOM ONLY:] We will now distribute a decision
sheet, where you can mark your choice of what food item and drink that you would like
your PARTNER to consume [Distribute a decision sheet, with space to record one choice
for food and one choice for drink for the partner]. Please circle the food item and the
drink that you would like your PARTNER to consume in the sheet of paper in front of
you and fold it to let us know you are done. My assistants and I will come and collect
your decision sheet.
   PART 4

   • We will now ask you to choose between two options: either you receive the food
     item and drink that your partner from round 1 or round 2 has picked for you; or
     you pay [Enumerator: this amount is randomized across sessions]. Rs. (5/20/50)-
     from your show-up fee and get your own choice of food and drink . We will do
     this twice. First, we will first ask you to make this choice with your partner from
     round 1, that is, the household member with whom you came/anonymous partner.
     Second, we will ask you to make this choice for the partner assigned to you in round
     2. The person you came with will be asked to make similar decisions, but we will
     not reveal to that person or anyone else any of the choices you make.

   • When you have made your choice for your partner in rounds 1 and 2, we will then
     select one of the two rounds at random and implement what you have decided. If
     the selected round is round 1, you will receive the food item and drink that your
     accompanying household member has selected for you, unless you agreed to pay Rs.
     (5/20/50) from your show-up fee to receive your own choice. If the selected round
     is round 2, you will receive the food item and drink that your unknown partner has
     selected for you, unless you agreed to pay Rs. (5/20/50) from your show-up fee to
     receive your own choice.

   • You will only need to pay Rs. (5/20/50) for the selected round. For instance,
     suppose that you selected to pay Rs. (5/20/50) to get your own choice only with
     the round 1 partner AND round 2 is selected. In this case, you will receive what
     the round 2 partner selected for you and you will pay nothing. Alternatively, if you
     selected to pay Rs. (5/20/50) for round 1 and round 2 partners, you will pay Rs.
     (5/20/50) and you will receive your own choice for sure.

   • We will not reveal to anyone the outcome of the coin toss that selects between your
     final decisions between round 1 and round 2.

    We will now call you one by one to the back of the room to record your final decisions
in privacy.
   [At individual meetings. The experimenter has two decision sheets in front of him:
the one with the subjectâes own pick (face up) and the one with the round 1 partnerâes


                                           86
pick for him/her (face down, folded to conceal id)]. Here I have the sheet with your
most preferred and least preferred food item and drink, and another sheet with what was
selected for you by your partner from round 1 (your spouse). You can either choose to
have what your partner picked for you, or you can give Rs. (5/20/50) from your show-up
fee of Rs. 500 and have your own choice. What is your decision?
   Enumerator: Write down Decision 1
   Now I will tell you what your partner has picked for you. What do you think your
partner has picked for you? Your partner picked    and      for you. Would you like to
change your earlier decision?
   Enumerator: Note revised decision as Decision 2
   [Repeat explanation of options if necessary. Record decision for Round 1. ]
    Now, I will ask you about Round 2, where you were matched to a random stranger.
At the end we will toss a coin to decide whether we implement your decision for round 1
or round 2.
    [The experimenter now has two decision sheets in front of him: the one with the
subjectâes own pick (face up), as before; and the one with the round 2 partnerâes pick for
him/her (face down, folded to conceal id)] Here I have the sheet with your most preferred
and least preferred food item and drink, and another sheet with what was selected for you
by your randomly assigned partner from round 2. You can either choose to have what
your partner picked for you, or you can give Rs. (5/20/50) from your show-up fee of Rs.
500 and have your own choice. What is your decision? [Enumerator: Please refer to the
session randomization list to find out what the cost is for each participant.]
   Enumerator: Write down Decision 3 (own or partner choice)
   Now I will tell you what your partner has picked for you. What do you think your
partner has picked for you? Enumerator: Note guess 2 of partnerâes choice of food item
    and drink
   Your partner picked         and      for you. Would you like to change your earlier
decision?
   Enumerator: Note revised decision as Decision 4 (yes/no)
   [Repeat explanation of options if necessary. Record decision for Round 2. ].
   [Enumerator: If decision 2 and 4 are the same, then Skip the coin toss]. Coin toss:
Now we will toss a coin to select between the 2 rounds of this task. If the coin toss falls
on heads, we will implement your final decision for round 1. If the coin toss falls on tails,
we will implement your final decision for round 2.
   Enumerator: Note outcome of coin toss.
  Some of our team members will now prepare the food items based on the decisions.
Meanwhile we will continue with the rest of the planned activities.
    [Record decision for Round 1 and Round 2. When all subjects have made their deci-
sion, the assistant enters the coin toss data]âe

                                             87
Instructions for Norm Elicitation game (Task 3)
For this task, I will read to you descriptions of a series of situations. These descriptions
correspond to situations in which a person must make a decision. For each situation, you
will be given a description of the decision faced by an individual. After I read to you the
description of the decision, I will describe a choice that the individual might have made,
and you should decide whether making that choice would be “acceptable” and “consistent
with proper social or moral behavior” or “unacceptable” and“inconsistent with proper
social or moral behavior.âe By acceptable, we mean behavior that most people agree is
the “correct” or “ethical” thing to do. Another way to think about what we mean is that,
if someone were to make an unacceptable choice, then someone observing this behavior
might get angry at the person who made the choice for acting in that manner.
   In each of your responses, we would like you to answer as truthfully as possible,
based on your opinions of what constitutes socially appropriate or socially inappropriate
behavior.
    To give you an idea of how the experiment will proceed, we will go through an example
and show you how you will indicate your responses. I will now read to you an example of
a situation. These cards that I am holding illustrate the situation and the decision sheet.
[Experimenter illustrates the situation using a vignette, to make it easier for subjects to
understand the situation].
    Someone is at a local grocery store. While there, the person notices that someone has
left a wallet/bag on the counter. How appropriate would it be to take the wallet?
   If this were the situation we asked you about in the study, you would indicate the
extent to which you believe taking the wallet would be “acceptable” and “consistent with
proper social or moral behavior” or “unacceptable” and “inconsistent with proper social
or moral behavior”. Recall that by socially appropriate we mean behavior that most
people agree is the ‘correct’ or ‘ethical’ thing to do.
    You should indicate your choice by filling the decision sheet [Hold up a reproduction
of the decision sheet, where the answers are pictured using thumbs up or down]. As you
can see, the decision sheet has four symbols on it:

   • 2 thumbs down, corresponding to “very unacceptable”

   • 1 thumb down, corresponding to “somewhat unacceptable”

   • 1 thumb up, corresponding to “somewhat acceptable”

   • 2 thumbs up, corresponding to “very acceptable”.

   This is to help you recognize and remember what each of these options mean. For
example, suppose you thought that taking the wallet was very unacceptable. Then, you
would indicate your response by selecting the first symbol, the one with the two thumbs
down on the decision sheet.


                                            88
   Are there any questions about this example situation or about how to indicate your
responses? I will now read to you several situations, all dealing with decisions that you
may have to make regarding your spouse, strangers or the researchers. I will illustrate
these situations using vignettes. For each of the choices, I would like you to think whether
making that choice is very unacceptable, somewhat unacceptable, somewhat acceptable
and very acceptable. To indicate your response, you would place a check mark on the
corresponding symbol on the decision sheet [Hold up reproduction of decision sheet again].
   Participants have to answer ALL questions regardless of who they are matched with.
   [Randomize order of 1, 2,3,4; randomize order of a and b]
    Question 1a: (Spouse) “Is it acceptable to pick a snack for your spouse that is
different from what you know they prefer.âe
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them rate it]
    Question 1b: (Spouse) “Is it acceptable for you to pick for yourself a snack that
is different from what your spouse picked for you.âe
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them to rate it]
    Question 2a: (non-household members/strangers of opposite gender). “Is
it acceptable to pick a snack for a man/woman (opposite gender) in the other room from
outside your household that is different from what you know they prefer”
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating.]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them rate it.]
    Question 2b: (non-household members/strangers of opposite gender). “Is
it acceptable for you to pick for yourself a snack that is different from what a man/woman
(opposite gender) in the other room from outside your household has picked for you”.
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating.]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them rate it.]
   Question 3a: (non-household members/strangers of the same gender). “Is it
acceptable to pick a snack for a man/woman (same gender) in the this room from outside
your household that is different from what you know they prefer”


                                            89
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating.]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them rate it.]
    Question 3b: (non-household members/strangers of the same gender). “Is
it acceptable for you to pick for yourself a snack that is different from what a man/woman
(same gender) in the this room from outside your household has picked for you”.
    [The assistants hand out the decision sheet, with a short description of the situation
(picking a snack) and the appropriateness rating.]
   [After participants have noted their opinions, read out the next statement and ask
them rate it.]
   âe


Final Instructions
This was the last activity. We will now compute your earnings and distribute them to
you. While you are distributed your lunch, we will ask you a short questionnaire.
    In order to compute your payment, we have to determine whether you will be paid for
Task 1 or Task 2, and whether you will be paid for your decisions as Player 1 or Player
2. Recall that we said we would draw a number from a bag to determine which task you
will be paid for, and would toss a coin to decide whether you would be paid as Player 1
or Player 2.
    We will therefore ask the enumerator outside to draw the number and then toss a coin:
if heads come up then you will be paid as Player 1; if tails come up, we will pay you as
Player 2. We will also use a coin toss to determine if you get payment from round 1 or
round 2 of task 1. We will inform each of you the outcome of the coin toss as we provide
you your earnings in privacy.
    [Enumerator: Please refer to the randomization lists provided to you to determine the
color of the tag that will get payment for the spouse round and the color that will be
paid for the stranger round. Also refer to the randomization list to find out whether each
individual is paid as player 1 or player 2.]
   Your final payment will therefore be determined by

   • Your decision/Your partner’s decision in task 1/2 (task that dictator was on that
     day).

   • On top of these earnings, you will also receive the participation fee

   • Also in addition, you will receive the money you earned in the first activity we
     performed, when we asked you to guess your partner’s ranking of the food items
     flavors. Recall that we promised you we would give you Rs 50 if you guessed your

                                           90
     partner’s favorite food item or drink, and Rs 100 is you guessed both food item and
     drink preferred by your partner. If you guessed correctly, those earnings will be also
     included in your total payment.

    [When distributing the payment envelopes]: Thank you very much for your participa-
tion! Please enjoy your lunch and don’t hesitate to ask us questions if you have doubts
before you leave.




                                           91
A3. Field experiment
The details of the randomized controlled trial are given in Afzal et al. (2018). The specific
part of the endline questionnaire dealing with the gift experiment is reproduced below,
together with the instructions for enumerators.
   GIFT FOR PARTICIPATION
   Thank you for answering our survey and being a part of our research.
    Before we start with a small exercise, we would like to give you Rs. 300 as a compen-
sation for your time in participating in this survey. These Rs. 300 are not a part of the
activity and are yours to keep.
   I would like to have brief conversation with your husband regarding our research. Can
you please call him and give us 5 minutes alone in this room?
    [ENUMERATOR: If husband is available and willing to talk to us, proceed with step
1 and step 2. If husband not available or unwilling to talk to us, ask if it is possible to
call him and agree with him on a time to talk. If husband not available to talk on the
phone, agree with the wife on a time to visit the household again when the husband will
be present.]
    [Enumerator: If the respondent is unmarried or her husband does not live with her/is
not a part of the household roster, then ask for the oldest male household member. Step
1 is then to be administered to this male individual.]
   If there is no husband and/or an adult male household member in the household then
record 77:
                   section 9
   STEP 1: Husband
   1.    You may remember that 8-9 months back we asked you to make a choice between
three household items (a male wallet, a female wallet and children’s pencil case). Your
choice was [report Item selected at baseline]      .
   {ENUMERATOR: if he did not make a choice at baseline, we ask him to choose right
now and note
   a.Item selected: 1: male wallet, 2: female wallet, 3; child’s pencil case.      choice 1a
   b.Recipient. i.e who is the item for?                             choice 1b
   c. What initials should appear on it?                             choice 1c}
   2.     Your wife was also asked to choose an item when we visited her 8-9 months
back. As we explained last time, we will toss a coin to decide, between your choice and
your wife’s choice, which item your household will receive.
   However, you can let your spouse choose in your stead, in which case, we will not toss
a coin and simply select the gift according to your wife’s choice.
   Would you like to let your wife choose in your stead? ————–[Yes/No]              choice 2

                                              92
    If YES to 2[ENUMERATOR: Skip to 4]


    3.     If NO to 2: Would you be willing to let your wife choose in your stead if we
offered you a voucher worth a certain amount of money? The value of this voucher is
determined by a random draw and it can be either Rs. X or Rs. XX. The value of the
voucher is written in this sealed envelope [ENUMERATOR: Show the envelope to the
respondent without opening the seal]. Before I open this envelope and reveal the value
of the voucher, I will ask you whether you would be willing to let your wife choose the
gift instead of you in exchange for the voucher, for each of the two possible values of the
voucher. Once I open the envelope and reveal the value of the voucher, we will implement
your choice corresponding to that value of the voucher. The voucher can be redeemed
at the NRSP office three-four weeks from today, and we will send an SMS to inform you
when the gift or voucher is ready to be collected.
   Before we proceed, do you have any questions on this? [ENUMERATOR: Answer any
questions before proceeding.]
 a.  Would you let your wife choose the gift if the voucher were worth Rs. X?
————–[Yes/No]                               choice 3a
   b.     Would you let your wife choose the gift if the voucher were worth Rs. XX?
————–[Yes/No] [ENUMERATOR: Ask this question regardless of the answer to 3a]
choice 3b
    c.    What is your best guess of your wife’s choice among the three gift options?
[         item]                                   choice 3c
  d.    Suppose you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the male wallet, how
much money should the voucher be worth to induce you to let your wife choose the gift?
[     Rupees]                                   choice 3d
   e.   Suppose you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the child’s pencil case,
how much should the voucher be worth to induce you to let your wife choose the gift?
[     Rupees]                                   choice 3e
  f.    Suppose you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the female wallet, how
much should the voucher be worth to induce you to let your wife choose the gift? [
Rupees]                                        choice 3f
    g.    Now we will find out the value of the voucher. [ENUMERATOR: Give the
sealed envelope to the respondent to open.]
   h.    Earlier you said that you would/would not [report respondent’s answer to 3a
or 3b, depending on the voucher value] let your wife choose the gift in exchange for a
voucher of this value. So we will now implement your choice.
    i.   [ENUMERATOR: If answer to 3a or 3b, is ‘YES’ to taking the voucher]
    Take this voucher receipt of Rs     .                        voucher male
    Please keep it safe. You will have to bring this voucher receipt with you to NRSP


                                            93
office to collect your money. We will now ask your wife to choose the gift.
   [ENUMERATOR: If answer to 3a or 3b, is ‘NO’ to taking the voucher]
    You will not receive the voucher, and your household’s gift will be decided after we
interview your wife.
   [ENUMERATOR: Now go to step 2]
   4.    What is your best guess of your wife’s choice among the three gift options? (1:
male wallet, 2: female wallet, 3; child’s pencil case.)                         choice 4
  5.     Suppose that I was willing to give you a voucher worth a certain amount of
money if you let your wife choose the gift instead of you.
    a.     Suppose also that you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the male wallet,
how much money should the voucher be worth to induce youto let your wife choose the
gift in your stead?
   [       Rupees]                                       choice 5a
   b.     Suppose you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the child’s pencil case,
how much should the voucher be worth to induce you to let your wife choose the gift in
your stead?
   [      Rupees]                                       choice 5b
    c.   Suppose you knew for sure that your wife’s choice was the female wallet, how
much should the voucher be worth to induce you to let your wife choose the gift in your
stead? [      Rupees]                                         choice 5c
    We also have a voucher in this envelope as a thank you for participating in our short
questionnaire today. I will now/you may now open the envelope to see what the amount
of this voucher is. This voucher can be redeemed at the NRSP office three-four weeks
from today, and we will send an SMS to inform you when the gift and voucher are ready
to be collected.
   [Enumerator: Now go to step 2]
   STEP 2: [ENUMERATOR: Go back to the female respondent.]
   1.    You may remember that 8-9 months back we asked you to make a choice between
three household items (a male wallet, a female wallet and children’s pencil case). Your
choice was [report Item selected at baseline]     .
    {ENUMERATOR: if she did not make a choice about the initials to appear on the
gift, ask now
   a. What initials should appear on it?                             choice 2 1}
   2.    Your husband was also asked to make a choice at that time and we have just
asked him to confirm his choice.
   3.    As we explained last time, we will toss a coin to decide, between your choice
and your husband’s choice, which item your household will receive.


                                            94
   We will also give you a voucher for either Rs. 50 or Rs. 200. The value of the
voucher is written in this sealed envelope [ENUMERATOR: Show the envelope to the
respondent without opening the seal].This voucher can be redeemed at the NRSP office
three-fourweeks from today, and we will send an SMS to inform you when the gift and
voucher are ready to be collected.
    Before I toss the coin to decide if you will get your choice or your husband’s choice
of gift, you can choose to forfeit the voucher and get your choice of the gift for sure –i.e.
you can skip the coin toss and guarantee you get your choice for sure, in exchange for the
voucher. Before I open this envelope and reveal the value of the voucher, I will ask you
whether you would be willing to get your choice for sure in exchange for the voucher, for
each of the two possible values of the voucher. Once I open the envelope and reveal the
value of the voucher, we will implement your choice corresponding to that value of the
voucher.
   4.    Would you forfeit the voucher to get your choice for sure if the voucher were
worth Rs. Y? ————–[Yes/No]                                           choice 2 4
   5.    Would you forfeit the voucher to get your choice for sure if the voucher were
worth Rs. YY? ————–[Yes/No] [ENUMERATOR: Ask this question regardless of the
answer to 4]                                                     choice 2 5
   6.    What is your best guess of your husband’schoice among the three gift options?(1:
male wallet, 2: female wallet, 3; child’s pencil case.)                choice 2 6
   7.     Suppose you knew for sure that your husband’s choice was the male wallet, how
much money would you be willing to give up to avoid the coin toss and make sure you
got your choice for sure? [      Rupees]                                choice 2 7
   8.    Suppose you knew for sure that your husband’s choice was the female wallet,
how much money would you be willing to give up to avoid the coin toss and make sure
you got your choice for sure? [    Rupees]                               choice 2 8
   9.     Suppose you knew for sure that your husband’s choice was the child’s pencil
case, how much money would you be willing to give up to avoid the coin toss and make
sure you got your choice for sure? [    Rupees]                            choice 2 9
    10.    Now we will find out the value of the voucher. [ENUMERATOR: Give the
sealed envelope to the respondent to open]
    11.     Earlier you said that you would/would not [report respondent’s answer to 4
or 5, depending on the voucher value] forfeit a voucher of this value in order to get your
choice of gift for sure. So we will now implement your choice.
   [If she has chosen to keep the voucher for the actual voucher value] For this value of
the voucher you chose to toss the coin instead of forfeiting the voucher. Please toss the
coin to determine whether you will get your choice or your husband’s choice of gift. If the
coin toss yields Head you will get your choice, if it yields Tails you will get your husband’s
choice. [Observe and record the outcome of the coin toss] The coin toss has come out
       [Head/Tails].                                                                 coin toss



                                             95
    [If she has chosen to forfeit the voucher and get her own choice for sure for the actual
voucher value] For this value of the voucher you chose to forfeit the voucher instead of
tossing the coin. You will thus receive your choice of gift.
    [If her husband had delegated the choice to her in step 1] For your information, your
husband chose [report item chosen by husband]           as a gift. He also chose to let you
choose the gift instead of him. Therefore, you will receive the gift of your choice and you
will not have to forfeit the voucher/ toss a coin.
   12.     For your information, your husband chose [report item chosen by husband]
     as a gift. He also chose to not let you choose the gift instead of him.
   13.     To summarise, according to your choices today, you will receive [report item
that the respondent will receive as gift(1: male wallet, 2: female wallet, 3; child’s pencil
case.)]      as a gift.                                                   final gift
    It will have [report initials that will have to be put on the gift that the respondent is
to receive]        initials inscribed on it.                            final initials
   This receipt records the gift that you are entitled to receive [Hand receipt].
   [If applicable] This also has the voucher of Rs      .               voucher female
    Please keep it safe. You will have to bring this receipt with you to NRSP office to
collect your gift and/or money, once you receive an SMS telling you that they are ready
to be collected, in about 3-4weeks’ time.




                                             96
Online Appendix B: Agency
questions
Question     Description                                                       Answer codes           Sample
household 12 Do you need to ask someone’s permission for making the            1: Nobody, 2: Hus-     Field     ex-
             following decisions, and if yes from whom? (a) Purchasing         band, 3: Mother-       periment
             ice cream for children, (b) Purchasing grocery, (c) Purchas-      in-law/father-in-      (women
             ing medicine for myself (d) Purchasing personal cosmet-           law, 4: Son, 5:        only)    and
             ics/clothing (e) Taking a child to a doctor (f) Purchasing        Daughter, 6: Other     LAB1
             childrenâes books / clothes, (g) Purchasing furniture (h)        male, 7:      Other
             Purchasing refrigerator / TV (i) Sale of personal jewelry         female
p1           Do you need to ask someone’s permission for making the            0: No, 1: Yes          LAB2
             following decisions, and if yes from whom? (a) Purchasing
             ice cream for children, (b) Selecting food or drink for myself,
             (c) Purchasing grocery for the household, (d) Purchasing
             personal cosmetics/clothing, (e) Buying a snack or drink
             from a street vendor, (f) Taking a household member to the
             doctor,(g) Meeting a friend in town, (h) Purchasing clothes
             for our children, (i) Inviting a friend to visit our house,
             (j) Purchasing furniture for the household, (k) Selling my
             personal jewelry
consump-     Are your preferences/opinion taken into consideration when        1: Always, 2: Most     Field    ex-
tion 8       making the following types of decisions within your house-        of the time, 3:        periment
             hold? (a) Decisions regarding boysâe schooling, (b) De-          Some of the time, 4:   (women
             cisions regarding girls’ schooling, (c) Decisions regarding       Rarely, 5: Never       only)
             your children’s marriage, (d) Decision regarding your med-
             ical care, (e) Decision regarding your childrenâes medical
             care, (f) Decision regarding family planning, (g) Social vis-
             its to your family, (h) Decisions regarding purchase of cloth-
             ing/cosmetics (j) Decision to work for earned income, (k)
             Decision to borrow money from an MFI, (l) Purchase of
             HH appliances (refrigerator, TV, etc), (m) Decision about
             house sale/purchase, (n) Decision regarding sale of personal
             jewelry




                                                  97
