                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           RISING GOVERNMENT DEBT:
                 CAUSES AND SOLUTIONS FOR A DECADES-OLD TREND

                                              Pierre Yared

                                         Working Paper 24979
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w24979


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2018




I would like to thank Marina Azzimonti, V.V. Chari, Steve Coate, François Geerolf, Marina Halac,
Andrew Hertzberg, Leo Martinez, Chris Moser, Suresh Naidu, Ziad Obermeyer, Facundo Piguillem,
Ken Rogoff, Jesse Schreger, Christoph Trebesch, and Alan Viard for comments. Trisha Sinha and
George Vojta provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pierre Yared. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rising Government Debt: Causes and Solutions for a Decades-Old Trend
Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 24979
August 2018, Revised January 2019
JEL No. D02,E62,H21,H6

                                            ABSTRACT

Over the past four decades, government debt as a fraction of GDP has been on an upward trajectory
in advanced economies, approaching levels not reached since World War II. While normative macroeconomic
theories can explain the increase in the level of debt in certain periods as a response to macroeconomic
shocks, they cannot explain the broad-based long-run trend in debt accumulation. In contrast, political
economy theories can explain the long-run trend as resulting from an aging population, rising political
polarization, and rising electoral uncertainty across advanced economies. These theories emphasize
the time-inconsistency in government policymaking, and thus the need for fiscal rules that restrict
policymakers. Fiscal rules trade off commitment to not overspend and flexibility to react to shocks.
This tradeoff guides design features of optimal rules, such as information dependence, enforcement,
cross-country coordination, escape clauses, and instrument vs. target criteria.


Pierre Yared
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 823
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pyared@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
Since reaching a trough in the mid-1970s, U.S. government debt as a fraction of GDP
has been on an upward trajectory, approaching levels not reached since World War II. As
Figure 1 illustrates, the government debt increase in World War II, as in other wars, was
only temporary; the post-war reduction in defense spending facilitated its repayment.1;2 In
contrast, the more recent increase in government debt re‡ects a long-term …scal imbalance.
Figure 2 shows that recent decades have been marked by large gaps between government
spending and revenue. This is largely the result of a secular expansion of government
spending— in particular, mandatory spending programs such as social security, medicare,
and medicaid— and an inability for tax revenue to rise as rapidly.3



                             Figure 1. Government Debt in the U.S.




    1
     The government debt to GDP ratio is projected to continue to increase signi…cantly over the coming
decade (Congressional Budget O¢ ce, 2018, Table 4.1).
   2
     Throughout this paper, I focus on gross central government debt, since this measure is available for
the broadest cross-section of advanced economies. All empirical observations are robust to replacing this
gross measure with federal debt held by the public for the case of the U.S.
   3
     See Blahous (2013) for a discussion of the impact of mandatory spending programs on rising govern-
ment debt. Mandatory spending relative to GDP increased from 1970 onward, with a rapid acceleration
between 1970 and the mid-1980s. Discretionary spending relative to GDP steadily declined from 1970 to
2000. Between 2000 and 2010, it increased (though remaining well below historical levels) and has been
decreasing since 2010. See Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2018).




                                                   1
                   Figure 2. Government Spending and Revenue in the U.S.




    The U.S. is not alone. Almost every single advanced economy has experienced a long-
term increase in government debt to GDP, including France and Germany; see Figure 3.
The increase in government debt in most of these countries is the result of tax revenue
not keeping pace with the expansion of government spending, as in the case of the U.S.4
In addition, across advanced economies, o¤-balance-sheet government liabilities, such as
future government commitments to the old, have grown substantially.5
    Debt buildups of the magnitude shown in Figure 3 can eventually lead to diminished
economic activity, either by crowding out private capital investment or by forcing an
increase in distortive taxes and decrease in public investment to facilitate repayment.6
Moreover, a government carrying such a high debt load may be constrained in responding
to future catastrophes, such as …nancial crises, natural disasters, or wars.7 In extreme
   4
      For example, between 1965 and 2016, general government tax revenue as a share of GDP increased
in France and Germany and in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
more broadly (see OECD "Revenue Statistics").
    5
      Hamilton (2014) estimates that in 2012, o¤-balance-sheet U.S. federal debt was six times the size
of on-balance-sheet debt. More than three quarters of this o¤-balance-sheet debt was accounted for by
future social security and medicare obligations (see Hamilton, 2014, Table 5). The European Central
Bank (2011, Tables 4 and 11) estimates that in 2007, future pension entitlements in the Euro area were
…ve times the size of on-balance-sheet debt.
    6
      For an analysis of the empirical relationship between economic growth and public debt, see Reinhart,
Reinhart, and Rogo¤ (2012) and Eberhardt and Presbitero (2015). Boskin, et al. (2018) assess the risks
of rising debt in the U.S.
    7
      For a discussion of this constraining e¤ect of higher public debt, see Obstfeld (2013), Battaglini and


                                                     2
cases, the result is default through explicit debt repudiation or in‡ation.8

                     Figure 3. Government Debt in Advanced Economies




    Could the costs of increased government debt— however large or small— be justi…ed?
Has the rise in government debt over the past four decades served a socially bene…cial
purpose that would compensate for the added debt burden? In the …rst part of this
article, I review normative macroeconomic theories in which government debt serves three
possible functions: it can facilitate tax-smoothing, provide a safe asset, or sustain dynamic
e¢ ciency. I argue that, while the increase in the level of debt in certain periods may
have been an optimal response to speci…c macroeconomic shocks, such as the global
…nancial crisis, the broad-based long-run trend in debt accumulation seems inconsistent
with optimal policy.9
    Motivated by this observation, I proceed in the second part of this article by reviewing
political economy theories of government debt. These theories predict that the presence of
an aging population, political polarization, and electoral uncertainty cause governments
Coate (2016), and Romer and Romer (2017), among others.
   8
     There are many historical cases of default in advanced economies (e.g., Reinhart, Reinhart, and
Rogo¤, 2015). The costs of default include increased stress on …nancial institutions, lower international
…nancing for …rms, and decreased export market access. For a discussion, see Borensztein and Panizza
(2008), Tomz and Wright (2013), and Hébert and Schreger (2017), among others.
   9
     Declining interest rates due to global imbalances after the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997 is another
force which could have increased the optimal level of public debt, depending on the relative importance
of di¤erent economic channels.


                                                   3
to be shortsighted and to promote immediate goals at the expense of long-term ones.
These political factors a¤ect the long-run size of government de…cits and therefore the
long-term trajectory of government debt. I argue that an increasingly older population,
rising political polarization, and rising electoral uncertainty can explain the long-run trend
in government debt across advanced economies.
    A resonating theme across all the political explanations for rising debt is the time-
inconsistency of government policy. Current governments want to be …scally irresponsible,
while simultaneously hoping that future governments be …scally responsible. This force
explains why governments across the world have been compelled to adopt …scal rules—
such as mandated de…cit, spending, or revenue limits— to restrict future …scal policy and
curtail the increase in government debt. In 2015, 92 countries had …scal rules in place, a
dramatic increase from 1990, when only 7 countries had them.10 In some countries, these
rules have been an e¤ective force at limiting the de…cit bias of governments and curbing
the increase in debt.11
    Given their prevalence, an important question concerns the optimal structure of …scal
rules, as well as the practical challenges to their implementation. In the …nal part of
this article, I describe some of the recent research on the optimal design of …scal rules,
elucidating the fundamental tradeo¤ between commitment and ‡exibility underpinning
these rules. I also consider what this tradeo¤ implies for various features of …scal rules
in theory and in practice. This discussion touches on how rules should be conditioned
on public information, how they should be enforced, how they should be applied at a
supranational level, whether they should feature escape clauses, and whether they should
be based on …scal policy tools or targets.


2       Rising Government Debt vs. Optimal Policy
Is rising government debt in advanced economies like the U.S. a re‡ection of optimal
policy? In this section, I review theories of optimal government debt, and I argue that
the answer to this question appears to be no. While the increase in the level of debt in
certain periods may have been an optimal response to speci…c macroeconomic shocks, the
broad-based long-run trend in debt accumulation seems inconsistent with optimal policy.
 10
      For a complete description of the …scal rule adopted in each country, see Lledó, et al. (2017).
 11
      See Caselli et al. (2018) for a discussion.




                                                      4
2.1     How Government Debt Matters
Behind any theory of optimal government debt is an assumption to break the Ricardian
Equivalence proposition (Barro, 1974). This proposition states that the level of govern-
ment debt is irrelevant and has no e¤ect on real economic activity. Speci…cally, if the
government cuts taxes and borrows today, the private sector anticipates a tax increase in
the future by the government to repay the debt. As a consequence, consumption, labor,
and capital investment decisions are unchanged since the private sector uses the tax cut
today to save through government bonds to …nance a higher future tax burden.
    The logic of Ricardian Equivalence requires three strong conditions that do not hold
in practice. First, it assumes that raising revenue entails no deadweight loss, which
is why the timing of revenue-raising does not directly distort consumption, labor, or
capital investment decisions. Second, households and …rms are assumed to be …nancially
unconstrained and can thus borrow and lend freely at the same terms as the government.
This is why a borrowing entity does not bene…t from the additional liquidity it receives
from a tax cut. Finally, households and …rms care about the level of taxes in…nitely
far into the future, which is why they internalize the future tax liability associated with
current tax cuts. I now turn to theories of optimal government debt that relax each of
these three conditions.


2.2     Tax-Smoothing
The most widely used theory of optimal government debt management is the tax-smoothing
theory. If raising revenue distorts economic decisions, whereas selling government bonds
does not, then government debt allows the government to smooth the deadweight loss
from raising revenue across time (e.g., Barro, 1979, Lucas and Stokey, 1983).12,13 Accord-
ing to this theory, there are a number of economic forces that drive optimal government
debt upward or downward. I now examine whether this theory of optimal policy can
justify the observed long-run trend in government debt in advanced economies.
  12
     One can introduce such a deadweight loss in a production economy by ruling out lump sum taxes.
This implies that raising revenue through distortionary taxes changes the level, and potentially the
distribution, of economic allocations.
  13
     For follow-up work which builds on this tradition, see Bohn (1990), Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe
(1994), Aiyagari, et al. (2002), Angeletos (2002), Buera and Nicolini (2004), Werning (2007), Lustig,
Sleet, and Yeltekin (2008), Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2010), Farhi (2010), Bhandari, et al. (2017a),
and Karantounias (2018), among others.




                                                  5
2.2.1    Unanticipated Fiscal Needs

The tax-smoothing argument suggests that a government facing temporary and unan-
ticipated spending needs should respond optimally by increasing government debt. The
logic is that …nancing these needs through immediate revenue-raising would be too costly
for the economy in the short-term; it is better to issue debt to spread these costs into
the future, when …scal needs are lower. There are several unanticipated temporary …scal
needs that have caused government debt to increase across advanced economies.
    The global …nancial crisis, which started in 2007, increased the …scal needs of govern-
ments. It put downward pressure on government revenues and upward pressure on the
potential bene…ts of …scal stimulus, which some countries pursued through temporary tax
cuts and government spending increases.14 Government debt across advanced economies
increased in response. In the U.S., gross central government debt as a fraction of GDP
increased from 64 percent in 2007 to 90 percent in 2010. During the same time frame,
government debt to GDP in the Euro area also increased, not only in countries heavily
impacted by the crisis such as Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, but also in
countries less impacted by the crisis such as Germany and France.15
    Nevertheless, the global …nancial crisis alone cannot explain the secular increase in
government debt across advanced economies, as this trend goes back several decades. In
1980, U.S. government debt was about one half the pre-crisis 2007 level. In France and
Germany, government debt to GDP was approximately one third the 2007 level.
    Prior to the global …nancial crisis, the unanticipated wars in Afghanistan (2001-
present) and Iraq (2003-2011) contributed to rising government debt. In the U.S., military
spending as a fraction of GDP increased from 2.9 percent in 2000 to 3.8 percent in 2007,
and government debt to GDP increased from 57 percent to 64 percent.16
    However, the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq cannot account for the increase in U.S.
government debt to GDP from 33 percent in 1980 to 57 percent in 2000. This was a period
during which the end of the Cold War brought along a signi…cant unanticipated decrease
in military spending, a force that should have caused government debt to decline, but
did not (e.g., Alesina, 2000). In addition, these wars cannot account for the increase in
government debt in other advanced economies. For example, military spending relative
to GDP actually decreased between 2000 and 2007 in the Euro area as a whole, including
  14
     See Ramey (2011) and the references therein for a discussion of the empirical evidence on the bene…t
of …scal stimulus measures.
  15
     All measures of gross central government debt to GDP are from Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2011).
  16
     Military spending as a fraction of GDP is from World Bank.




                                                   6
in Germany and France.17 Nonetheless, government debt relative to GDP increased for
many Euro area countries, including in Germany and France.18
   In sum, unanticipated temporary …scal needs resulting from the global …nancial crisis
and war can explain the increase in the level of debt in certain periods, but they cannot
explain the long-term trend in government debt across advanced economies.

2.2.2    Anticipated Fiscal Needs

A question then emerges as to whether anticipated …scal needs can explain the long-
term trend in public debt. According to tax-smoothing theory, a government facing a
reduction in long-term …scal needs should increase public debt in the present. This is
because declining …scal pressures can facilitate future debt repayment.
    The long-term anticipated …scal needs of advanced economies have actually evolved
in the exact opposite direction. Across advanced economies, the reduction in fertility
rates and the extension of life spans have gradually increased the fraction of the popula-
tion which is old, as displayed in Figure 4. The result is higher dependency ratios and
larger old-age government assistance programs.19 In the U.S., for example, social security
spending as a fraction of GDP increased from 2.8 percent of GDP in 1970 to 4.9 percent
of GDP in 2017. Medicare spending as a fraction of GDP increased from 0.6 percent of
GDP to 3.7 percent of GDP during that time.20 These are forecasted to continue to rise
over the coming decade.21
    In the face of these anticipated demographic changes, tax-smoothing theory would
have prescribed a decumulation— not an accumulation— of government debt during the
past several decades. A government facing rising future …scal pressures should pay down
a larger portion of the debt in the present so as to alleviate forecasted …scal strain. More-
over, tax-smoothing theory would have predicted lower debt accumulation in countries
anticipating greater strain due to an aging population. Nevertheless, the cross-sectional
  17
     Military spending decreased in the Euro area from 1.9 percent to 1.7 percent of GDP. In Germany,
the decline was from 1.4 percent to 1.2 percent of GDP. In France, the decline was from 2.5 percent to
2.2 percent of GDP.
  18
     In Germany, government debt increased from 35 percent to 39 percent of GDP. In France, government
debt increased from 57 percent to 64 percent of GDP.
  19
     For example, between 1975 and 2015, the dependency ratio in the OECD increased from 19.5 to 27.9
(OECD, 2017, Table 5.5). Between 1980 and 2013, cash bene…ts to the elderly as a fraction of GDP
increased from 5.7 percent to 8.2 percent (OECD "Social Expenditure Database").
  20
     Data from Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2018). This increase in mandatory spending was anticipated
by historical U.S. government forecasts which, on average, predicted larger increases than were realized
(see Congressional Budget O¢ ce, 2017).
  21
     Social security spending is projected to increase to 6.0 percent of GDP and medicare spending to 5.1
percent of GDP by 2028 (Congressional Budget O¢ ce, 2018, Table 2.1).


                                                   7
data illustrated in Figure 5 shows the opposite: Countries experiencing a greater increase
in population aging, like Japan, actually accumulated more debt as a percentage of GDP
than those experiencing a lower demographic strain, such as Denmark.
    In sum, the long-term secular trend in government debt accumulation across advanced
economies cannot re‡ect an optimal policy response to anticipated …scal needs.

                  Figure 4. Aging Population in Advanced Economies




       Figure 5. Change in Government Debt and Change in Elderly Population




                                            8
2.3     Safe Asset Provision
A second theory of optimal government debt considers the role of public debt when the
private sector is …nancially constrained and cannot borrow or lend freely at the same terms
as the government (e.g., Woodford, 1990, Aiyagari and McGrattan, 1998, Holmström and
Tirole, 1998).22 This theory builds on the fact that, relative to private defaultable debt,
government debt is less risky to hold since it is backed by future tax revenues, which
the government can collect through its power of coercion. By increasing the issuance of
government bonds, the government slackens …nancial constraints on borrowers who now
receive additional resources from the government (through tax cuts or government loans),
while simultaneously increasing the supply of safe assets available to lenders. Accordingly,
the government can accommodate a change in safe asset demand or supply— which a¤ects
interest rates— with an increase or decrease in government debt. I now examine whether
this safe asset provision theory of optimal debt can justify the observed long-term trend
in government debt in advanced economies.23

2.3.1    Financial Constraints

The safe asset provision theory suggests that, in the face of tightening private credit con-
ditions, the government should respond with an increase in government debt. If …nancial
constraints become tighter, an increase in public debt counteracts the shrinking supply
of safe assets for creditors, while simultaneously providing more liquidity to increasingly
constrained borrowers.24
    From this perspective, the increase in public debt in response to the global …nancial
crisis previously described is qualitatively consistent with the conduct of optimal policy.
However, the logic of this argument is not consistent with the secular increase in public
debt in the decades prior to the global …nancial crisis. Between 1980 and 2007, …nancial
conditions did not tighten, but actually loosened through a global process of …nancial
  22
     For follow-up work which adds on this tradition, see Mankiw (2000), Yared (2013), Azzimonti, de
Francisco, and Quadrini (2014), Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2016), Bhandari, et al. (2017b), and
Azzimonti and Yared (2017, 2018), among others.
  23
     For this exercise, I consider the implications for an economy with heterogeneous households consisting
of borrowers and lenders. An alternative approach considers hand-to-mouth homogeneous households in
an open economy. Since the government’s objective in this case is to smooth private consumption over time
through taxes and transfers matched with ‡uctuating government borrowing from abroad, the analysis of
this environment is isomorphic to a tax-smoothing framework. For further discussion on the isomorphism
between tax-smoothing and consumption-smoothing frameworks, see Barro (1979) and Aiyagari et al.
(2002).
  24
     Azzimonti and Yared (2018) establish this comparative static quantitatively when evaluating the
stationary distribution of an economy along a balanced growth path.



                                                    9
deregulation (e.g., Philippon and Reshef, 2012). Deregulation came hand in hand with
an increase in private sector leverage.25 According to the safe asset provision theory, such
a relaxation of …nancial constraints should have been met with a decrease, as opposed to
an increase, in public debt.

2.3.2    Precautionary Private Savings

The safe asset provision theory also suggests that public debt should increase in response
to rising income risk. Households and businesses facing greater income risk develop a
stronger precautionary motive to save, driving down interest rates. The optimal policy
response increases the supply of public debt to satisfy the increased demand for safe
assets.26
    Nevertheless, evidence from U.S. administrative data suggests that income risk actu-
ally declined in the decades after 1980 (e.g., Sabelhaus and Song, 2010, Guvenen, Ozkhan,
and Song, 2014).27 According to the safe asset provision theory, this development should
have been met with a decrease, as opposed to an increase, in public debt.

2.3.3    Global Capital Flows and Interest Rates

A …nal factor which the safe asset provision theory can address is how public debt should
respond to globalization. Over the last four decades, the reduction of international bar-
riers in trade and …nance led to a dramatic expansion of cross-border ‡ows.28 This trend
accelerated in the aftermath of the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997 and the introduction of
China into the World Trade Organization in 2001. The ensuing large capital in‡ows into
advanced economies— a phenomenon known as the global saving glut— led to a deteriora-
tion of net foreign asset position for some advanced economies and to a decline in global
interest rates (Bernanke, 2005).29
    What is the e¤ect of globalization on the optimal provision of public debt? How should
public debt respond to larger capital in‡ows from global saving glut countries? The answer
  25
     The U.S., for example, saw an increase in household debt, with household debt service as a percent
of disposable income rising from 10.5 percent in 1980 to 13 percent in 2007 (see Federal Reserve Board).
  26
     Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini (2014) illustrate this result in a quantitative model.
  27
     This evidence pertains to household labor income. Business-level analyses of trends in risk have found
mixed results (e.g., Campbell, et al, 2001, and Brandt, et al., 2009).
  28
     For example, between 1980 and 2017, U.S. foreign assets increased from 30 percent of GDP to 144
percent of GDP while U.S. foreign liabilities increased from 19 percent of GDP to 185 percent of GDP
(U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "International Investment Position", Table 1.1).
  29
     In the U.S., for instance, net foreign assets relative to GDP declined from -9 percent of GDP in 1997
to -41 percent of GDP in 2017 (U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "International Investment Position",
Table 1.1).


                                                    10
depends on a number of factors. First, an increase in asset demand by foreigners cheapens
borrowing by the domestic private and public sectors, reducing the level of interest rates.
Second, globalization expands the market for safe assets, thereby reducing the marginal
interest rate response to additional public debt issuance. Finally, additional borrowing
by the domestic private sector (in response to lower interest rates) means that domestic
borrowers su¤er more from marginal interest rate increases induced by higher public debt.
While the …rst two forces reduce the cost of issuing public debt on the margin, the third
force increases this cost. As such, the optimal policy response to greater globalization
and capital in‡ows is ambiguous.30
    Beyond this theoretical ambiguity, there are other reasons why the long-term trend in
public debt across advanced economies does not appear to be an optimal policy response to
globalization. First, government debt in the U.S. and other advanced economies had been
on an upward trajectory well before the onset of the global saving glut in the late 1990s.31
Second, prior to the late 1990s, the degree of cross-border public debt holdings had been
relatively stable, suggesting that the globalization of public debt markets was limited up
until that point.32 Finally, this theory would predict that smaller countries respond to
globalization by increasing public debt proportionately more than larger countries. This
follows since globalization decreases the interest rate response to debt issuance by more
for small countries. This prediction is also at odds with the empirical evidence. The
relationship between country size and debt issuance for advanced economies during this
period is actually positive, with larger economies such as Japan and the United States
increasing their public debt to GDP ratio by more than other countries.33
  30
     The three channels highlighted here, together with an ambiguous optimal policy response, emerge if
one extends the two-period model of Azzimonti and Yared (2017) by introducing foreign asset demand
(details available upon request). Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini (2014) also illustrate the second
channel in a model with symmetric countries individually choosing policy. Another approach to this
question additionally considers the risk of default and in‡ation by the government (e.g., Caballero, Farhi,
and Gourinchas, 2017, Farhi and Maggiori, 2017, He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt, 2018, among others).
  31
     See the discussion in the previous section for the case of the U.S. In Germany, government debt to
GDP grew from 15 percent in 1980 to 35 percent in 2000. In France, it grew from 21 percent to 57
percent.
  32
     For example, in the case of the U.S., the fraction of government debt which was domestically held
remained around 79 percent between 1980 and 1994. Between 1994 and 2017, this fraction declined to
49 percent (see U.S. Department of the Treasury, Fiscal Service).
  33
     As an illustration, in the advanced economy sample from Figure 3, the change in debt to GDP from
1980 to 2010 has a correlation of 0.26 with log 1980 population and 0.23 with log 1980 GDP. Population
and GDP data are from Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer (2015).




                                                    11
2.4     Dynamic E¢ ciency
I have argued that neither the tax-smoothing theory nor the safe asset provision theory
can deliver a justi…cation for the long-term trend in government debt accumulation across
advanced economies. A …nal, less explored, theory considers the role of public debt when
the private sector does not internalize the e¤ect of …scal policy in…nitely far into the future
(e.g., Diamond, 1965, and Blanchard, 1985). In such an environment, older households
do not face the future tax cost of issuing government debt today, since these taxes will
be repaid by future generations. As a consequence, an increase in government debt has
the e¤ect of tilting the lifetime consumption pro…le towards older generations, while also
increasing interest rates and crowding out capital investment. Moreover, under some
conditions, the possibility of a bubble in government debt arises, whereby one generation
is willing to hold government debt purely because future generations are also expected to
do so.
    From this perspective, if an economy is dynamically ine¢ cient and has overaccumu-
lated capital, increasing government debt can be optimal.34 By reducing the capital stock,
a higher government debt reduces household saving and bene…ts society by increasing
household lifetime consumption. However, there is no evidence of capital overaccumula-
tion in advanced economies over the last decades. Abel, et al. (1989) examine data for
the OECD from 1960 to 1985 and for the U.S. from 1929 to 1985 and …nd no dynamic
ine¢ ciencies. The empirical patterns behind their conclusions also hold for the U.S. with
data extended to the present.35 This evidence suggests that the observed trend in public
debt is unlikely to have been an optimal policy response to dynamic ine¢ ciency.36


3      Political Forces behind Rising Government Debt
The absence of a clear normative reason for the trend in government debt across advanced
economies suggests that political forces are behind this pattern. In this section, I review
political economy theories of government debt. These theories predict that the presence of
an aging population, political polarization, and electoral uncertainty cause governments
to be shortsighted and to promote immediate goals at the expense of long-term ones.
These political factors a¤ect the long-run size of government de…cits and therefore the
  34
     Ine¢ cient overaccumulation can emerge in equilibrium when agents have …nite horizons, in which
case a bubble on government debt can improve welfare. See Shell (1971) and Geanakoplos (2008) for a
discussion of ine¢ ciencies in overlapping generations economies.
  35
     See Geerolf (2017), Figure 3.
  36
     Geerolf (2017) revisits the conclusions of Abel el al. (1989) and argues that some OECD countries,
such as Japan and South Korea, are dynamically ine¢ cient.


                                                  12
long-term trend of government debt. I argue that, over the past four decades, changes in
these political factors can explain the long-run trajectory of government debt.37
    Theoretically, the political factors that I describe imply that a government behaves
similarly to an agent with present-biased and dynamically inconsistent preferences (e.g.,
Strotz, 1955). An analytically tractable representation of such preferences is the quasi-
hyperbolic case analyzed in Phelps and Pollak (1968) and Laibson (1997).38 In the context
of a …scal policy model, quasi-hyperbolic preferences imply that the government at a given
date t weighs periods ft; t + 1; t + 2; :::g according to discount rates 1; ; 2 ; ::: , for
some rate of time preference 2 (0; 1) and present bias 2 (0; 1). This present bias is
determined by various underlying political factors.39
    Relative to the benevolent social planner, with discount rates 1; ; 2 ; ::: , these quasi-
hyperbolic preferences feature a sharp drop in valuation after date t, capturing the present
bias. Moreover, these preferences are dynamically inconsistent: The weight the govern-
ment assigns to future periods depends on the perspective of the government. For example,
consider the weight the government assigns to date t + 2 relative to date t + 1. From the
                                             2
perspective of date t, this weight is          = ( ) = , but from the perspective of date
t + 1, this weight is     < . The date t + 1 government is therefore more shortsighted
than the date t government would prefer.
    In this framework, any political factor that ampli…es the present bias (reduces )
results in larger de…cits and changes the long-term trend in government debt. Moreover,
since a government at any date would prefer to commit future governments to constraining
the growth of debt, debt accumulation in this context re‡ects a political failure.40
    In the next subsections, I describe the political factors that provide a microfoundation
for the present bias and the dynamic inconsistency of government preferences. I argue
  37
     My discussion focuses on rational theories in which political self-interest drives debt accumulation.
The "…scal illusion" theory emphasizes voters’behavioral biases and their potential inability to understand
the long-term costs of de…cits (e.g., Buchanan and Wagner, 1977). This theory does not lead voters to
demand commitment devices, such as the …scal rules that have been adopted across the world (see the next
section for a discussion). Moreover, it is not clear whether the time-series and cross-country patterns in
behavioral biases–to the extent these could be measured–would explain the empirical evidence on public
debt.
  38
     For follow-up work on the analysis of quasi-hyperbolic preferences, see Krusell and Smith (2003),
Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin (2015), Bisin, Lizzeri, and Yariv (2015), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2016),
Cao and Werning (2017), Lizzeri and Yariv (2017), and Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva (2017), among
others.
  39
     For …scal policy applications that make use of these preferences, see Aguiar and Amador (2011) and
Halac and Yared (2014, 2017, 2018a), for example.
  40
     In contrast to a framework with an impatient, time-consistent government that overborrows, the
quasi-hyperbolic model leads to a demand for commitment devices, such as the …scal rules that govern-
ments have adopted across the world (see the next section for a discussion).



                                                    13
that persistent, broad-based changes in these political factors o¤er an explanation for the
long-run trend in government debt.41,42


3.1     Aging and Heterogeneous Discounting
Government debt is impacted by the fact that households di¤er in how much they weigh
the present relative to the future. These di¤erences can be the result of demographics,
with older households caring less about the future than younger households. This het-
erogeneity by itself does not imply excessive debt accumulation. However, in a political
environment in which policy is chosen sequentially without commitment, as in a repre-
sentative democracy, this heterogeneity implies a present bias together with dynamically
inconsistent preferences for the government.
    We can illustrate this idea using a simple example based on the analysis in Jackson
and Yariv (2014, 2015). Suppose that half the population has a rate of time preference
  H and the other half has a rate L < H , with policy chosen sequentially by a utilitarian

government.43 Individuals are time-consistent, since an individual applies discount rates
  1; i ; 2i ; ::: for i = H; L to the future. However, the utilitarian government is present-
biased and dynamically inconsistent. To see why, consider the weight the utilitarian
government assigns to date t + 2 relative to date t + 1. From the perspective of date t,
this weight is 2L + 2H = ( L + H ). However, from the perspective of date t + 1, this
weight is ( L + H ) =2 < 2L + 2H = ( L + H ). Thus, the government overweighs date
t + 1 when choosing policy at date t + 1 relative to what it would have preferred ex ante
at date t. Note further that for the special case where L = 0, government preferences
exactly coincide with the quasi-hyberbolic preferences described previously, with a rate of
time preference = H and a de…cit bias = 1=2 (the fraction of patient households).44
  41
      Due to space restrictions, I focus on long-run considerations and ignore variation in present bias over
the political business cycle (e.g., Rogo¤ and Sibert, 1988, and Rogo¤, 1990, Drazen, 2000, Ales, Maziero,
and Yared, 2014). See the survey in Alesina and Passalacqua (2016) for a more detailed discussion of the
theoretical literature on the political economy of public debt.
   42
      Note that even in the absence of the forces that I describe, government debt can deviate from the
normative benchmark if a government is benevolent but lacks commitment to the path of interest rates or
to repaying debt (e.g., Chari and Kehoe 1993a, 1993b, Debortoli, Nunes, and Yared, 2017, 2018, among
others). However, whether this form of lack of commitment on its own leads to debt that is higher or
lower than is optimal is ambiguous and depends on various economic considerations. For this reason, I
focus on how lack of commitment combined with additional political factors leads to excessive debt.
   43
      This representation of sequential policymaking is equivalent to a policy chosen through dynamic
elections in a probabilistic voting game (e.g., Farhi, et al., 2012).
   44
      Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015) generalize this idea and show that with any heterogeneity in pref-
erences, every nondictatorial aggregation method that respects unanimity must be time-inconsistent;
moreover, any such method that is time separable must lead to a present bias.



                                                     14
    Conceptually, heterogeneity in discount rates means that impatient households wield
disproportionate in‡uence in policymaking. If commitment were possible, impatient
households would agree ex ante to allow the patient households to have more political
in‡uence in the future, since those households value the future more. However, noth-
ing can stop impatient households from in‡uencing policy ex post through the political
process, which is why there is a present bias in policymaking, and the government is
time-inconsistent.
    This theory has implications for intergenerational con‡ict and its impact on govern-
ment debt. The larger is the fraction of old impatient households relative to young patient
households, the more shortsighted is the government, the larger are government de…cits,
and the more rapid is government debt accumulation.45 This is consistent with survey
evidence on intergenerational di¤erences in policy preferences, with younger households
placing a larger value on …scal responsibility than older households.46
    This theory can explain the long-term trend in government debt in advanced economies
as resulting from an aging population, as displayed earlier in Figure 4. In addition, this
theory is consistent with the cross-country trends displayed earlier in Figure 5, where
government debt has grown faster in countries experiencing a larger increase in the elderly
population.


3.2     Tragedy of the Commons
A second political factor leading to shortsighted policymaking is the tragedy of the com-
mons. According to this theory, political parties acting independently engage in excessive
targeted government spending since they do not internalize the shared …nancing costs of
government debt.47
    As an illustration, consider N symmetric parties that can make targeted de…cit-
…nanced spending appropriations to their constituencies, simultaneously and without co-
ordinating. Then each party fails to internalize the total cost of additional debt, since
the burden of this debt is shared equally across parties in the future; the private cost
of one additional unit of debt due to targeted spending is a fraction 1=N of the total
  45
      Arguments along these lines are made in Calvo and Obstfeld (1988), Cukierman and Meltzer (1989),
and Tabellini (1991). Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2012) show that this present bias can be mitigated
if current generations care more about future generations than future generations care about current
generations.
   46
      See Parker (2012) and Wolter, et al. (2013).
   47
      Weingast, Shepsle, and Johnsen (1981) discuss the common pool problem in a static …scal framework.
Tornell and Lane (1999), Velasco (1999, 2000), and Hertzberg (2016) discuss it in a dynamic framework
where they show that it leads to lower aggregate saving.



                                                    15
cost. The result is excessive spending and government debt accumulation, which would
be alleviated if parties jointly committed ex ante to limiting borrowing. In this sense, the
lack of coordination leads the government to be present-biased and time-inconsistent in
its …scal policy.48
    This coordination problem can also emerge across countries, particularly if these coun-
tries are highly integrated …nancially, as in the Euro area. Individual countries may fail to
internalize the impact of their borrowing decisions on the shared interest rates, in‡ation
rates, or probability of …nancial contagion. The result is ine¢ ciently high public debt
accumulation across countries.49
    The tragedy of the commons predicts that countries with a large number of con-
stituencies or deep disagreements in spending priorities across constituencies will incur
larger government de…cits, resulting in faster government debt accumulation.50 This pre-
diction is consistent with empirical work that has found that larger de…cits are associated
with countries with more ministers, with greater ideological polarization in the executive,
and with a proportional (as opposed to majoritarian) election system.51
    This theory can explain the long-term trend in government debt in advanced economies
as a result of the increase in political polarization and fragmentation across advanced
economies. Figure 6 displays the increase in partisan con‡ict in the U.S. since the late
1960s. This trend is consistent with evidence from other advanced economies, which have
witnessed a declining in‡uence of centrist political parties; see Figure 7.52 Finally, across
advanced economies, the rise in government debt has also mirrored the increase in political
fractionalization in legislatures; see Figure 8.53
  48
      Under some assumptions on preferences, Hertzberg (2016) establishes an equivalence result which
links the intertemporal behavior of multiple time-consistent agents su¤ering from the tragedy of the
commons with that of a single time-inconsistent agent with quasi-hyperbolic preferences.
   49
      Chang (1990), Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini (2014), and Halac and Yared (2018a) discuss
excessive borrowing in the context of shared interest rates. Beetsma and Uhlig (1999), Chari and Kehoe
(2007), and Aguiar, et al. (2015) discuss it in the context of shared in‡ation rates. These mechanisms
also apply to subnational governments which can issue their own debt (e.g., Dovis and Kirpalani, 2017).
   50
      Disagreement in a common pool model can be represented by the weight individual constituencies
place on targeted transfers versus mutually bene…cial public goods. See Hertzberg (2016) for additional
details.
   51
      See for example evidence in Woo (2003), Persson and Tabellini (2004) and Crivelli, et al. (2015).
   52
      This pattern is principally driven by rising vote shares for far right political parties versus far left
parties, which have maintained stable vote shares. See Betz (1994) and Ignazi (2003) for a discussion.
   53
      Figures 7, 8, and 10 present data from Funke, Schularick, and Trebesch (2016) starting from 1950
to maximize the cross-section of countries in the balanced panel. Relative to the sample in Figure 3,
the sample in these …gures excludes Greece, Iceland, New Zealand, Portugal, and Spain, for which this
political data is not available for all years. Figure 10 additionally excludes Finland due to lack of data.




                                                     16
      Figure 6. Rising Political Polarization in the U.S.




Figure 7. Rising Political Polarization in Advanced Economies




                              17
            Figure 8. Rising Political Fractionalization in Advanced Economies




3.3     Political Turnover
A large literature focuses on the third explanation for rising government debt: political
turnover.54 In contrast to the tragedy of the commons, the present bias in policymaking
is not due to a lack of (intratemporal) coordination. Instead, present bias results from
the interaction of two factors: the temporary concentration of political authority in one
political party, which bene…ts disproportionately from current spending, and the inability
of parties to make binding (intertemporal) commitments to one another.
    We can illustrate this idea with an example from the analysis of Aguiar and Amador
(2011). Suppose that there are N symmetric parties, each with a rate of time preference
  . For simplicity, suppose that only one party has the authority to make …scal policy
decisions at any date. When a party is out of power, it puts a weight of 1 on the value of
government spending, whereas when it is in power, it puts a weight of > 1 on the value
of spending. The parameter captures the degree to which a party can derive additional
bene…ts from spending while in power by boosting its popularity, concentrating spending
on preferred initiatives, or increasing wasteful rents. The probability of any given party
  54
    For example, see Persson and Svensson (1989), Alesina and Tabellini (1990), Tabellini and Alesina
(1990), Lizzeri (1999), Battaglini and Coate (2008), Caballero and Yared (2010), Yared (2010), Bouton,
Lizzeri, and Persico (2016), and Müller, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2016), among others.



                                                 18
having power at a given date is q = 1=N , which captures the degree of political risk for the
incumbent party. When choosing policy at date t, an incumbent considers the probability
of holding power in the future and hence weighs periods ft; t + 1; t + 2; :::g according to
(e¤ective) discount rates       ; (q + (1 q)) ; (q + (1 q)) 2 ; ::: . This formulation is
mathematically equivalent to the quasi-hyberbolic case described at the beginning of this
section, with a rate of time preference and de…cit bias = (q + (1 q)) = .
    Conceptually, the presence of political turnover causes the current government to be
impatient, since the party holding power recognizes that it may not have the opportunity
to bene…t from spending in the future.55 This present bias is more severe ( is lower) if
the temporary bene…ts from spending and rent-seeking while in o¢ ce are large ( is high),
if there are more parties competing for power (N is high), or if there is more political
risk (q is low).56 In addition to this present bias, government preferences are dynamically
inconsistent; the party presently in power would prefer that future governments be …scally
responsible, but future governments cannot commit ex ante to future policy. In this sense,
the combination of lack of commitment together with political risk causes the government
to be present-biased and time-inconsistent.
    This theory predicts that countries with more rent-seeking, political fragmentation,
or political risk will incur larger government de…cits, resulting in faster government debt
accumulation. These predictions are in line with empirical cross-country studies on the
determinants of government de…cits.57
    This theory can explain the long-term trend in government debt in advanced economies
as a result of rising political uncertainty for parties in power. Figure 9 shows that the
margin of victory in U.S. presidential elections has been in decline since the mid-1980s,
suggesting that elections have become closer and less predictable. This pattern is in
line with the analysis of U.S. congressional elections, which has documented a declining
incumbency advantage since the mid-1980s (e.g., Jacobson, 2015). Moreover, this U.S.
trend is consistent with the evidence from advanced economies in Figure 10, which displays
a decline in the average popular vote margin in legislative elections for the governing party
  55
     In this example, turnover is exogenous and probabilistic. However, the literature highlighted in Foot-
note 54 shows that the insight holds more generally if turnover is deterministic or if it is endogenous (and
potentially o¤ the equilibrium path). In addition, Persson and Svensson (1989) and Müller, Storesletten,
and Zilibotti (2016) argue that the present bias may be more severe if the current party in power leans
to the right and puts higher relative weight on tax cuts versus government spending increases.
  56
     Note that if a subset of parties can make decisions at any time (e.g., Battaglini and Coate, 2008), then
the number of parties and the degree of political risk are not mechanically related, as in this example.
  57
     In addition to the work cited in Footnote 51, see Drazen (2000) and Alt and Lassen (2016) who
discuss the e¤ect of elections on de…cits.




                                                     19
or coalition.58

          Figure 9. Declining Margin of Victory in Presidential Elections in the U.S.




Figure 10. Declining Margin of Victory in Legislative Elections in Advanced Economies




  58
       See Footnote 53 for additional information on the sample.



                                                    20
3.4     Assessment
In contrast with normative theories, political economy theories of government debt can
qualitatively explain the long-term trend in government debt accumulation across ad-
vanced economies. Nevertheless, these theories leave several unanswered questions for
future research.
    First, it is unclear whether political economy models can quantitatively match the
time-series and cross-sectional patterns in advanced economy government debt. Many
normative models of government debt have been evaluated quantitatively, sometimes
with counterfactual conclusions regarding the size and structure of government debt.59
An analogous analysis of political economy models could potentially clarify what political
factors can best account for the upward trend in government debt. Second, while polit-
ical economy theories explain why an increase in polarization and electoral uncertainty
can lead to rising debt, they do not explain why polarization and electoral uncertainty
have increased in advanced economies, and how this development may have been caused
by certain economic trends or policies.60 Finally, current political economy theories do
not directly address the change in the composition of government spending, which has
become increasingly concentrated in old-age government assistance programs. This de-
velopment could re‡ect how di¤erent political forces interact in the world, as increasingly
competititve political parties change the composition of government spending and increase
government debt to appeal to an aging constituency.61


4      Fiscal Rules to Constrain Rising Debt
A resonating theme across every political explanation for rising debt discussed in the pre-
vious section is the time-inconsistency in government preferences. Current governments
want to be …scally irresponsible, while simultaneously hoping that future governments
be …scally responsible. This force explains why governments across the world have been
compelled to adopt …scal rules— such as mandated de…cit, spending, or revenue limits— to
  59
      For example, in their evaluation of the tax-smoothing model under incomplete markets, Aiyagari, et
al. (2002) and Bhandari, et al. (2017a) …nd that the optimal level of government debt is negative. An-
geletos (2002) and Buera and Nicolini (2004) evaluate the tax-smoothing model under complete markets
and …nd that debt positions at di¤erent maturities can take opposite signs and be extremely large (in
absolute value) relative to GDP.
   60
      McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2008), for example, argue that polarization and income inequality
reinforce each other.
   61
      An additional question regards how the political factors behind present bias, such as polarization,
interact with asymmetric information across political parties. Alesina and Drazen (1991) argue that …scal
stabilizations can be delayed when a one party is uncertain about the rival party’s cost of high debt.


                                                   21
restrict future …scal policy and curtail the increase in government debt. Figure 11 illus-
trates the growing number of countries that have imposed …scal rules.62 These rules have
been adopted at the subnational, national, and supranational levels. In some countries,
such as in Switzerland, they have been an e¤ective force at limiting the government’s
de…cit bias and curbing the increase in debt, as Figure 12 makes clear.63
    Given their prevalence, an important question concerns the optimal structure of …scal
rules, as well as the practical challenges in implementing them. In this section, I describe
recent research on the optimal design of …scal rules, elucidating the fundamental tradeo¤
between commitment and ‡exibility underpinning these rules. I address what this tradeo¤
implies for various features of …scal rules in theory and in practice. This discussion touches
on how rules should be conditioned on public information, how they should be enforced,
how they should be applied at a supranational level, whether they should feature escape
clauses, and whether they should be based on …scal policy tools or targets.



                       Figure 11. Number of Countries with Fiscal Rules




  62
      For a complete description of the …scal rule adopted in each country, see Lledó, et al. (2017). The U.S.
is currently subject to spending caps passed in the Budget Control Act of 2011 which were subsequently
increased by Congress in 2013, 2015, and 2018. A criticism of these spending caps is that they do not
apply to most mandatory spending items underlying the growth in debt (see Capretta, 2014).
   63
      See Salvi, Schaltegger, and Schmid (2017) for an analysis of the case of Switzerland and Wyplosz
(2014) and Caselli et al. (2018) for a broader discussion of the e¤ectiveness of national and supranational
rules at reducing debt. See Poterba (1994, 1996), Bohn and Inman (1996), Fatás and Mihov (2006), and
Primo (2007) for an analysis of the e¤ectiveness of subnational rules in the U.S. See Grembi, Nannicini,
and Troiano (2016) for a related subnational analysis for the case of Italy.



                                                     22
                      Figure 12. Adoption of Fiscal Rule in Switzerland




4.1     Commitment vs. Flexibility
In practice, tight …scal rules that successfully limit debt accumulation are associated with
a less responsive and less volatile …scal policy.64 This observation re‡ects the fundamen-
tal tradeo¤ between commitment and ‡exibility underlying …scal rules. On the one hand,
rules provide valuable commitment, as they can counteract the present bias in policymak-
ing; on the other hand, there is a cost of reduced ‡exibility as …scal constitutions cannot
spell out policy prescriptions for every single shock or contingency, and some discretion
may be optimal.65
    There are two approaches to the theoretical analysis of this tradeo¤. The …rst approach
restricts the structure of a …scal rule to a form used in practice— such as a de…cit limit—
and evaluates the stringency of an optimal rule (e.g., Azzimonti, Battaglini, and Coate,
2016, Halac and Yared, 2018a).66 The second approach does not restrict the structure
of a …scal rule and uses mechanism design to simultaneously characterize the structure
and the stringency of an optimal rule (e.g., Amador, Werning, and Angeletos, 2006, and
Halac and Yared, 2014, 2016, 2017, 2018b). This second approach distinguishes between
…scally relevant information on which a …scal rule can explicitly depend— such as the
  64
     See, for example, the work cited in Footnote 63.
  65
     A related commitment-versus-‡exibility tradeo¤ arises in the institution of monetary rules. See for
example the discussion in Rogo¤ (1983), Lohmann (1992), and Athey, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2006), among
others.
  66
     Additional examples of this approach include Coate and Milton (2017), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2016),
and Dovis and Kirpalani (2017), among others.


                                                  23
level of public debt or GDP— and …scally relevant information on which a …scal rule
cannot explicitly depend— such as the depth of a …nancial crisis or the wartime needs
of the military. This latter type of information can be thought of as the government’s
private information, since it is payo¤ relevant but cannot be part of a rule’s description.67
An optimal …scal rule then is represented as a policy prescription that maximizes social
welfare subject to the government’s private information and present bias.68
    The advantage of the …rst approach is that it can be used to assess real world rules
and evaluate the costs and bene…ts of partial reform in a framework that incorporates
a rich set of macroeconomic and political forces. The advantage of the second approach
is that it can be used to ask whether the overall structure of real world rules is optimal
and to evaluate the costs and bene…ts of global— as opposed to partial— reform. This
second approach also elucidates how other considerations, on top of private information
and present bias, may contribute to the determination of an optimal rule, which can often
take a simple, realistic form. These two approaches complement each other and provide
useful lessons for the optimal design of …scal rules.69
    In the next subsections, I discuss what the tradeo¤ between commitment and ‡exibility
implies for various features of …scal rules in theory and in practice.


4.2     Conditioning on Information
An optimal …scal rule conditions on …scally relevant information that is observable and
veri…able, such as the level of debt and GDP. If no additional (private) information in-
forms optimal …scal policy, the rule would take the form of a contingent policy prescription
that a¤ords no discretion to policymakers. In practice, however, not all …scally relevant
information can be easily observed and veri…ed, and some discretion may be bene…cial.
A commitment-versus-‡exibility tradeo¤ then arises, as discretion comes at the cost of
  67
      Formally, this private information may be publicly observable but not veri…able by a rule-making
body. An alternative interpretation of the private information is that it represents the aggregation
of individual citizens’ preferences observable only to the government (e.g., Sleet 2004, Piguillem and
Schneider, 2016). Another interpretation is that the private information corresponds to …scally relevant
data— such as the exact cost of public goods— which is only known to the government.
   68
      This approach is related to the study of delegation in principal-agent settings, including Holmström
(1977, 1984), Melumad and Shibano (1991), Alsonso and Matouschek (2008), Amador and Bagwell (2013),
and Ambrus and Egorov (2013, 2017), among others. The delegation problem concerns a principal who
provides incentives to a better informed but biased agent by limiting the agent’s actions (since transfers
are infeasible). In contrast to the analysis of delegation, the analysis of …scal rules must address the
dynamic inconsistency in the agent’s (the government’s) preferences.
   69
      The di¤erence between these two approaches is analogous to that between the Ramsey and Mir-
rlees approaches to optimal taxation. See Mankiw, Weinzerl, and Yagan (2009) for a discussion of this
distinction.



                                                   24
excessive borrowing due to the government’s present bias. Amador, Werning, and An-
geletos (2006) show that, under some conditions, the optimal resolution of this tradeo¤
is a threshold rule, taking the form of a de…cit, spending, or revenue limit, as is often
observed in practice.70 The optimal threshold is tighter the smaller is the volatility of the
government’s private information and the more severe is the government’s present bias,
as in both cases the value of commitment is increased relative to the value of ‡exibility.
    There are important challenges in determining how to optimally set …scal thresholds.
First, there are practical questions regarding implementation. Recent research has been
devoted to examining which macroeconomic measures should be used to set a threshold,
how to weigh the relative importance of these measures, and how to set the numerical
targets so as to a¤ord su¢ cient ‡exibility while simultaneously preventing excessive debt
growth.71 Second, when some …scally relevant information is not veri…able, there are con-
ceptual questions regarding what other information an optimal …scal rule should condition
on. In particular, Halac and Yared (2014) show that if the government’s private informa-
tion is persistent over time, an optimal …scal rule should condition on the extent to which
past policies agreed with …scal targets, even if this measure is irrelevant for optimal policy
determination. How to practically incorporate these considerations into real world …scal
rules is an interesting area for future research.


4.3     Enforcement
According to the International Monetary Fund, governments comply with …scal rules only
about 50 percent of the time.72 Whenever a rule is violated, a formal or informal enforce-
ment mechanism is triggered. For example, in the European Union, an Excessive De…cit
Procedure— a sequence of costly …scal adjustments and potential sanctions— is set in mo-
tion whenever a rule is breached.73 In contrast, in Chile, there are no formal procedures,
and penalties for rule violation have been informal. In 2009, a breach of the …scal rule by
the Chilean administration was informally punished by the next administration, which
  70
     This result requires certain assumptions on the distribution of private information and the govern-
ment’s preferences. Without these assumptions, an optimal rule is more complex and can involve multiple
policy thresholds.
  71
     As an example, Azzimonti, Battaglini, and Coate (2016) analyze the short- and long-term costs and
bene…ts of adopting a balanced budget amendment in the U.S. Alfaro and Kanczuk (2016) compare the
performance of a debt-independent de…cit limit to a pure debt limit for the case of Brazil. Hatchondo,
Martinez, and Roch (2017) argue that …scal rules should not be absolute and should respond ‡exibly to
market signals such as sovereign spreads. See Eyraud, Baum, et al. (2018) for a general discussion of the
challenges in calibrating …scal rules.
  72
     See Caselli et al. (2018).
  73
     See Lledó, et al. (2017, p.81) for a description of this procedure.



                                                   25
continued to ignore the rule despite criticism of …scal irresponsibility.74 This example
highlights a self-enforcement mechanism: the threat of rule abandonment by future gov-
ernments may serve as a deterrent for a current government considering breaking a …scal
rule.
    How should …scal rules be structured under limited enforcement? Halac and Yared
(2017) address this question in a commitment-versus-‡exibility framework with limited
punishments that harm both the government and society. They show that under some
conditions, the optimal rule is a maximally-enforced threshold, namely a de…cit, spending,
or revenue limit that triggers the largest feasible penalty whenever violated. A key insight
is that, even though graduated punishments are less socially costly ex post, they are
suboptimal ex ante as they induce too little …scal discipline.75 Furthermore, this analysis
shows that …scal thresholds that are never violated by the government may be too lax
and thus also suboptimal. This occurs when the government’s present bias is severe and
situations of extreme …scal need are rare. The …scal rule should then be tight enough as
to be occasionally broken, since the social cost of infrequent punishment is outweighed by
the bene…t of increased …scal discipline in normal times.
    There are several issues to take into account when considering punishments for break-
ing …scal rules. First, whether or not rules have been broken might be unclear due to
lack of transparency. Governments can utilize creative accounting techniques to circum-
vent rules. For example, in 2016, President Dilma Rousse¤ of Brazil was impeached for
illegally using state-run banks to directly pay for government expenses and bypass the
…scal responsibility law.76 Given this problem of transparency, many countries have es-
tablished independent …scal councils to assess and monitor the implementation of …scal
policy together with the compliance with …scal rules.77
    A second issue to consider is credibility. Non-credible punishments are ine¤ective to
enforce …scal rules. As an example, the Excessive De…cit Procedure against France and
Germany in 2003 was stalled because of disagreement between the European Commission
and the European Council; consequently, French and German de…cits persisted without
  74
     See Halac and Yared (2017) for a description of this episode.
  75
     This insight relies on a technical result that incentives take a bang-bang form. In the model of Halac
and Yared (2017), this high-powered incentive structure is optimal since rewards and punishments are
experienced jointly by the government and society.
  76
     See Leahy (2016) for a discussion. Another form of liability shifting in U.S. states has involved
compensating government employees with future pension payments, which increases o¤-balance-sheet
entitlement liabilities not subject to …scal rules (see Bouton, Lizzeri, and Persico, 2016). Frankel and
Schreger (2013) describe another example of creative accounting in the Euro area. They argue that
governments utilize over-optimistic growth forecasts as a means of minimizing the burden of complying
with …scal rules.
  77
     See Debrun et al. (2013) for an overview of these institutions.


                                                    26
penalty.78 Halac and Yared (2017) argue that in the absence of institutionalized penalties,
the temporary abandonment of rules combined with overspending— as in the Chilean
case previously described— can serve as its own deterrent for breaking a …scal rule. Such
an informal punishment is arguably easier to enforce than formal sanctions, as there is
typically some constituency in favor of increasing spending.79
    A …nal issue to consider is the response of the private sector to a violation of rules,
which can also serve as a form of punishment. For example, Caselli et al. (2018) …nd that
the violation of …scal rules is associated with a signi…cant increase in sovereign spreads.
Such an increase in …nancing costs immediately penalizes a government for breaching a
rule.80


4.4     Coordinated Rules
More than half of the countries subject to …scal rules face rules that apply at a suprana-
tional level. Moreover, among these countries, more than a dozen have additional rules at
the national level.81 For example, Germany is constrained not only by the guidelines of
the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), but also by its own constitution-
ally mandated “debt brake", which imposes a tighter limit on the government’s structural
de…cit than the SGP.82
    The main argument for imposing rules at a supranational level relates to the tragedy
of the commons. Individual countries in an integrated economic region do not internalize
the impact of their borrowing decisions on the shared interest rates, in‡ation rates, or
probability of …nancial contagion. Supranational …scal rules can limit this externality.83
    The adoption of supranational rules comes with numerous challenges. First, the im-
position of uniform thresholds for multiple countries under a supranational rule, as in
the case of the SGP, may be inappropriate if countries are likely to di¤er in the level or
  78
     See Tran (2003) for a discussion.
  79
     A similar mechanism underlies the incentive bene…t of formal institutions that make current spending
increases automatically persist into the future (e.g., Bowen, Chen, and Eraslan, 2014, and Piguillem and
Riboni, 2018).
  80
     This idea can be formalized in a model of government debt and default which features multiple
equilibria resulting from self-ful…lling market expectations (e.g., Calvo, 1988).
  81
     The treaties that encompass the supranational rules correspond to the European Union’s Stability
and Growth Pact, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, and the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. The countries with both national
and supranational rules are all in the European Union.
  82
     See Truger and Will (2013).
  83
     Halac and Yared (2018a) discuss the role of …scal rules in the context of shared interest rates. Beetsma
and Uhlig (1999), Chari and Kehoe (2007), and Aguiar et al. (2015) discuss them in the context of shared
in‡ation rates.



                                                     27
volatility of their …scal needs or in the severity of their governments’present bias. Hatch-
ondo, Martinez, and Roch (2017) argue that conditioning thresholds on market signals,
like a sovereign interest spread, allows supranational rules to more e¤ectively tailor to
individual countries.
    Second, the design of rules at a supranational level must account for the disciplining
e¤ect of interest rates (Halac and Yared, 2018a). Excessively tight supranational rules
not only reduce ‡exibility, but they promote …scal irresponsibility by reducing regional
interest rates and governments’cost of funding.84 In addition, countries that complement
supranational rules with more stringent rules at the national level— as in the case of
Germany in the European Union— exert an externality by driving down regional interest
rates and reducing …scal discipline in other countries. Halac and Yared (2018a) show that
in the face of such low interest rates, supranational rules must be made more stringent.85
    Finally, whether supranational rules are easier or harder to enforce than national
rules is an open theoretical and empirical question. On the one hand, supranational
rules may be easier to enforce since the international economic system provides more
tools for sanctioning, and the supranational sanctioning authority may be less subject to
domestic political pressures. On the other hand, there is a collective action problem in the
enforcement of supranational rules. Moreover, disagreement may be another impediment,
as in the case described previously concerning the enforcement of the European Union’s
Excessive De…cit Procedure in 2003.


4.5     Escape Clauses
Many …scal rules feature an escape clause to allow the government to violate the rule
under exceptional circumstances. Triggering an escape clause typically involves a costly
review process, which culminates in a …nal decision by an independent …scal council, a
legislature, or citizens via a referendum. In Switzerland, for example, the government can
deviate from a …scal rule with a legislative supermajority in the cases of natural disaster,
severe recession, or changes in accounting method.86
  84
      Fernández-Villaverde, Garicano, and Santos (2013) argue that the drop in interest rates that followed
European integration led to the abandonment of reforms and institutional deterioration in the peripheral
European countries.
   85
      This is because the ensuing international imbalances amplify the interest rate externality due to the
tragedy of the commons. Halac and Yared (2018a) also show that if the disciplining e¤ect of interest rates
is strong enough, supranational surplus limits which increase interest rates are optimal. This theoretical
consideration can justify initiatives like the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure in the European Union,
which limits current account surpluses (indirectly tied to budget surpluses) to 6 percent of GDP (see
European Commission, 2016, Table 3.2).
   86
      See Lledó, et al. (2017) for examples of countries with escape clause mechanisms.


                                                    28
    Escape clauses function somewhat like the enforcement mechanisms described previ-
ously, since triggering them is costly and this deters governments from using them too
frequently. However, in contrast to enforcement mechanisms, the costs here are directly
related to the resources required for evaluation and deliberation. Moreover, since escape
clauses facilitate information gathering to promote e¢ cient …scal policy, they are useful
even in the presence of perfect rule enforcement.
    Coate and Milton (2017) and Halac and Yared (2016) study …scal rules that make
use of escape clauses in a commitment-versus-‡exibility framework.87 They …nd that
introducing escape clause provisions is optimal if (privately observed) …scal shocks are
su¢ ciently volatile, the government’s present bias is su¢ ciently severe, and the resource
cost of triggering an escape clause is su¢ ciently low. In such a situation, a rule with an
escape clause dominates a pure threshold rule by allowing for more ‡exibility in response
to extreme economic conditions.
    In practice, the use of escape clause provisions can be challenging. The interpretation
of events in which escape clauses can be triggered is subjective, and the political delib-
eration surrounding an appropriate …scal response can be uncertain and induce delay.88
Whether these costs can outweigh the bene…ts of using escape clauses is an open empirical
question.


4.6     Instrument-Based and Target-Based Rules
How should …scal rules be applied? Should the government face constraints directly on
instruments of policy, such as spending, or should the …scal rule concern targets of policy,
such as de…cits? And which instruments and targets are the optimal ones to be addressed?
    In practice, …scal rules can constrain di¤erent instruments of policy, such as govern-
ment spending or tax rates, and can address speci…c categories of these instruments. For
example, many countries have “golden rules", which limit spending net of a government’s
capital expenditure. Di¤erent instruments may call for di¤erent thresholds, as the associ-
ated commitment-versus-‡exibility tradeo¤ may not be the same.89 For instance, due to
  87
     Coate and Milton (2017) restrict attention to de…cit limits and model escape clauses as ex-post
bargaining between a government and citizens. Halac and Yared (2016) do not impose an exogenous
structure on …scal rules and model escape clauses as costly veri…cation of the government’s private
information.
  88
     See Primo (2007, 2010) for a discussion of the problems in implementing escape clauses in the …scal
rules of U.S. states.
  89
     See Galperti (2018) for a theoretical exposition of this argument in the context of personal budgeting.
In addition, having multiple layers of rules— for example on individual categories of spending and on
overall spending— is optimal, particularly if there are complementarities from applying di¤erent …scal
instruments. This reasoning can explain why a (forecasted) de…cit rule on top of a spending and tax rate


                                                    29
volatile geopolitical conditions, military spending needs may be less forecastable ex ante
than other spending needs, and may thus demand more ‡exibility. Capital spending is
another category where allowing increased ‡exibility may be optimal, as the bene…ts of
capital spending accrue well into the future and are thus subject to a less severe present
bias. The evidence suggests that rules that distinguish across categories have indeed
positive e¤ects on …scal and macroeconomic outcomes.90
    Similar principles apply to the analysis of target-based rules, which specify targets
for outcomes of policy, such as the de…cit to GDP ratio. Target-based rules di¤er from
instrument-based rules in two respects.91 First, a target-based rule more directly ties a
government’s incentives to economic goals, while giving the government greater instrument
discretion to respond to changing macroeconomic conditions. Second, given the risk of
macroeconomic surprises, a government may be penalized for rule breach despite its best
e¤orts to choose instruments to satisfy the target. Therefore, an optimal target threshold
should be tight enough that it induces the government to rein in its present bias through
its choice of instruments, but not so tight that it is excessively prone to violations due to
macroeconomic surprises.
    Halac and Yared (2018b) develop a theoretical framework to compare these di¤erent
classes of rules. They show that target-based rules dominate instrument-based rules if
the government is su¢ ciently well informed, so that instrument discretion is bene…cial
and punishment due to macroeconomic surprises is relatively unlikely. Bohn and Inman
(1996) analyze …scal rules of U.S. states and …nd that target-based rules, in the form of
end-of-the-year …scal requirements, perform better than instrument-based rules, in the
form of beginning-of-the-year …scal requirements. Finally, Halac and Yared (2018b) show
theoretically how a simple hybrid rule— which allows for an instrument threshold that is
relaxed whenever a target threshold is satis…ed— would do better than either class.


5     Concluding Remarks
Over the past four decades, government debt as a fraction of GDP has been on an up-
ward trajectory in advanced economies, approaching levels not reached since World War
II. While normative macroeconomic theories can explain the increase in the level of debt
rule can be optimal.
  90
     Bassetto and Sargent (2006) address the bene…ts of a “golden rule" in a calibrated theoretical model,
and Poterba (1995) assesses the rule’s impact in the context of U.S. states. See Eyraud, Lledó, et al.
(2018) for an additional discussion of issues to consider in rule selection.
  91
     Halac and Yared (2018b) formalize these di¤erent rule classes in an extended delegation framework
that incorporates a noisy observable outcome.


                                                   30
in certain periods as a response to macroeconomic shocks, they cannot explain the broad-
based long-run trend in debt accumulation. In contrast, political economy theories can
explain the long-run trend as resulting from an aging population, rising political polar-
ization, and rising electoral uncertainty across advanced economies.
    Political economy theories emphasize the time-inconsistency in government policymak-
ing, and thus the need for …scal rules that restrict policymakers. Many countries have
adopted …scal rules to rein in growing debts. Most of these rules were recently introduced,
and time will tell whether they lead to sustainable government …nances and to a reversal
of a decades-old trend. Their success depends, in part, on whether they appropriately
balance the tradeo¤ between commitment and ‡exibility underpinning these rules, and
whether they address other challenges that I have highlighted, such as enforceability.
    This discussion leaves us with several interesting questions for future research. First,
while I have focused on …scal rules as a solution to growing debts, in practice, the introduc-
tion of …scal rules should be combined with additional reforms to budgetary procedures.
How speci…c procedural rules, such as voting or amendment rules, complement or thwart
the e¤ect of …scal rules is an important issue to consider.92 Second, a government’s de…cit
bias is not constant, since it evolves over time in response to factors such as changing po-
larization and electoral uncertainty. Understanding how these underlying political forces
are impacted by …scal policy and by the introduction of …scal rules is important for gov-
ernments contemplating rule adoption. Finally, the introduction and implementation of
…scal rules requires a level of political consensus and stability, which is likely to emerge
during a period of responsible policymaking, when the bene…t of rules is less salient. How
to take advantage of such an occasion to adopt and improve …scal rules, rather than letting
it pass as a missed opportunity, is critical for limiting the growth of government debt.
  92
    Capretta (2014), for example, suggests reforms to the U.S. budget process that would allow Congress
to more easily change entitlement policy.




                                                  31
6    References
Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard
J. Zeckhauser. 1989. "Assessing Dynamic E¢ ciency: Theory and Evidence." Review
of Economic Studies, 56: 1-20.
    Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. 2011. "Growth in the Shadow of Expro-
priation." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 651-697.
    Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath.
2015. "Coordination and Crisis in Monetary Unions." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(4): 1727-1779.
    Aiyagari, Rao S., Albert Marcet, Thomas J. Sargent, and Juha Seppälä.
2002. "Optimal Taxation without State-Contingent Debt." Journal of Political Economy,
110(6): 1220-1254.
    Aiyagari, Rao S., and Ellen R. McGrattan. 1998. "The Optimum Quantity of
Debt." Journal of Monetary Economics, 42(3): 447-469.
    Ales, Laurence, Pricila Maziero, and Pierre Yared. 2014. "A Theory of
Political and Economic Cycles." Journal of Economic Theory, 153: 224-251.
    Alesina, Alberto. 2000. "The Political Economy of the Budget Surplus in the
United States." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3): 3-19.
    Alesina, Aberto, and Allan Drazen. 1991. "Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?"
American Economic Review, 81(5): 1170-1188.
    Alesina, Alberto, and Andrea Passalacqua. 2016. "The Political Economy of
Government Debt." In Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 2599-2651. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
    Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 1990. "A Positive Theory of Fiscal
De…cits and Government Debt." Review of Economic Studies, 57: 403-414.
    Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk. 2016. "Fiscal Rules and Sovereign Default."
NBER Working Paper 23370.
    Alonso, Ricardo, and Niko Matouschek. 2008. "Optimal Delegation." Review
of Economic Studies, 75(1): 259-293.
    Alt, James E., and David Dreyer Lassen. 2006. "Transparency, Political Polar-
ization, and Political Budget Cycles in OECD Countries." American Journal of Political
Science, 50(3): 530-550.
    Amador, Manuel, and Kyle Bagwell. 2013. "The Theory of Optimal Delegation
with an Application to Tari¤ Caps." Econometrica, 81(4): 1541-1599.
    Amador, Manuel, Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2006.
"Commitment vs. Flexibility." Econometrica, 74(2): 365-396.


                                         32
    Ambrus, Attila, and Georgy Egorov. 2013. "Comment on "Commitment vs.
Flexibility"." Econometrica, 81(5): 2113-2124.
    Ambrus, Attila, and Georgy Egorov. 2017. "Delegation and Nonmonetary
Incentives." Journal of Economic Theory, 171: 101-135.
    Angeletos, George-Marios. 2002. "Fiscal Policy with Noncontingent Debt and
the Optimal Maturity Structure." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 1105-1131.
    Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2016. "Pub-
lic Debt as Private Liquidity: Optimal Policy." NBER Working Paper 22794.
    Athey, Susan, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2005. "The Optimal
Degree of Discretion in Monetary Policy." Econometrica, 73(5): 1431-1475.
    Azzimonti, Marina. 2018. "Partisan Con‡ict and Private Investment." Journal of
Monetary Economics, 93: 114-131.
    Azzimonti, Marina, Marco Battaglini, and Stephen Coate. 2016. "The Costs
and Bene…ts of Balanced Budget Rules: Lessons from a Political Economy Model of Fiscal
Policy." Journal of Public Economics, 136: 45-61.
    Azzimonti, Marina, Eva de Francisco, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2014. "Fi-
nancial Globalization, Inequality, and the Rising Public Debt." American Economic Re-
view, 104(8): 2267-2302.
    Azzimonti, Marina, and Pierre Yared. 2017. "A Note on Optimal Fiscal Policy
in an Economy with Private Borrowing Limits." Economics Letters, 151: 62-65.
    Azzimonti, Marina, and Pierre Yared. 2018. "The Optimal Public and Private
Provision of Safe Assets." NBER Working Paper 24534.
    Barro, Robert J. 1974. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
Economy, 82(6): 1095-1117.
    Barro, Robert J. 1979. "On the Determination of the Public Debt." Journal of
Political Economy, 87(5): 940-971.
    Bassetto Marco, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2006. "Politics and E¢ ciency of
Separating Capital and Ordinary Government Budgets." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121(4): 1167-1210.
    Battaglini, Marco, and Stephen Coate. 2008. "A Dynamic Theory of Public
Spending, Taxation, and Debt." American Economic Review, 98(1): 201-236.
    Battaglini, Marco, and Stephen Coate. 2016. "A Political Economy Theory of
Fiscal Policy and Unemployment." Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(2):
303-337.
    Beetsma, Roel, and Harald Uhlig. 1999. "An Analysis of the Stability and
Growth Pact." Economic Journal, 109: 546-571.

                                         33
    Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account
De…cit." Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, March
10, 2015.
    https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/
    Bernheim, B. Douglas, Debraj Ray, and Sevin Yeltekin. 2015. "Poverty and
Self-Control." Econometrica, 83(5): 1877-1911.
    Betz, Hans-Georg. 1994. Radical Right-Wing Populism in Western Europe. New
York: MacMillan Press.
    Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas J. Sargent.
2017a. "Fiscal Policy and Debt Management with Incomplete Markets." Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 132(2): 617-663.
    Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas J. Sargent.
2017b. "Public Debt in Economies with Heterogenous Agents." Journal of Monetary
Economics, 91: 39-51.
    Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Leeat Yariv. 2015. "Government
Policy with Time-Inconsistent Voters." American Economic Review, 105(6): 1711-37.
    Blahous, Charles P. 2013. "Why We Have Federal De…cits: The Policy Decisions
that Created Them." Mercatus Center Research Paper
    https://www.mercatus.org/publication/why-we-have-federal-de…cits-policy-decisions-created-
them
    Blanchard, Olivier J. 1985. "Debt, De…cits, and Finite Horizons." Journal of
Political Economy, 93(2): 223-247.
    Bohn, Henning, and Robert P. Inman. 1996. "Balanced-Budget Rules and
Public De…cits: Evidence from U.S. States." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 45: 13-76.
    Bohn, Henning. 1990. "Tax Smoothing with Financial Instruments." American
Economic Review, 80(5): 1217-1230.
    Borensztein, Eduardo, and Ugo Panizza. 2008. "The Costs of Sovereign De-
fault." International Monetary Fund Sta¤ Papers, 56(4): 683–741.
    Boskin, Michael J., John H. Cochrane, John F. Cogan, George P. Shultz,
and John B. Taylor. 2018. "A Debt Crisis is on the Horizon." Washington Post, March
27, 2018.
    Bouton, Laurent, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nicola Persico. 2016. "The Polit-
ical Economy of Debt and Entitlements." NBER Working Paper 22570.
    Bowen, T. Renee, Ying Chen, and Hüyla Eraslan. 2014. "Mandatory versus
Discretionary Spending: The Status Quo E¤ect." American Economic Review, 104(10):

                                          34
2941-2974.
    Brandt, Michael W., Alon Brav, John R. Graham, and Alok Kumar. 2010.
"The Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle: Time Trend or Speculative Episodes?" Review of
Financial Studies, 23(2): 863-899.
    Buchanan, James M., and Richard E. Wagner. 1977. Democracy in De…cit:
The Political Legacy of Lord Keynes. New York: Academic Press.
    Buera, Francisco, and Juan Pablo Nicolini. 2004. "Optimal Maturity of Gov-
ernment Debt without State Contingent Bonds." Journal of Monetary Economics, 51:
531-554.
    Caballero, Ricardo J., and Pierre Yared. 2010. "Future Rent-Seeking and
Current Public Savings." Journal of International Economics, 82: 124-136.
    Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.
2017. "The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3):
29-46.
    Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. "Servicing the Public Debt: Role of Expectations."
American Economic Review, 78(4): 647-661.
    Calvo, Guillermo A., and Maurice Obstfeld. 1988. "Optimal Time-Consistent
Fiscal Policy with Finite Lifetimes." Econometrica, 56(2): 411-432.
    Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu.
2001. "Have Individual Stocks Become More Volatile?: An Empirical Exploration of
Idiosyncratic Risk." Journal of Finance, 56(1): 1-43.
    Cao, Dan, and Iván Werning. 2017. "Saving and Dissaving with Hyperbolic
Discounting." Econometrica, forthcoming.
    Capretta, James C. 2014. "Reforming the Budget Process." National A¤airs, 21,
64-80.
    Caselli, Francesca, Luc Eyraud, Andrew Hodge, Federico Diaz Kalan, Young
Kim, Victor Lledó, Samba Mbaye, Adina Popescu, Wolf Heinrich Reuter,
Julien Reynaud, Elif Ture, and Philippe Wingender. 2018. "Second-Generation
Fiscal Rules: Balancing Simplicity, Flexibility, and Enforceability." International Mone-
tary Fund Sta¤ Discussion Note 18-04.
    Chang, Roberto. 1990. "International Coordination of Fiscal De…cits." Journal of
Monetary Economics, 25: 347-366.
    Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1994. "Optimal
Fiscal Policy in a Business Cycle Model." Journal of Political Economy, 102(4): 617-652.
    Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1993a. "Sustainable Plans and Debt."
Journal of Economic Theory, 61: 230-261.

                                           35
    Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1993b. "Sustainable Plans and Mutual
Default." Review of Economic Studies, 60(1): 175-195.
    Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2007. "On the Need for Fiscal Constraints
in a Monetary Union." Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 2399-2408.
    Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Burcu Eyigungor. 2016. "Continuous Markov Equi-
libria with Quasi-Geometric Discounting." Journal of Economic Theory, 163: 467-494.
    Coate, Stephen, and Ross Milton. 2017. "Optimal Fiscal Limits with Over-
rides." Unpublished.
    http://rossmilton.com/opt…sclim17.pdf
    Congressional Budget O¢ ce. 2017. "An Evaluation of CBO’s Part Outlay Pro-
jections."
    www.cbo.gov/publication/53328
    Congressional Budget O¢ ce. 2018. "The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018-
2028."
    www.cbo.gov/publication/53651
    Crivelli, Ernesto, Sanjeev Gupta, Carlos Mulas-Granados, and Carolina
Correa-Caro. 2016. "Fragmented Politics and Public Debt." International Monetary
Fund Working Paper 16-190.
    Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer. 1989. "A Political Theory of Gov-
ernment Debt and De…cits in a Neo-Ricardian Framework." American Economic Review,
79(4): 713-732.
    Debortoli, Davide, Ricardo Nunes, and Pierre Yared. 2017. "Optimal Time-
Consistent Government Debt Maturity." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1): 55-102.
    Debortoli, Davide, Ricardo Nunes, and Pierre Yared. 2018. "Optimal Taxa-
tion and Debt Management without Commitment." NBER Working Paper 24522.
    Debrun, Xavier, Tidiane Kinda, Teresa Curristine, Luc Eyraud, Jason Har-
ris, and Johann Seiwald. 2013. "The Functions and Impact of Fiscal Councils." IMF
Policy Paper, July 16, 2013.
    Diamond, Peter A. 1965. "National Debt in Neoclassical Growth Model." Ameri-
can Economic Review, 55(5): 1126-1150.
    Dovis, Alessandro, and Rishabh Kirpalani. 2017. "Fiscal Rules, Bailouts, and
Reputation in Federal Governments." NBER Working Paper 23942.
    Drazen, Allan. 2000. "The Political Business Cycle after 25 Years." NBER Macro-
economics Annual, 15: 75-117.
    Eberhardt, Markus, and Andrea F. Presbitero. 2015. "Public Debt and
Growth: Heterogeneity and Non-Linearity," Journal of International Economics, 97: 45-

                                         36
58.
    European Central Bank. 2011. "The Size and Composition of Government Debt
in the Euro Area." Occasional Paper Series, 132.
    European Commission. 2016. "The Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure: Ratio-
nale, Process, Application: A Compendium." European Commission Institutional Work-
ing Paper 039.
    https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/…les/…le_import/ip039_en_2.pdf
    Eyraud, Luc, Anja Baum, Andrew Hodge, Mariusz Jarmuzek, Young Kim,
Samba Mbaye, and Elif Türe. 2018. "How to Calibrate Fiscal Rules: A Primer"
International Monetary Fund, Fiscal A¤airs Department How-To Notes, March 2018.
    Eyraud, Luc, Victor Duarte Lledó, Paolo Dudine, and Adrian Peralta.
2018. "How to Select Fiscal Rules: A Primer" International Monetary Fund, Fiscal
A¤airs Department How-To Notes, March 2018.
    Faraglia, Elisa, Albert Marcet, and Andrew Scott. 2010. "In Search of a
Theory of Debt Management." Journal of Monetary Economics, 57: 821-836.
    Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggirori. 2018. "A Model of the International
Monetary System." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 295-355.
    Farhi, Emmanuel. 2010. "Capital Taxation and Ownership When Markets Are
Incomplete." Journal of Political Economy, 118(5): 908-948.
    Farhi, Emmanuel, Christopher Sleet, Iván Werning, and Sevin Yeltekin.
2012. "Non-linear Capital Taxation Without Commitment." Review of Economics Stud-
ies, 79: 1469-1493.
    Fatás, Antonio, and Ilian Mihov. 2006. "The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Fiscal
Rules in the US States." Journal of Public Economics, 90: 101-117.
    Federal Reserve Board. 2018. "Household Debt Service and Financial Obligations
Ratio."
    https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/housedebt/default.htm (accessed June 6, 2018)
    Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. "The
Next Generation of the Penn World Table." American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150-
3182.
    www.ggdc.net/pwt / (accessed June 6, 2018)
    Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Luis Garicano, and Tano Santos. 2013. "Polit-
ical Credit Cycles: The Case of the Eurozone." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3):
145-166.
    Frankel, Je¤rey, and Jesse Schreger. 2013. "Over-Optimistic O¢ cial Forecasts
and Fiscal Rules in the Eurozone." Review of World Economics, 149(2): 247-272.

                                          37
    Funke, Manuel, Moritz Schularick, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. "Going
to Extremes: Politics afer Financial Crises, 1870-2014." European Economic Review, 88:
227-260.
    Galperti, Simone. 2018. "A Theory of Personal Budgeting." Theoretical Eco-
nomics, forthcoming.
    Geanakoplos, John. 2008. "Overlapping Generations Models of General Equilib-
rium." In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition, edited by Steven
N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, 1-29. London: Palgrave MacMillan.
    Geerolf, François. 2017. "Reassessing Dynamic E¢ ciency." Unpublished.
    https://fgeerolf.github.io/r-g.pdf
    Grembi, Veronica, Tommaso Nannicini, and Ugo Troiano. 2016. "Do Fiscal
Rules Matter?" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3): 1-30.
    Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkhan, and Jae Song. 2014. "The Nature of Coun-
tercyclical Income Risk." Journal of Political Economy, 122(3): 621-660.
    Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2014. "Fiscal Rules and Discretion under
Persistent Shocks." Econometrica, 82(5) 1557-1614.
    Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2016. "Commitment vs. Flexibility with
Costly Veri…cation." NBER Working Paper 29936.
    Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2017. "Fiscal Rules and Discretion under
Self-Enforcement." NBER Working Paper 23919.
    Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2018a. "Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World
Economy." American Economic Review, 108(8): 2305-2334.
    Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared. 2018b. "Instrument-Based vs. Target-Based
Rules." NBER Working Paper 24496.
    Hamilton, James D. 2014. "O¤-Balance-Sheet Federal Liabilities." Cato Papers
on Public Policy, 3: 1-40.
    Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, Leonardo Martinez, and Francisco Roch. 2017.
"Fiscal Rules and the Sovereign Default Premium." Unpublished.
    https://drive.google.com/…le/d/0B28k8Kom2VDBZzhGQnFLeVFCLUE/view
    He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt. 2018. "A
Model of Safe Asset Determination." American Economic Review, forthcoming.
    Hébert, Benjamin and Jesse Schreger. 2017. "The Costs of Sovereign Default:
Evidence from Argentina." American Economic Review, 107(10), 3119-3145.
    Hertzberg, Andrew. 2016. "Time-Consistent Individuals, Time-Inconsistent House-
holds." Unpublished.
    https://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/ahertzberg/papers/HH_Paper_Sept_2016_v9.pdf

                                      38
    Holmström, Bengt. 1977. "On Incentives and Control in Organizations." PhD
diss, Stanford University.
    Holmström, Bengt. 1984. "On the Theory of Delegation." In Bayesian Models in
Economic Theory, edited by Marcel Boyer and Richard Kihlstrom, 115-41. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
    Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. "Private and Public Supply of
Liquidity." Journal of Political Economy, 106(1): 1-40.
    Ignazi, Piero. 2003. Extreme Right Parties in Western Europe. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
    International Monetary Fund. "Fiscal Rule Dataset." International Monetary
Fund Fiscal A¤airs Department.
    http://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/…scalrules/map/map.htm (accessed June 6,
2018).
    Jackson, Matthew O., and Leeat Yariv. 2014. "Present Bias and Collective
Dynamic Choice in the Lab." American Economic Review, 104(12): 4184-4204.
    Jackson, Matthew O., and Leeat Yariv. 2015. "Collective Dynamic Choice:
The Necessity of Time Inconsistency." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
7(4): 159-178.
    Jacobson, Gary C. 2015. "It’s Nothing Personal: The Decline of the Incumbency
Advantage in US House Elections." Journal of Politics, 77(3): 861-873.
    Karantounias, Anastasios G. 2018. "Optimal Fiscal Policy with Recursive Pref-
erences." Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
    Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith Jr. 2003. "Consumption-Savings Decisions
with Quasi-Geometric Discounting." Econometrica, 71(1): 365-375.
    Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112(2): 443-478.
    Leahy, Joe. 2016. "What Is Brazil’s President Dilma Rousse¤ Accused Of?" Fi-
nancial Times, May 12, 2016.
    Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Leeat Yariv. 2017. "Collective Self-Control." American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 9(3): 213-244.
    Lizzeri, Alessandro. 1999. "Budget De…cits and Redistributive Politics." Review
of Economic Studies, 66: 909-928.
    Lledó, Victor, Sungwook Yoon, Xiangming Fang, Smaba Mbaye, and Young
Kim. 2017. "Fiscal Rules at a Glance." International Monetary Fund Background
Paper.



                                        39
    Lohmann, Susanne. 1992. "Optimal Commitment in Monetary Policy: Credibility
vs. Flexibility." American Economic Review, 82(1): 273-286.
    Lucas Jr., Robert E., and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. "Optimal Fiscal and Mone-
tary Policy in an Economy without Capital." Journal of Monetary Economics, 12: 55-93.
    Lustig, Hanno, Christopher Sleet, and Sevin Yeltekin. 2008. "Fiscal Hedging
with Nominal Assets." Journal of Monetary Economics, 55: 710-727.
    Mankiw, N. Gregory 2000. "The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy." Amer-
ican Economic Review, 90(2): 120-125.
    Mankiw, N. Gregory, Matthew Weinzierl, and Danny Yagan. 2009. "Op-
timal Taxation in Theory and in Practice." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4):
147-174.
    McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2008. Polarized
America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge: MIT Press.
    Melumad, Nahum D., and Toshiyuki Shibano. 1991. "Communication in
Settings with No Transfers." RAND Journal of Economics, 22(2): 173-198.
    Moser, Christian, and Pedro Olea de Souza e Silva. 2017. "Optimal Pater-
nalistic Savings Policies." Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 17-51.
    Müller, Andreas, Kjetil Storeletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2016. "The
Political Color of Fiscal Responsibility." Journal of the European Economic Association,
14(1): 252-302.
    Obstfeld, Maurice. 2013. "On Keeping Your Powder Dry: Fiscal Foundations of
Financial and Price Stability." Monetary and Economic Studies, 31: 25-37.
    Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. "Elderly Popula-
tion."
    https://data.oecd.org/pop/elderly-population.htm (accessed June 6, 2018).
    Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. "Revenue Statis-
tics."
    https://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?DataSetCode=rev (accessed June 6, 2018).
    Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. "Social Expendi-
ture Database."
    http://www.oecd.org/social/expenditure.htm (accessed June 6, 2018).
    Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2017. "Pensions
at a Glance 2017."
    https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/pensions-at-a-glance-2017/old-
age-dependency-ratio_pension_glance-2017-22-en (accessed June 6, 2018).



                                          40
    Parker, Kim. 2012. "The Big Generation Gap at the Polls Is Echoed in Attitudes
on Budget Tradeo¤s." Pew Research Center Working Paper.
    http://assets.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2012/12/FINAL_policies_report.pdf
    Persson, Torsten, and Lars E.O. Svensson. 1989. "Why a Stubborn Conserva-
tive Would Run a De…cit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences." Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 104(2): 325-345.
    Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2004. "Constitutional Rules and Fiscal
Policy Outcomes." American Economic Review, 94(1): 25-45.
    Phelps, E.S., and R. A. Pollak. 1968. "On Second-Best National Saving and
Game-Equilibrium Growth." Review of Economic Studies, 35(2): 185-199.
    Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef. 2012. "Wages and Human Capital in the
U.S. Finance Industry: 1909-2006." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4): 1551-1609.
    Piguillem, Facundo, and Alessandro Riboni. 2018. "Fiscal Rules as Bargaining
Chips." Einaudi Institute of Economics and Finance Working Papers Series 1804.
    Piguillem, Facundo, and Anderson Schneider. 2016. "Coordination, E¢ ciency
and Policy Discretion." Einaudi Institute of Economics and Finance Working Papers Series
1306.
    Poterba, James M. 1995. "Capital Budgets, Borrowing Rules, and State Capital
Spending." Journal of Public Economics, 56: 165-187.
    Poterba, James M. 1996. "Budget Institutions and Fiscal Policy in the U.S.
States." American Economic Review, 86(2): 395-400.
    Poterba, James M. 1994. "State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The E¤ects of Bud-
getary Institutions and Politics." Journal of Political Economy, 102(4): 799-821.
    Primo, David. 2007. Rules and Restraints: Government Spending and the Design
of Institutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Primo, David. 2010. "Making Budget Rules Bite." Mercatus on Policy, 72: 1-4.
    Ramey, Valerie A. 2011. "Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?"
Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3): 673-685.
    Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogo¤. 2012. "Pub-
lic Debt Overhangs: Advanced Economy Episodes Since 1800." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 26(3): 69-86.
    Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogo¤. 2015. "Deal-
ing with Debt." Journal of International Economics, 96(1): 543-555.
    Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogo¤. 2011. "From Financial Crash
to Debt Crisis." American Economic Review, 101 (5): 1676–1706.



                                        41
    Rogo¤, Kenneth. 1985. "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
Monetary Target." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100: 1169-1189.
    Rogo¤, Kenneth. 1990. "Equilibrium Budget Cycles." American Economic Re-
view, 80(1): 21-36.
    Rogo¤, Kenneth, and Anne Sibert. 1988. "Elections and Macroeconomic Policy
Cycle." Review of Economic Studies, 55(1): 1-16.
    Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2017. "Why Some Times Are
Di¤erent: Macroeconomic Policy and the Aftermath of Financial Crises," Economica, 85:
1-40.
    Sabelhaus, John, and Jae Song. 2010. "The Great Moderation in Micro Labor
Earnings." Journal of Monetary Economics, 57: 391-403.
    Salvi, Michele, Christoph A. Schaltegger, and Lukas Schmid. 2017. "Do
Fiscal Rules Cause Lower Debt?" Working Paper.
    Shell, Karl. 1971. "Notes on the Economics of In…nity." Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 79(5): 1002-1011.
    Sleet, Christopher. 2004. "Optimal Taxation with Private Government Informa-
tion." Review of Economic Studies, 71: 1217-1239.
    Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2012. "Rotten
Parents and Disciplined Children: A Political-Economic Theory of Public Expenditure
and Debt." Econometrica, 80(6): 2785-2803.
    Strotz, R.H. 1995. "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization."
Review of Economic Studies, 23(3): 165-180.
    Tabellini, Guido. 1991. "The Politics of Intergenerational Redistribution." Journal
of Political Economy, 99(2): 335-357.
    Tabellini, Guido, and Alberto Alesina. 1990. "Voting on the Budget De…cit."
American Economic Review, 80(1): 37-49.
    Tomz, Michael, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2013. "Empirical Research on Sovereign
Debt and Default." Annual Review of Economics, 5(1): 247–272.
    Tornell, Aaron, and Philip R. Lane. 1999. "The Voracity E¤ect." American
Economic Review, 89(1): 22-46.
    Tran, Mark. 2003. "France and Germany Evade De…cit Fines." The Guardian, 25
November, 2003.
    Truger, Achim, and Henner Will. 2013. "The German "debt brake": a shining
example for European …scal policy?" Revue de l’OFCE, 127: 153-188.
    U.S. Department of the Treasury, Fiscal Service. Retrieved from FRED, Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis;

                                          42
    https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/ (accessed June 6, 2018)
    U.S. Electoral College. "Historical Election Results." National Archives and Records
Administration of U.S. Electoral College.
    https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/electoral-college/votes/index.html (accessed
June 6, 2018).
    U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. "International Investment Position."
    https://www.bea.gov/national/ (accessed June 6, 2018).
    U.S. O¢ ce of Management and Budget. "Historical Tables".
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/historical-tables/ (accessed June 6, 2018).
    Velasco, Andrés. 2000. "Debts and De…cits with Fragmented Fiscal Policymak-
ing." Journal of Public Economics, 76: 105-125.
    Velasco, Andrés. 1999. "A Model of Endogenous Fiscal De…cits and Delayed Fiscal
Reforms." In Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, edited by James M. Poterba and
Jürgen Von Hagen, 37-58. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Weingast, Barry R., Shepsle, Kenneth A., and Johnsen, Christopher. 1981.
"The Political Economy of Bene…ts and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive
Politics." Journal of Political Economy, 89(4): 642-664.
    Werning, Iván. 2007. "Optimal Fiscal Policy with Redistribution." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(3): 925-967.
    Wolter, Kirk, Mark Hansen, Andrea Campbell, and Stephen Ansolabehere.
2013. "2012 NORC Presidential Election Study: Americans’Views on Entitlement Re-
form and Health Care." Working Paper.
    Woo, Jaejoon. 2003. "Economic, Political, and Institutional Determinants of Pub-
lic De…cits." Journal of Public Economics, 87: 387-426.
    Woodford, Michael. 1990. "Public Debt as Private Liquidity." American Eco-
nomic Review, 80(2): 382-388.
    World Bank. "World Development Indicators."
    https://data.worldbank.org/products/wdi (accessed June 6, 2018).
    Wyplosz, Charles. 2012. "Fiscal Rules: Theoretical Issues and Historical Ex-
periences." In Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesina and
Francesco Giavazzi, 495–529. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Yared, Pierre. 2010. "Politicians, Taxes and Debt." Review of Economic Studies,
77: 806-840.
    Yared, Pierre. 2013. "Public Debt Under Limited Private Credit." Journal of the
European Economic Association, 11(2): 229-245.



                                           43
