NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRESCRIPTION DRUG MONITORING PROGRAMS, OPIOID ABUSE, AND CRIME
Dhaval Dave
Monica Deza
Brady P. Horn
Working Paper 24975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24975

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018, Revised January 2020

The authors would like to thank Kevin Callison, Hope Corman, Brad Humphreys, Bo Feng,
Michael Pesko and seminar participants at the City University of New York-Graduate Center,
Colby College, Washington State University, Loyola Marymount University, and Temple
University for helpful comments and suggestions. Dave acknowledges funding support from the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (1 R03 HS025014-01). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Dhaval Dave, Monica Deza, and Brady P. Horn. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs, Opioid Abuse, and Crime
Dhaval Dave, Monica Deza, and Brady P. Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 24975
August 2018, Revised January 2020
JEL No. H0,I1,K0
ABSTRACT
We study the spillover effects of prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) on crime, and
in the process inform how policies that restrict access to Rx opioids per se within the healthcare
system would impact broader non-health domains. In response to the substantial increase in
opioid use and misuse in the United States, PDMPs have been implemented in virtually all states
to collect, monitor, and analyze prescription opioid data with the goal of preventing misuse and
the diversion of controlled substances. Using information on offenses known to law enforcement
and arrests from the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), combined with a difference-in-differences
empirical strategy, we find that PDMPs reduced overall crime by 5%. These reductions in crime
are associated with both violent and property crimes. This decrease in crime is also reflected by a
decrease in crime-related arrests as well as drug-related arrests. Overall, these results provide
additional evidence that PDMPs are an effective social policy tool to mitigate some of the
negative consequences of opioid misuse, and more broadly indicate that opioid policies can have
important spillover effects into other non-health related domains such as crime.
Dhaval Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Monica Deza
Department of Economics
Hunter College, City University of New York
New York City, NY 10065
monicadeza@gmail.com

Brady P. Horn
Department of Economics
University of New Mexico
Econ 2023B, Albuquerque, NM 87131
bhorn@unm.edu

1.

Introduction

The prescribing behavior of physicians has fueled the opioid crisis (Kolodny et al. 2015).
In addition to the availability of new drugs (for instance, market entry of OxyContin in 1996)
and aggressive pharmaceutical marketing efforts over the 1990s, the concern that pain was being
undertreated led to more aggressive pain management standards, and state medical boards
liberalized rules governing the prescription of opioid analgesics for chronic non-cancer pain.
As a result, total opioid prescriptions filled increased from 107 million in 1992 to 274 million in
2012 (Pezalla et al. 2017). Though opioid prescribing has since fallen, the volume of
prescriptions remains more than two times higher than in 1992. The proper use of opioids can
mitigate the burden of acute pain, such as post-surgical pain (Manchikanti et al. 2010), and
indeed a substantial portion of outpatient opioid prescribing can be traced to a hospital procedure
(Brummett et al. 2017). However, while expanded availability and access to prescription (Rx)
opioids has benefitted many, it has also led to unintended consequences in the form of addiction
and the diversion of these drugs for non-medical purposes.
Overdose deaths from opioid analgesics have increased seven-fold since 1999,1 with
economic costs of the opioid epidemic exceeding $500 billion annually (Council of Economic
Advisors 2017).2 Though the crisis has shifted in recent years with an upsurge in overdose deaths
related to non-prescription opioids such as heroin or illicit fentanyl, prescription opioids continue
to play a role as four out of five new heroin users started out by misusing prescription opioids
(Jones et al. 2013).

1

Authors’ calculations based on age-adjusted death rates from CDC Wonder.
The CEA found that previous estimates of the economic cost of opioid abuse (for instance, Florence et al. 2016)
were considerably understated due to the underestimation of the value of the lives lost due to opioid-related
overdoses.

2

2

In order to restrain the diversion of Rx opioids for non-medical use and address the role
played by physician prescribing, a popular state-level intervention has been to implement
Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs). PDMPs are statewide databases that track the
prescribing and dispensing of controlled substances, and thus provide key information to
physicians and pharmacists on the patient’s prescription history. While individuals can obtain Rx
drugs for non-medical use through several sources including theft, street purchases, and from a
friend or relatives, physicians remain the leading source for those who are at highest risk of
overdose (Jones, Paulozzi, and Mack 2014). Notably, individuals may obtain excessive Rx
opioids through their own prescriptions, often times from multiple providers without the
prescribers being aware of the other prescriptions, a practice known as “doctor shopping”.
Doctor shopping can also be an important indirect source for the user by making up an essential
part of supply for street dealers (Inciardi et al. 2009).3 PDMPs can help identify patients who
may be doctor shopping, misusing Rx drugs, or are at risk of overdose. Also, PDMPs can help
identify patients that would benefit from timely treatment interventions.
Currently all states and D.C. have an operational PDMP, though utilization of these
programs by providers largely remains voluntary and the systems vary based on their
comprehensiveness and degree of integration. In many states where providers have discretion in
whether or not to refer to the PDMP prior to prescribing an opioid (or another controlled
substance), utilization rates tend to be quite low, hovering between 14-25% (Alexander et al.
2015), and unsurprisingly PDMPs are found to have limited to no effect on opioid misuse. A
growing number of states have enhanced and modernized their programs, instituting universal
registration and mandatory-access provisions and requiring providers to register on and query the

3

Numerous additional problems have also been identified with how opioids are prescribed, including overlapping or
early refill of prescriptions, dose escalation, and high daily dose rates (Mack et al. 2015).

3

PDMP prior to prescribing any controlled substance. Several individual state audit studies have
shown that mandatory access PDMPs have effectively increased utilization and query rates.4
There is an emerging consensus that these stricter programs have also led to robust reductions in
opioid misuse and related negative consequences. Mandatory-access PDMPs have reduced
opioid misuse among Medicare Part D participants (Buchmueller and Carey 2018), and also
reduced opioid misuse and opioid-related mortality among adults in the general population (Ali
et al. 2017; Grecu, Dave, and Saffer 2019).5 The CDC, U.S. Government Accountability Office,
and the President’s Commission on opioid abuse have all stressed the importance of states
mandating PDMP use among licensed prescribers, as an integral part of a comprehensive
strategy to combat opioid misuse (U.S. GAO 2009; Christie et al. 2017).6
What remains unclear are the potential spillovers from these interventions, and any
resulting success in reducing Rx drug misuse, on other outcomes. Opioid misuse has been linked
with many adverse consequences including: higher health care costs (White et al. 2005), lower
worker productivity (Hansen et al. 2011), more suicides (Borgschulte et al, 2018), and a
complementary increase in cocaine and marijuana use (Grecu, Dave and Saffer 2019). Given the
links between drug misuse, mental health, and crime, policies that lead to changes in Rx opioid
abuse may also generate spillover effects on criminal behaviors, which could have substantial
economic effects.7

4

For instance, the number of prescriber and pharmacist PDMP registrations increased by 77% and 680%
respectively, existing but inactive accounts decreased by 50%, and queries increased from an average of 11,000 per
month to 1.2 million per month, following New York’s enactment of mandated use in August 2013. Enrollment in
the PDMP database in Kentucky increased by 264% (and multiple provider episodes – “doctor shopping” –
decreased by 52%) and queries in Ohio increased by 505% (and multiple provider episodes decreased over 40%)
following the enactment of mandatory access PDMP provisions). See Grecu et al. (2018) and
http://www.namsdl.org/library/27CD066B-AF5B-BF3E-9B06857DF279C60A/.
5
Note that these studies also found that merely having an operational PDMP without mandated access is largely
ineffective.
6
See: https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/policy/index.html.
7
Florence et al. (2016) estimate criminal justice costs of about $8 billion annually related to Rx opioid abuse.

4

We provide some of the first evidence on the impact of PDMPs on an important societal
outcome, crime. Our study also speaks to the larger and complex question of how policies that
restrict access to Rx opioids per se within the healthcare system can have a broader impact on
societal outcomes such as crime. While restricting Rx opioids can reduce Rx opioid misuse,
leading to a potential decrease in crime, if individuals substitute to other illicit drugs or more
dangerous supply channels then such policies could actually generate unintended costs through
greater engagement in crime and violence. Given the growing literature on the impact of PDMPs
on the misuse of opioids, and the well-documented link between substance misuse and crime
(Carpenter 2007; Pedersen and Skardhamar 2010), such policies could have a considerable
external impact on crime. Moreover, given the substantial costs associated with crime in general,
and the fact that crime associated with opioid use is particularly costly (Hansen et al. 2011), if
there are spillovers on criminal engagement, then they are likely to be of an order of magnitude
that is economically significant.
Many states have yet to enact stringent provisions to their PDMPs, and some providers
resist using the PDMP due to time constraints, learning costs, and because often times these
databases are not well-integrated into the electronic medical records of the medical practice
(Grecu et al. 2019).8 There have also been some drawbacks associated with PDMPs, which
include additional costs to the healthcare system and compliance difficulties (Islam and McRae
2014, Stucke et al. 2018). Hence, the overall value of these programs is still actively debated,
despite recommendations from policymakers and public health organizations urging states to

8

For instance, challenges by some MA physician and dentist groups to the breadth of circumstances proposed for
PDMP queries have contributed to a 2-year delay in the final implementation of a legally-required mandate
(Haffajee et al. 2015).

5

adopt these provisions. Failure to account for potential crime costs associated with these
programs – either positive or negative – can substantially skew the cost-benefit calculus.
While a few studies have imputed the criminal justice cost burden associated with Rx
opioid misuse (Hansen et al. 2011; Florence et al. 2016), these have been based on a descriptive
apportionment approach and not meant to be interpreted as causal estimates. We provide one of
the first studies to specifically inform the causal link between Rx opioid misuse and crime. In
particular, we exploit variation in the timing of the implementation of PDMPs and enhanced
mandatory access provisions across states, within a difference-in-differences research design. We
find consistent evidence that the mandatory provisions are associated with a significant reduction
on the order of about 5% for overall crime, driven by decreases in both violent and property
crimes.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section briefly provides some
background on the previous literature and the pathways through which Rx opioid misuse, and
PDMPs, could impact crime. Section 3 describes the data sources, followed by a discussion of
the empirical methods in Section 4. We present the results and robustness checks in Section 5,
and the concluding section summarizes our findings and places them in context along with some
policy implications.
2.

Background

2.1 PDMPs and Opioid misuse
A large literature has studied the effects of PDMPs, which can be separated into earlier
studies that used data predating most of the mandatory access provisions and more recent work
that has specifically assessed the effectiveness of voluntary vs. mandatory access PDMPs. Many
of the studies based on older data, or data which do not differentiate between voluntary and

6

mandatory access programs, find very limited or nil effects of the programs on measures of
opioid use and misuse (McDonald, Carlson, and Izrael, 2012; Reifler et al., 2012; Jena et al.
2014; Haegerich et al. 2014). These inconsistent and limited effects are likely driven by the low
provider query rates in states that do not mandate PDMP use. As stressed in the GAO report
(U.S. GAO 2009), in order for PDMPs to work to their fullest potential, prescribers and
dispensers must refer to the data prior to prescribing and filling a prescription.9
The recent wave of studies has moved this literature forward by specifically disentangling
the effects of voluntary vs. the more recent mandatory access PDMP provisions. They find
robust evidence of significant declines in opioid misuse and related adverse health consequences
from mandatory access PDMPs but generally not from programs with no utilization mandates.
For instance, Buchmueller and Carey (2018) find that mandatory access PDMPs significantly
reduced measures of misuse, including excessive quantity and doctor shopping behaviors, among
the Medicare Part D population. Their results reflect a 5-6% decline in the share of opioid takers
with overlapping claims (multiple scripts for the same drug at a point in time) and with more

9

PDMPs are enacted and operationalized at the state-level; thus, each state follows its own mode of monitoring and
enforcing that healthcare providers are utilizing the PDMP where mandated. Different state agencies may be
responsible for administering the PDMP, including substance abuse or consumer protection or licensing agencies.
In the majority of states (36 states), however, PDMPs are administered either by the state’s board of pharmacy or the
department of health (Grecu et al. 2019). The state’s appropriate licensing board – typically the medical board
and/or the board of pharmacy – has the authority to impose (or refer to the appropriate licensing agency to impose)
disciplinary actions that can include revocation, suspension, or non-renewal of the provider’s license for
inappropriate prescribing of opioids and failure to register on and refer to the PDMP. Any licensed prescriber who
fails to register on the PDMP and query the system, or fails to submit the accurate prescribing information or
inappropriately prescribes controlled substances, is also subject to other civil or criminal penalties as defined in each
state’s legislation, which can vary across states. Referral to law enforcement agencies, however, is generally
confined to cases wherein physicians are prescribing for diversion purposes; a warning or license suspension
(following multiple warnings) is relatively more typical for non-compliance with PDMP mandates. States can also
conduct frequent and automated analyses of their PDMP – generating reports on providers who exhibit problematic
prescribing and dispensing – and use this information to investigate further and impose warnings and disciplinary
actions as necessary. Disciplinary actions can result from such regular audits as well as from complaints originating
from dispensers, law enforcement, or consumers regarding any inappropriate prescribing. States also can establish a
Medicaid Fraud Control Unit to investigate suspicious behavior based on PDMP information.

7

than a seven-month supply, and an 8-16% drop in doctor shopping behavior (share of individuals
obtaining opioids from five or more prescribers and pharmacies).
Ali et al. (2017), based on self-reported information from the National Surveys of Drug
Use and Health, also find a significant drop in doctor shopping (defined in their data as obtaining
Rx drugs from two or more doctors) and a reduction in the number of days of misuse at the
intensive margin (by about 42% relative to the mean).10 Grecu, Dave, and Saffer (2019) assess
the effects of PDMPs on substance use disorder treatment admission flows stemming from
various Rx drugs and on mortality from drug poisonings. They also confirm the broader findings
and find statistically and economically significant reductions in these measures of misuse, with
the largest effects concentrated on Rx opioid misuse and among young adults ages 18-24 (32%
decline in treatment admissions and 26% decline in opioid-related mortality).11 Kaestner and
Ziedan (2019) provide evidence of a significant first-stage with respect to prescribing patterns,
and show that the adoption of a modern PDMP system accessible to all users is associated with a
4-8% decrease in retail opioid prescriptions.
2.2 Substance misuse, PDMPs and Crime
Most of the studies that have evaluated the impact of PDMPs have assessed measures of
Rx drug misuse or associated health indicators, and at best assessed spillovers into the use of
other drugs. Given the robust and consistent findings from this literature that certain forms of
PDMPs have been highly effective, it is plausible that the reduction in Rx opioid misuse may
also impact criminal behaviors. Broadly, substance use can affect crime through three pathways,

10

They do not report marginal effects, but find approximately a 24% decline in the odds of doctor shopping
associated with the must-access PDMP policies relative to voluntary PDMPs.
11
The effectiveness of mandatory access PDMPs is driven by the sharp increase in utilization and query rates. For
instance, the number of registered prescribers and pharmacists increased by 77% and 680% respectively, existing
but inactive accounts decreased by 50%, and queries increased from an average of 11,000 per month to 1.2 million
per month, following New York’s enactment of mandated use in August 2013 (see:
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/assets/2016/12/prescription_drug_monitoring_programs.pdf).

8

including a pharmacological effect by affecting aggression or violent tendencies, an economic
effect whereby drug users may resort to income-generating crime in order to finance their drug
use habit, and/or a “systemic” effect as participants interact in illicit markets that inherently tend
to resort to a high degree of violence and criminal activity in their sales and distribution networks
(Corman and Mocan 2000).12 These channels also point to important effects on both violent and
property (income-generating) crime.
Various prescription drugs, including certain opioids and others that are likely to be
misused, have been linked to reports of violence towards others. Based on data on adverse drug
events reported to the FDA, Moore et al. (2010) find that many anti-depressants, sedatives, and
drugs for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder are associated with serious acts of violence;
oxycodone, an opioid, was among the top 20 Rx drugs associated with violence-related adverse
drug events.13 Opioid-dependent fathers tend to be more violent towards their intimate partners
(Moore et al. 2011), and behavioral symptoms of Rx drug misuse can include excessive mood
swings and hostility.14
If PDMPs are effective in reducing opioid misuse, and effective in reducing the use of
other complementary substances such as cocaine and alcohol (which have also been linked to
aggression and violence; Davis 1996; Corman and Mocan 2000), then we may see a reduction in
violent crime. Decreased use and misuse of addictive substances, and better mental health, have
generally been linked to lower rates of both property and violent crime (Grogger and Willis,
2000; DeSimone, 2007; Cuellar et al., 2004; Markowitz, 2005; Marcotte and Markowitz, 2011;

12
Violence occurs in drug markets partly because consumers and suppliers are not able to rely on contracts and the
court system to resolve disputes.
13
Number of violence cases for oxycodone was over 4 times greater than for all other evaluated drugs, adjusting for
the volume of reports.
14
See https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/prescription-drug-abuse/symptoms-causes/syc-20376813.

9

Fryer et al. 2013).15 Though these studies focused on illicit drugs such as cocaine and heroin, the
broader causal link underscored here may also carry over to Rx opioids.
More specific to Rx opioid misuse, doctor shopping has been found to be a significant
source of diversion (Simeone 2017), including sourcing street dealers. Underground drug
markets are particularly associated with violent crime as well as property crime. In this context,
mandatory PDMPs represent an adverse supply shock not just for those who may be accessing
opioids for non-medical use through the healthcare system but also for those who may be
obtaining Rx opioids on the street. To the extent that this may lead to further declines in Rx drug
misuse, criminal activity – both income-generating and violent crime – may decline.
On the other hand, disruptions to access of Rx drugs may also generate perverse or even
no effects on crime through potential substitution and compensatory behaviors and generate
important dynamics in the market response. For instance, in the context of methamphetamines,
large supply-side disruptions have not been found to have any major effects on violent or
property crime, and any transient changes in prices and indicators of misuse returned to preinterventions levels within 4-18 months (Dobkin and Nicosia 2009). In the context of Rx opioids,
both substitution to other supply sources for the same Rx drugs as well as substitution to other
illicit drugs are possible. Given that doctor shopping and physicians are an important supply
source for patients who misuse opioids, constraining this access may lead them to seek out
underground channels outside the healthcare system.
There is some emerging evidence that supply-side interventions that limit access to
opioids may increase the use of some other illicit substances. Notably, the reformulation of

15

In order to bypass the endogeneity between substance abuse and crime and between mental health and crime,
these studies rely on natural experiment and exogenous shocks, for instance exploiting changes in illicit drug prices,
emergence of crack cocaine, and mental health treatment.

10

OxyContin into an abuse-deterrent formulation, and its market entry in 2010, has been found to
be associated with a sharp increase in mortality from heroin overdose (Alpert, Powell & Pacula
2018; Evans & Lieber 2019). Interactions with supply and distribution networks in illicit drug
markets have been especially prone to violence, gang activity, and crimes involving guns.16
Furthermore, the street price of Rx drugs tends to be considerably higher than the pharmacy price
(Sajan et al. 1998; Surrat et al. 2012; Dasgupta et al. 2013), raising the total cost of access for a
user substituting from the formal healthcare system to underground sources. Thus, if some users
are now substituting to these underground supply sources as a result of the PDMPs, then this
may lead to an increase in violent crime and possibly property crime.
Very little work has evaluated broader spillovers of opioid-related interventions. In the
only other study on PDMPs and spillovers into crime-related outcomes that we are aware of,
Mallatt (2019) finds a strong increase (about 112% on average) in crime incidents related to
heroin possession, with stronger effects in counties which had higher rates of oxycodone
prescribing at baseline.17 Based on descriptive trends, some studies have linked the recent
increase in homicide rates to the re-emergence of heroin and transition from Rx opioids to other
illicit opioids (Rosenfeld 2016). Rosenfeld (2016) notes that the greater demand and entry of
more users into the illicit drug market leads to greater opportunities and incentives for the sellers,
and more disputes among sellers over territories and customer access and more disagreements
between sellers and buyers can lead to greater violence. At the same time, studies directly linking

16

Drug use has been found to be correlated with aggressive and violent behavior (Murray et al. 2008), and in terms
of drug epidemics, the rise of heroin in the 1970’s and the crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980’s were both
associated with substantial increases in violent crimes, including gun crimes and homicides (Szalavitz and Rigg
2017).
17
Mallatt (2019) focuses solely on heroin and opioid crime, specifically related to possession, in order to gauge
spillovers from restricted access to Rx opioids on substitution into illicit opioids. Kaestner and Ziedan (2019)
consider broader socioeconomic outcomes including employment, earnings, public assistance, and marital status,
and find little evidence that state interventions targeting Rx opioids are significantly associated with these outcomes.

11

interventions targeted at Rx opioid misuse and spillovers on other illegal drugs are limited and
have not reached a consensus and find very weak adverse or even beneficial effects on other
illicit drugs (Meinhofer 2018; Grecu et al. 2019).18
The upshot of this discussion is that, while spillover effects on crime are plausible, the
net effects of disruption to Rx opioid access on criminal behaviors are a priori indeterminate. The
overall effects depend on the extent of potential substitution into other illicit drugs vs. the overall
reduction in the pool of addicts. The various reinforcing and/or counteracting channels also
suggest that there may heterogeneous responses across crime types, and in particular point to
potentially important (negative or positive) effects on violent crime, which generate much of the
societal costs associated with crime (McCollister et al. 2010). We provide the first study on the
broader spillover effects of PDMPs on total crime and across specific crime categories. As
policies and interventions proliferate at the federal, state, and local levels targeted at curbing the
opioid epidemic, it is important to account for spillovers on other outcomes and markets. Hence,
our study contributes more broadly towards understanding how supply-side interventions which
disrupt access to Rx opioids in the healthcare system impact crime. Finally, this study contributes
to the larger literature on the effects of substance use on crime, providing evidence on the causal
link between Rx opioid misuse and crime by exploiting the adoption of the mandatory PDMP
provisions as a source of exogenous variation in access to and diversion of Rx drugs.
3.

Data

3.1 Crime

18
Degenhardt et al. (2005) exploit a supply shock in Australia in 2001, which sharply reduced heroin supply, and
find a transient increase in cocaine use among injecting drug users, which was associated with an increase in violent
crime. Doleac and Mukherjee (2018) study the effects of Naloxone (an opioid antagonist, effective at reversing
overdose from Rx opioids) access laws and find an increase in opioid-related theft associated with greater access to
Naloxone. They attribute this to an ex ante moral hazard effect and to change in the composition of the population
towards surviving active drug users, who are more likely to commit such crimes.

12

We use measures of crime using data spanning 2003-2017 from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s (FBI) Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) monthly files19, and use three separate
datasets within the UCR, each providing complementary strengths.20 All law enforcement
agencies that operate under a U.S. jurisdiction, state, county, city, university/college, tribal and
federal law enforcement agencies, submit crime data to the UCR, either through a state UCR
program or directly to the FBI’s UCR program. These files include the most commonly reported
violent and property crimes (Part I crimes) including murder, manslaughter, rape, robbery,
assault, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft. Between 88 to 96 percent of the U.S.
population is covered by agencies that report to the FBI’s UCR Program (Maltz 1999).
For our primary analysis, we use the Offenses Known and Clearances by Arrests
segments of the UCR. In addition to total crime, we estimate effects on Part I violent crime
(homicide-murder and manslaughter, rape, robbery, assault and simple assault) and Part I
property crime (burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft), as well as separately for each of the
disaggregated crime types.
Known crimes are considered the most accurate crime outcome as they are not an
endogenous function of police enforcement; however, a drawback is that data on known crimes
do not include information about the offender (or the victim). Thus, we also supplement our
main analyses with information from the UCR Arrest Data, which are valuable for two reasons.
First, arrest data include information on drug-related crimes.21 Second, arrest data include
information on the demographics of the offender, which allows us to determine whether the

19
Kaplan (2019) compiled the offenses, arrests and homicide UCR datasets in ICPSR. While the data on offenses
known is available for 2017, the arrest data is only available until 2016.
20
This is important and provides a validation check, given the inherent difficulties in measuring crime, a limitation
not unique to our study.
21
In particular, UCR Arrests report information for sale, manufacture or possession of: (1)
opium/cocaine/derivatives, (2) marijuana, (3) synthetic narcotics, and (4) other dangerous non-narcotics.

13

propensity to commit crime changed in response to PDMP implementation differentially by age.
Since young adults are more likely to engage in criminal activity in general and also the most
likely to adjust their opioid use patterns in response to the implementation of PDMPs (Grecu et
al. 2019), we expect the effect on crime among individuals of this age group to be
disproportionately impacted by the policy. We further supplement our analyses with data from
the UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), with the added advantage that they contain
information regarding the age of both the offender and the victim, albeit only for homicides.
Finally, it is important to note that the UCR data are reported at the agency level. Because
of the heterogeneity in the reliability of reporting across agencies and the fact that a single nonreporting agency may account for a substantial fraction of crime for a given geographical area,
we follow the crime literature and focus on agencies that reported crimes consistently in all 12
months of the year, every year (Maltz and Targonski, 2002).
3.2 Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs
While PDMP programs have been in existence for quite some time, in 2003 the
Department of Justice began supporting initiatives to implement PDMPs, and the NAMSDL
published the Model Prescription Monitoring Program Act and appropriated funds for its
deployment (Dekker 2007). Thus, we chose to begin our analysis period in 2003, which provides
a sample of PDMPs that are more homogeneous and potentially more effective across states.
To model the impact of PDMP legislation on crime we follow the literature and use dates
on which a state’s PDMP became operational derived from the Prescription Drug Abuse Policy
System (PDAPS)22 and dates of implementation of mandatory-access provisions. Mandatoryaccess provisions are stronger statutes that required all licensed prescribers and dispensers to

22

http://pdaps.org/datasets/prescription-monitoring-program-laws-1408223416-1502818373

14

register on the PDMP and to query the PDMP prior to prescribing and dispensing controlled
substances. We note that there is some heterogeneity across states in terms of mandatory access.
For instance, Kentucky mandates access in the strictest sense in that it requires that both
prescribers and dispensers must access the PDMP before writing and dispensing any script for
controlled substances. In contrast, some states mandate access in limited circumstances or do not
mandate access for all providers. For instance, Georgia only requires that physicians practicing at
a pain clinic regularly check the PDMP on all new and existing patients and Florida only requires
providers to check the database prior to prescribing but does not require dispensers to check the
database prior to dispensing.23
Thus, there is some heterogeneity in the PDMP definitions derived from the PDAPS. In
supplementary analyses, we also model the impact of PDMPs, based on an alternate dimension
and dates that have been highlighted in a recent study (Horwitz et al. 2018). Horwitz et al. (2018)
contend that a salient consideration when modeling the impact of PDMPs is to assess
effectiveness relative to when a state’s full modern, electronic PDMP system became operational
and became directly accessible to all users (providers, law enforcement). They carefully
assemble a legal database and report the dates based on these criteria, and further show these
PDMPs to be negatively associated with measures of “doctor shopping”.
3.3. Other Drug and Alcohol Policies
In order to account for other confounding shifts, we control for several additional policies
and laws that were enacted over the sample period and which may also potentially have impacted
drug use and crime. Specifically, we control for ID Laws, which require pharmacists to request
and check identification prior to dispensing controlled substances, and physical exam

23

According to PDAPS, eighteen states have mandated access defined as “Does the state require prescribers to
check the PDMP before prescribing controlled substances?”.

15

requirement (PER) laws, which require a physical examination or a bona fide physician-patient
relationship prior to prescribing controlled substances. Dates of implementation of ID and PER
laws are obtained from the National Conference of State Legislatures and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and are cross-validated with the review of individual state legislatures
and the Federation of State Medical Boards.
We further control for Naloxone access laws, which expand access to Naloxone to people
other than the person at risk of overdose in order to facilitate friends and family of the user to
administer the opioid antagonist in case of an overdose (Rees et al. 2019). We also control for
Good Samaritan Laws, which exempt those who seek medical assistance for someone
experiencing overdose from arrest and prosecution for minor drug and alcohol law violations
(Rees et al. 2019). Information on these laws is obtained from the Policy Surveillance Program,
which is funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Network for Public Health
Law.24 Finally, we control for policies pertaining to marijuana legalization, marijuana
decriminalization, medical marijuana, beer taxes, and whether the state has a 0.08 blood alcohol
content (BAC) per se limit law.
3.4. Demographic and Police Composition Data
Police department employment data were obtained from the UCR Program Data: Police
Employee (Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted Program - LEOKA) from 2003 to
2017. Specifically, we control for the natural logarithm of the number of officers in the police
force per 100,000 residents. We also control for state-level demographic composition using data
from the bridged-race population estimates, which are produced by the U.S. Census Bureau in
collaboration with the National Center for health Statistics (NCHS).25 In particular, we construct

24
25

https://www.networkforphl.org/_asset/qz5pvn/network-naloxone-10-4.pdf
https://wonder.cdc.gov/controller/datarequest/D9

16

the share of the population composed by minors, individuals ages 18-25, and males ages 18-25
years, as well as the overall share of males. Additionally, we control for income per capita and
seasonally adjusted unemployment rates, which were obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics and the County Business Patterns (CBP), and account for shifts in the state’s
economy.26 Finally, we control for the poverty rate, and the share of residents with a college
degree, some college, high school, less than high school.27
4.

Methods

Our empirical analysis is motivated by the mechanisms described above through which
mandatory PDMPs, which have been shown to significantly reduce Rx opioid misuse, can have
spillover effects on crime. To assess these relationships, we exploit variation in the timing of
PDMP implementation across states, and estimate the following difference-in-differences (DD)
specification:
𝑌"#$ = 𝛼' + 𝛽' 𝑃𝐷𝑀𝑃#$ + 𝛽- 𝑃𝐷𝑀𝑃#$ ∗ 𝑀𝐴#$ + 𝛿𝑋#$ + 𝛾$ + 𝛾" + 𝜀"#$

(1)

Equation (1) can be interpreted as a reduced-form crime supply function. The analysis is
at the agency-year level j, and the outcome (denoted by 𝑌"#$ ) represents the natural logarithm of
the rate of offenses known to police per 100,000 residents in a given agency j, in state s and year
t. 28 Models are estimated for all Part 1 crimes, and separately for violent and property crimes.
The variable 𝑃𝐷𝑀𝑃#$ is a dummy variable that indicates if a state has an operational PDMP in
place, and 𝑀𝐴#$ is a dummy variable indicating that the state has enhanced its prescription drug

26

Note that this dataset provides annual statistics for businesses with paid employees and excludes mostly
establishments with government employees.
27
These measures are obtained from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research Welfare Data
(http://www.ukcpr.org/data), and alternately computed from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the
March Current Population Surveys.
28
We add one to the counts before computing the rate in order to avoid dropping the agency-year observations with
zero counts.

17

monitoring program and implemented stricter mandated-access provisions. The coefficient of
interest is β1, which represents the net reduced-form effect of mandated PDMP use, relative to
states that have an operational but voluntary PDMPs.
All specifications control for an extended vector of socioeconomic and policy factors
(𝑋#$ ) including demographic information (share of population composed by minors, individuals
age 18-25, males 18-25 years of age, males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws,
Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization,
medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (number of officers in the
police force) and other socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty
rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than
high school).
All specifications further include agency fixed effects (𝛾" ), and year fixed effects (𝛾$ ).
The agency fixed effects account for time-invariant differences across agencies (and hence timeinvariant differences across states, since agencies are nested within states). Time fixed effects
account for national trends in crime rates over the sample period. We also present estimates from
models that include treatment-specific linear trends (𝑀𝐴# ∗ 𝑡), to account for the possibility that
states which ever-adopted enhanced provisions to their PDMPs may be systematically different
than the non-adopting states, and models that include state-specific linear trends (𝛾# ∗ 𝑡), to
account for unmeasured systematic time-varying confounding factors across all states (e.g.
policing behavior, funds allocated to policing, funds allocated to education, among others).
These controls account to some degree for systematic differential trends across implementation
vs. non-implementation states prior to the policy. Given that the analysis is performed at the
agency-year level, including state-specific trends is salient as most potential confounders such as

18

allocation of public funds or implementation of police training tactics would be implemented at
the state and not at the agency level.29 Standard errors are clustered at the state level, and all
models are weighted by the population covered by the agency (Angrist and Pischke 2007).
We extend the baseline model in several ways. First, in addition to evaluating the effects
on aggregated counts of all Part 1 crimes (per 100,000 residents), which implicitly assigns equal
severity to each offense, we also evaluate effects on cost-weighted crime following Chalfin and
McCrary (2018). The latter provides an estimate of the policy on the expected cost of crime
based on a weighted aggregate of crime counts, with weights equal to the cost of each type of
crime.30 This approach explicitly places a larger weight on more costly crimes, and typically
violent crimes are more costly than property crimes, given the high victim and societal costs of
the former. Second, since aggregated crime may mask nuanced changes in relatively infrequent
crimes, we also explicitly assess effects of PDMP policy separately on each offense type.
Specifically, the following crimes are evaluated: homicide (which combines murder and
manslaughter), rape, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft.
Third, drawing on the previous literature that has documented significant heterogeneity
across age groups with respect to the non-medical use of opioids, we estimate the impact of
PDMPs on crime conditioned on age group. While information on the offender’s and victim’s
age is not contained in the UCR Offenses Known Segment, we can observe the offender’s and

29

Previous crime literature exploits variation at the county or city level to evaluate the effect on crime or substance
use at the agency level include a state by year fixed effect as the main specification in order to control for potential
confounders such as the allocation of public funds on policing, education, changes in policing tactics and training, or
socioeconomic conditions that usually vary at the state level (Bondurant, Lindo and Swensen, 2019; Swensen,
2015). Because PDMPs vary at the state-year level, we cannot include a state by year fixed effects, but a statespecific linear trend would take into account these confounders that vary linearly. Also, note that the treatmentspecific linear trends are nested within the state-specific linear trends.
30
Estimating the effect on cost-adjusted violent and property crimes, or the expected cost of crime, as presented in
Chalfin and McCrary (2018), takes into account that a policy that prevents a small amount of more socially costly
crimes such as homicide could be more cost-effective than a policy that prevents a large amount of less costly
crimes such as burglary.

19

victim’s age and gender with respect to homicide incidents using the UCR Supplement of
Homicide Report (SHR). In particular, we examine the following dependent variables: the rate of
homicides where the offender (victim) was between the ages of 18-39 and 40 and over.31
Fourth, we further exploit the SHR to evaluate whether the rate of homicides that
involved a firearm or a knife changed in response to PDMP implementation. Illicit drug markets
are more likely to involve interactions and networks prone to violence. In particular, studies of
drug gangs show that a significant amount of gang activity involves homicide and assault (Levitt
and Venkatesh 2000; Rainbow 2010; Klein, Maxson and Cunningham, 1991) and particularly
gun-related homicide (Miron 1999; Levitt and Rubio 2005). If PDMPs impact interactions with
illicit drug markets, violent crime, and homicides in particular, it is possible that the strongest
impact among offenders may be among young adults - the group whose opioid misuse and
adverse health events are most impacted by mandatory PDMPs (Grecu et al. 2019).
Fifth, we also use information on the offender’s age from the arrest data, which have also
been commonly used in the crime literature (Corman et al. 2014). Specifically, we re-estimate
Equation (1) for total arrests for adults 18-30 and over 40. Another advantage of these data is that
they allow separate analyses for drug-related arrests, which we capitalize on to assess effects on
arrests related to specific categories of drugs.
A critical assumption necessary for the DD research design to credibly identify the causal
effect is that trends in non-implementation states are a valid counterfactual for trends in
implementation states in the absence of mandatory access provisions (Angrist and Pischke 2007;

31

The age of the victim is missing only in 1.3 % of the incidents while the age of the offender is missing for 35% of
the incidents and therefore the results pertaining the effects on demographics of the offender must be interpreted
with caution.

20

Colman and Dave 2018). We conduct a fully-specified conditional event study based on the
following specification.
8
𝑌"#$ = 𝛼 + ∑" 𝛽 8 𝐼[𝐷#$
= 1] + 𝛿𝑋#$ + 𝛾$ + 𝛾" + 𝜀"#$

(2)

8
In this specification 𝐷#$
is an indicator that has the value of one when state s has enacted

a PDMP k years away from the contemporaneous period and we estimate this event study using
both the voluntary PDMP implementation dates as well as the mandatory access dates from
PDAPS. Note that when k<0 it indicates lead pre-policy effects, that the PDMP will be enacted k
years in the future, and when k>0 it indicates post-policy effects, that the PDMP program was
enacted k years in the past. We normalize 𝛽 =- to zero and therefore all parameters 𝛽 8 for k
between -4 and 4 should be interpreted as the policy effect on crime relative to the year prior to
implementation. We also impose endpoint restrictions for periods at least five years away from
the year of implementation, which prevents us from assigning unequal weight to states that
enacted PDMP particularly early or particularly late given the unbalanced sample.
The event study framework serves two functions. First, it allows us to directly test for
differential pre-policy trends by evaluating the magnitude and significance of the lead
coefficients (k<0). Second, the event study allows us to decompose the dynamics of the main DD
effect from Equation (1). That is, the main DD effect represents the average effect on crime over
the post-policy window. For instance, Grecu et al. (2019) show that, while mandatory PDMPs
are highly effective, the effects become stronger over time. This compounding is partly due to
the diffusion of physician knowledge and training as they become more versed with using the
PDMPs, partly because there may be lags in the disruption to supply due to stockpiling, or
because it may take time for the total pool of addicts to decrease. Furthermore, even if access to
Rx opioids is disrupted, alternate sources may substitute over time or there may be substitution

21

into heroin and other illicit drugs (synthetic opioids) in the shorter or longer term. The event
study allows us to capture any such dynamic effects that may either accumulate or dissipate over
time.
Finally, to evaluate the validity of our empirical estimates we perform a placebo check
similar to the randomization inference outlined in Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003). In this
falsification exercise, agency-year indicators for whether mandated access is active are reshuffled and randomly assigned. Equation (1) is then re-estimated with this placebo or “shuffled”
pseudo-PDMP indicator, and this process is repeated 300 times, each time using a different set of
placebo indicators. Once the estimation is complete, all 300 placebo coefficients are plotted and
compared with the results of our primary DD analysis.
5.

Results

5.1. Summary Statistics
Due to the fact that some agencies do not report offenses every year, decreases in crime
could be driven by actual decreases in crime or could be driven by agencies not reporting crimes
on that year. In order to avoid that problem, our main analysis is restricted to the 9,136 agencies
that report crimes in all years between 2003 and 2017 and that report offenses all 12 months each
year between 2003 and 2017.32
Panel A of Table 1 presents the summary statistics of offenses known to police for all
agencies in the sample (columns 1-2), and agencies that reported all 12 months and reported data
each year between columns 2003-2017 (columns 3-4). In terms of crime rates for the entire

32
We also estimate the model restricting to agency-year cells that report offenses all 12 months regardless of
whether they do so for all years between 2003 and 2017. We further analyze offenses known to police restricting the
agencies to those that report crimes all years between 2003 and 2016 and that belong to cities with at least 10,000
residents and the results are similar. The last restriction excludes cities with population smaller than 10,000, MSAs
and non-MSAs. These results will be provided upon request.

22

sample, overall there were approximately 2,240 crimes per 100,000 residents with 212 (9%) of
these constituting violent crimes and the other 2,027 (90%) being property crimes. The violent
crime with the highest crime rate is aggravated assault with 152 incidents per 100,000 residents
while the least frequent violent crime is homicide with 2.4 incidents per 100,000 residents.
Among property crimes, the most prevalent property crime is larceny with 1,487 incidents per
100,000 residents while the least prevalent property crime is motor vehicle theft with 129
incidents per 100,000 residents. While the means for the subsample we use in the main analysis
are expectedly higher due to more complete information on all reporting agencies, the relative
shares of violent and property crime in total crime, and the shares of the specific offenses in
violent and property crime, remain largely unaffected.
Panel B presents summary statistics for the Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR),
where the first two columns correspond to the entire sample and the last two columns correspond
to the subsample used in this study. Because the original SHR dataset reports homicides at the
incident level, agencies only appear in the dataset as long as they reported a homicide and
therefore the SHR is potentially restricted to agencies where homicide is more prevalent. A
missing agency-year can occur either because the data are missing or because there were zero
homicides during that period. In order to avoid this issue, we restrict the analysis to agencies that
appear in the data every year, and hence report at least one homicide every year throughout the
period studied. This is reflected in the fact that the number of homicides that occurred with a
firearm are much larger in the subsample used.33

33
We restrict the SHR analysis to agencies that correspond to cities with a population of at least 10,000 that reports
data every year instead of restricting the analysis to agencies that report all 12 months because the latter would
imply restricting the analysis to agencies that reported at least one homicide each month. The discrepancies between
the murder rate and the murder rate conditional on any given age group occurs because not every incident reports
demographics of the victim. As we mentioned earlier, demographics of the offender are largely missing.

23

Finally, Panel C presents summary statistics of the arrest dataset. Patterns of arrest rates
(e.g. property crime arrests are more prevalent than violent crime arrests, murder is the least
prevalent violent crime, among others) remain unchanged when we restrict the sample to
agencies that report all 12 months and report crimes every year in the observed period. In
addition, the patterns of arrest rates follow closely the patterns we observed among offenses
known to police.
5.2 Effect of PDMPs on Part I Crimes
Table 2 presents the coefficients 𝛽' and 𝛽- from Equation (1) using agency-year level
data, where the dependent variable is the natural log of the number of offenses per 100,000
residents. We also report estimates for the impact of mandatory access PDMPs, relative to no
PDMP, using a model with mutually exclusive categories for voluntary and mandated PDMP.
We present estimates for total Part I offenses, and then separately for violent and property
offenses. Panel A presents the effects for aggregated crime counts, and Panel B presents effects
on cost-weight crime counts, explicitly weighting each crime type by its total societal cost
following Chalfin and McCrary (2018).
For each crime outcome, we estimate the baseline model, and then progressively add the
treatment-specific trends and the state-specific trends in order to control for potential
confounders and policies that likely vary at the state level and the less-than-perfect nature of the
natural experiment. Our preferred estimates are the ones that include these trends, though it is
reassuring that estimates are not largely sensitive to these controls or how we control for these
trends (state-specific or treatment-specific). We present estimates from an event study
framework later to more explicitly assess the parallel trends assumption and effect dynamics.

24

The estimates in Table 2 suggest three main findings. First, there is little indication that
voluntary PDMPs have had any economically or statistically significant effect on crime. This is
consistent with much of the prior work that concludes that merely having an operational PDMP
without any mandate on providers to query the databases has not been effective in reducing Rx
drug or opioid misuse (Haegerich et al. 2014; Buchmueller and Carey 2018; Grecu, Dave and
Saffer 2019). Second, we do find evidence that mandatory-access PDMPs significantly decrease
crime. Specifically, mandatory PDMPs are found to significantly reduce overall crime by about
5-6%, relative to voluntary PDMPs. Since virtually all states have an operational PDMP
currently, these “add-on” effects are policy-relevant given that they inform what may happen if
these states enhanced and mandated use of these systems. The total effect of moving from no
PDMP of any kind to a fully mandated PDMP is significant and implies about a 7-8% reduction
in total crime (based on models that control for trends).
Third, results largely hold when offenses are disaggregated into property and violent
crime – voluntary PDMPs do not significantly reduce crime and mandatory access PDMPs do.
However, some of these effects are imprecisely estimated. In general, these estimates imply
about a 4-5% reduction in property and violent crime as a result of stricter PDMPs. Results in
Panel B are largely similar and indicate a comparable reduction in total expected crime costs,
driven by both a reduction in violent and property crimes. In Table 3 crimes are disaggregated
into specific types of offenses (homicide, rape, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny, and motor
vehicle (MV) theft). Similar to Table 2 – voluntary PDMPs are generally found to have no
significant effect on any of the offense types. In contrast, mandatory-access PDMPs have a
robust and significant negative effect on both assault and burglary. Also, while results are
sensitive to model specification and disaggregated crime data are more subject to noise, we also

25

find a negative effect of mandatory-access PDMPs on homicide, robbery, and motor vehicle
theft. Generally, mandatory-access PDMPs are found to reduce offenses on the order of about
5-10%.
A limitation of offenses known segment of the UCR is that it does not contain
information about the age of either the offender or the victim. There are several reasons to use
the other UCR segments that contain demographics about the offender and victim. First,
reflecting an age-crime gradient (Ulmer and Steffensmeier 2014), engagement in criminal
activity tends to peak into late adolescence and early adulthood. Second, young adults ages 1824, followed by adults ages 25-44, tend to have the highest prevalence of non-medical use of Rx
drugs and dependence on pain relievers, though misuse has also been increasing among older
adults.34 Third, prior work has shown that young adults, and in particular young-adult males,
have experienced the largest decrease in opioid misuse and related mortality as a result of
mandatory access PDMPs (Grecu et al. 2019).35
To incorporate information about the offender and victim Appendix Tables A1 and A2
present estimates from FBI UCR arrest rates, which are commonly used in the crime literature
(see for instance, Corman et al. 2014, 2017). It is validating that these estimates are largely
consistent with those from the Offenses Known Segment. They consistently show that
mandatory PDMPs are associated with a reduction in total arrests and are driven by both a
reduction in violent and property crime arrests. The effect magnitudes are also similar to those
reported in Table 2, implying a decline on the order of about 5-6%. Decomposing these effects

34
Data from 2014 National Survey of Drug Use and Health indicate that the prevalence of Rx drug abuse and
dependence (pain reliever abuse and dependence) is 3 times (2.8 times) higher and 2.6 times (2.5 times) higher
among adults ages 18-25 and ages 26-44 relative to adults 45+, respectively.
35
We also estimate the effect of PDMP with an alternative subsample of agencies that report crimes during all 12
months every year of the study and explore with defining the dependent variable as the log or as the log plus one in
order to avoid agencies with zero counts and the results remain unchanged. See Table A2 and A3.

26

into specific crime types, we find a significant reduction in assault, burglary, and motor vehicle
theft, particularly among young adults (ages 18-39). There is also a suggestive decline in
robbery, assaults, burglary, and motor vehicle theft (5-13%).36
5.3 Homicide
Given that we find significant effects of PDMPs on homicide, we further evaluate
whether this effect is also reflected in data from the UCR Homicide Supplements. Based on the
Homicide Supplements we are further able to evaluate the extent to which the effect of PDMPs
on homicides is driven by a particular demographic group among offenders (gender and age), to
what extent it happens to a particular demographic group of victims, and whether the effects are
driven by homicides involving a particular weapon or firearms. For consistency, we aggregate
the data at the agency-year level.
Table 4 presents the results of the DD model estimated with the UCR Homicide
Supplements where the dependent variable is the natural log of the number of homicides per
100,000 residents, conditioned on demographics. Results are broadly in line with the results in
Table 3 in that voluntary PDMPs are not found to have a statistically significant impact on
homicides, and mandatory-access PDMPs are found to have a significant impact.
Columns 2-3 of Table 4 report the effects of PDMPs on weapon used. The results indicate that
mandated PDMPs decreased the rate of homicides that occurred with a firearm by approximately
7-14%. If stricter PDMP regulations affects the circumstances under which individuals access
the illicit drug market, wherein interactions are particularly more likely to involve guns, one

36

In addition, we computed a pairs cluster percentile-t bootstrap (Cameron and Miller, 2015; Hansen, 2018;
Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2008), where we resample states and for every resample compute a bootstrapped tstatistic for the true null hypothesis that the bootstrap coefficient is equal to the full sample coefficient. The
percentiles of the bootstrapped t-statistics can be used to adjust up or down the full sample standard error. This more
refined approach to inference leaves our main results unchanged in terms of their qualitative conclusions. See
Cameron and Miller (2015) for a description of paired-clustered percentile t-bootstrap.

27

would expect more pronounced effects on gun-related homicides. Previous literature has found
that the drug market contributes to violent disputes, murders, and non-fatal shootings with
handguns (Maher and Dixon 2001; Blumstein 1995; Maher and Dixon 1999; Ramussen et al.
1993; Miron 1999; Levitt and Rubio 2005; Sullivan and Elkus 2008).37 The reduction in
homicides, and in particular homicides involving handguns, suggest that overall, PDMPs may
not have increased interactions with the illicit drug market. This is prima facie consistent with
the prior literature that found that these interventions resulted in a net decrease in opioid misuse
and related health consequences.
Columns 4-5 evaluate the impact of PDMPs on homicides of victims conditioned on age.
Results indicate that mandatory access PDMPs reduced the number of homicides where the
victim was between ages 18-39 by 7-13% and the number of homicides where the victim was
over 40 by 8%.38 Both of these effects are statistically significant at conventional levels. The last
two columns present evidence that the number of homicides committed by individuals between
the ages of 18-39 decreased by about 9%, with a similar magnitude of effect among older
offenders.39 As noted previously, the effects on the offender’s demographics must be interpreted
with caution because the demographics of the offender are largely missing.
Table 5 presents the effects of PDMP on the demographics of the victim (Panel A) and
offender by gender (Panel B) and can be summarized as follows: There is a decrease in the rate
of male homicide victims of 6-11% and this is driven mostly by a decrease in homicide rate of
18-39 year old men of approximately 6-12%. There is a decrease in the rate of female homicide

37
On the other hand, prohibiting drugs or disrupting drug markets also lead to the inevitable consequences of gun
violence and homicides (Werb et al, 2011).
38
The effect on victimization of older adults is not statistically different from that for younger victims.
39
Results a close to zero for models estimated with no time trends and the results for offenders over 40 are less
precisely estimated.

28

victims of 14%, driven by larger effects among older females (40+). As indicated by the means
reported in the table, homicide is a crime where the offender and victim are typically male.
Hence, even if relative effects for female victims are similar, these estimates from the
demographic composition of homicides suggest that the decline that we find in homicides is
primarily driven by a decline among young adult male victims (ages 18-39).
Alternately we can also turn to arrests to identify whether the effects are different among
younger or older adult offenders. Appendix Table A1 presents evidence that the decrease in
overall and property crimes are somewhat higher among 18-39 year olds than among individuals
over age 40. On the other hand, the effect of PDMP on violent crimes are generally similar in
magnitude among younger or older adults. It should be noted that, though these relative effects
are more or less similar, the effect sizes imply substantially larger reductions in the total number
of crimes committed by young adult offenders (given that young adults commit more crimes than
older adults).
5.4 Event Study and Timing of the Effects
We visually present the event study in Figures 1-4. Specifically, Figure 1 presents the
coefficients 𝛽 " from Equation (2) corresponding to dates of mandated access implementation, for
total Part 1 crimes, and Figures 2 and 3 present the corresponding estimates for violent and
property crime rates respectively. Figure 4 separately presents the event study coefficients using
the dates of voluntary PDMP implementation.40
Our event-study results underscore four points, all of which instill a degree of confidence
to our estimates. First, there is consistent, dynamic evidence that voluntary PDMPs did not

40

Given the inherent noisiness of the crime data, a limitation not unique to our study, disentangling the timing of the
effects is an imprecise exercise. Furthermore, dynamics in the effect magnitudes (shorter vs. longer term effects, for
instance) may also capture differential effects across early vs. later adopters (Rees et al. 2019), and estimates should
be interpreted with care.

29

impact crime rates in any significant manner (Figure 4). Given that most of the literature has
found little to no first-order effects of these discretionary programs on opioid misuse, this result
adds confidence to the validity of our model. Second, we find that the lead pre-policy effects are
close to zero (e.g. the coefficients 𝛽 " are statistically indistinguishable from zero for t<0), which
indicate that the reduction in crime only materializes after the implementation of mandatory
PDMP. This suggests that PDMPs were not endogenously implemented in response to changes
in crime trends.
Third, figures 1-3 suggest that a reduction in crime materializes after the implementation
of the mandatory access PDMPs. These results are also reflected in the expected cost of crime.41
Fourth, there are important dynamics in the treatment effects. For violent crime, the post-policy
effects persist up to our window of observation (4 years); there also appear to be lagged effects
of the policy such that the effects on violent crime get stronger over time. Lagged effects are
indicated in prior work, and plausible, given the time it takes for physicians to learn and become
well-versed in accessing the databases. Also, this makes sense given the potential lags between
restricted access to Rx opioids and substitution into alternate sources or diversion into treatment
(Grecu et al. 2019).42
For property crime, the post-policy effects are negative for a while but then tend to
rebound back to pre-policy levels by the last year of our observation window. This is consistent

41

Figure A1 presents the coefficient corresponding to the event study using the dates of modern fully accessible
PDMP systems from Horwitz et al (2018) and the results remained similar. Since the dates presented in Horwitz et
al (2018) are not as recent as those of the PDAPS mandated access, we show a longer event study when using those
dates, where we estimate dynamic effects within a five-year period and impose endpoint restrictions where 𝛽8 = 𝛽̅
if 𝑡 ≥ 6 and 𝛽8 = 𝛽 if 𝑡 ≤ 6. The endpoint restrictions prevent us from assigning unequal weight to cities that
enacted their PDMP particularly earlier or later given that the sample is unbalanced in event time (Kline, 2014;
McCrary, 2007).
42
Prior work in the context of heroin (Moore and Schnepel 2018) also finds that a supply shock that increased the
price of heroin by 400% resulted in a short term smaller increase in property crimes accompanied by a longer term
decline; indicating that an average post-policy effect may mask important dynamics in the presence of drug
transitions.

30

with Dobkin and Nicosia (2009) who also found that changes in prices and misuse indicators
related to supply-side interventions, albeit for methamphetamines, were transient and returned to
pre-intervention levels within two years. In terms of non-cost adjusted crime rates, the transient
effects for property crime dominate those for violent crime and hence Figure 1 also suggests that
total crime may revert back within four years. However, when one accounts for the relative
severity of violent crime, cost-adjusted crime rates (Figure 1) – where violent crime carries a
larger weight - continue to show a sustained decline. The discrepancies between crime rates and
cost-adjusted crime rates arise because the more socially costly crimes are the least prevalent.
While a very small change in crime would be unlikely to noticeably change crime rates, the costadjusted measure would capture it if these crimes are costly.
5.5 Robustness Checks and Falsification Diagnostics
Drug Arrests
One advantage of the arrest data is that they allow separate analyses for drug-related
arrests, which we capitalize on to assess effects on arrests related to specific categories of drugs.
Previous work has reported strong net decreases in opioid misuse among younger adults as a
result of PDMPs (Grecu et al. 2019). Hence, if there is a decrease in Rx opioid misuse, and some
of these individuals are diverted into treatment and do not substitute into other illicit drugs, then
we would not expect strong effects on drug arrests. Drug-related arrest data are subject to
measurement error and the effects of PDMP on drug-related arrest rates are largely imprecise.
Nevertheless, Appendix Table A3 presents some evidence of a decrease in arrests related
to drugs offenses in general. This decrease is primarily driven by synthetic drugs (manufactured
addicting narcotics such as Demerol and methadone) and by other non-narcotic drugs (e.g.
barbiturates and Benzedrine). Previous literature has found a diversion effect from opioids to

31

heroin, but our specification does not have sufficient power even though the effects are positive
and suggestive of an increase of about 5% among younger adults. In addition, some recent work
has found that opioids and marijuana may be substitutes, and that medical marijuana may be
associated with a decrease in opioid use and misuse (Liang et al. 2018; Bachhuber et al. 2014).
Consistent with this literature, we find a positive effect on marijuana-related arrests (on the order
of 6%); however, this effect is statistically insignificant at the conventional level and not
consistent across the trend controls.43
Falsification Diagnostics
As discussed in the previous section, we perform a placebo check similar to the
randomization inference outlined in Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) in order to evaluate where
our results fare relative to a placebo analysis where agency-year indicators for whether mandated
access is active are re-shuffled and randomly assigned. For this falsification exercise, we
estimate equation (1) with an iteration-specific “shuffled” or placebo pseudo-PDMP indicator
and repeat this process 300 times. Figures 5 presents the coefficients of these iterations for the
300 placebo parameters alongside the actual main policy effect and visual inspection suggest that
the estimated effect of PDMPs is considerably different from the placebo estimates for the total
crime rates as well as for the cost-adjusted crime rates. Figure A2 presents the coefficients of a
similar exercise using the dates presented in Horwitz et al (2018) and the results remain similar.
Other Specification Checks
We implemented the following additional checks to verify that our main results are
robust to alternate specifications and adjustments for sampling issues, and to assess and these

43

We further examine the relationship between drug-related arrests and PDMP implementation using the dates from
Horwitz et al (2018) and those results present evidence of a decrease in arrests related to “other drug” (e.g.
Barbiturates and Benzedrine) that is statistically significant at the conventional level.

32

results are available upon request. First, we alternately specify the outcome as the crime rate or
the natural log of the count of offenses (or arrests). Second, we estimate models using inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation (that can account for zero cell counts without having to add one
in the log models), fixed effects Poisson and negative binomial specifications. Third, we evaluate
the sensitivity of our results to weighting. In our main analyses, we weight all models by the
agency population, which produces a policy effect that represents an average over individuals (as
opposed to an average over agencies, if the models are unweighted) and can also improve
precision of the estimates since crime rates in a small agency may be more variable over time.
Our coefficient estimates, patterns of results, and general conclusions are not materially affected
by unweighting.
Fourth, we aggregated up all crime data to the state-year level, and re-estimated all
specifications. Aggregation did not materially impact our results. Finally, in our main analyses
we restricted the analyses to those agencies that consistently reported their crime statistics for
every month of our sample period (that is, reported over all 180 months over our 2003-2017
sample period). As a robustness check we instead use agency-year cells that consistently reported
over all 12 months in a given year, yielding an unbalanced panel of agencies (that still
nevertheless reported consistently over all 12 months in the given calendar year for which we
included their data). All of our estimates, in terms of signs, magnitudes, and statistical
significance, remain robust in this expanded sample.
5.6 Alternate PDMP Measures
The bulk of the recent literature that has evaluated the effectiveness of PDMPs (for
instance, Grecu et al. 2019; Buchmueller et al. 2018; Ali et al. 2017) stress the importance of
differentiating mandatory access provisions to PDMPs. These studies find strong evidence that

33

mandatory provisions have effectively reduced measures of opioid misuse. In recent work,
Horwitz et al. (2018) stress another important dimension of such programs, notably when a
state’s full modern, electronic PDMP system became operational and became directly accessible
to users (all key providers, law enforcement). They show that this aspect of PDMP deployment is
significantly and negatively associated with doctor shopping and negatively associated with the
dispensing of Rx opioids.
Given this evidence of a “first-stage”, that such PDMPs appear to have reduced Rx
opioid misuse, we also assess whether this dimension produces declines in crime consistent with
mandatory access provisions. Appendix Table A4 and A5 utilize these alternate dates of modern,
electronic, and fully accessible PDMP deployment from Horwitz et al. (2018) to assess effects on
crime (based on both offenses known and the arrests). It is validating that these estimates largely
confirm our previously discussed findings; they indicate a significant reduction in total crime as
well as in violent and property crime, on the order of about 4%. Also, figure A1 graphically
presents estimates from the event study analysis of PDMP deployment using the dates presented
in Horwitz et al (2018). Reassuringly, the lead effects are insignificant and close to 0 in
magnitude, suggestive of parallel pre-policy trends between the treated and control states.
Furthermore, where there are reductions in crime, they materialize only after the deployment of
the modern and fully accessible PDMP, with dynamics consistent with those discussed above
with respect to mandatory PDMPs.
5.7 Effects in Context
Our estimates thus far suggest that mandatory access PDMPs have led to a significant
reduction in overall crime, in both violent and property crime. The effect magnitudes indicate
about a 5% reduction in the total number of offenses overall, and specifically a 7% reduction in

34

the number arrests among young adults. These are reduced-form estimates that directly link the
policy lever to a key societal outcome. We can combine the reduced-form effect on crime with
the reduced-form effect on Rx drug misuse from the literature to impute an “implied instrumental
variables” (IV) estimate of the structural effect of shifts in Rx drug misuse on crime.44
Specifically, Grecu, Dave and Saffer (2018), based on similar DD and event-study specifications,
find robust evidence that mandatory PDMPs reduced Rx opioid misuse among young adults ages
18-24 by between 26-32% (26% for opioid-related mortality, and 32% for treatment admissions).
Combining these sets of estimates, the implied IV-based elasticity of total crime with respect to
Rx opioid misuse is about 0.2 for young adults.45 This effect in line with the literature relating
other substances (heavy alcohol use, crack cocaine) to crime (Grogger and Willis 2000;
Carpenter 2007; Fryer et al. 2013).
We can further use these sets of estimates to project the numbers of arrests that could be
prevented at the margin from reducing Rx drug misuse. In 2017, about 2.5 million adults (ages
18-25) misused opioid pain relievers (based on the NSDUH), and law enforcement made about
2.21 million arrests among this age group (based on the UCR Arrest files). The reduced-form
estimates indicate that mandatory PDMP provisions may have decreased the number of young
adult Rx opioid misusers by about 750,000 and decreased total arrests among young adults by
about 154,700. This indicates that for every 5 or so fewer Rx drug misusers, about one arrest
appears to have been averted. Thus, the marginal effect of Rx opioid misuse on arrests is also
about 0.2 (154,700 / 750,000). This compares to an average probability of an arrest relative to

Note that the causal effect of Rx drug abuse on crime (∂Crime / ∂Rx Abuse) can be decomposed as the ratio of
two reduced-form effects: (∂Crime / ∂Rx Abuse) = (∂Crime / ∂PDMP) / (∂Rx Abuse / ∂PDMP)
45
The reduced-form effect of the policy on crime is about 7% and the reduced-form of the policy on Rx opioid
abuse is about 30% (26-32%), among young adults. Thus, the implied IV elasticity, akin to a Wald estimate, is: (0.07 / -0.30) or 0.2.
44

35

having ever misused opioids, of about 0.31.46 Hence, the marginal probability implied by our
estimates is reasonable and “in the ball park”; that it is somewhat smaller than the average
probability may imply a concave crime production function with respect to Rx opioid misuse.
While these imputed estimates help to frame the potential importance of PDMPs in
affecting crime, help derive a structural causal effect of Rx drug misuse on crime, and also help
assess the plausibility of the effect magnitudes, they are meant to be suggestive and should be
interpreted with caution. The implied structural causal effect of Rx misuse on crime assumes that
shifts in Rx opioid misuse are the only proximate channel through which mandatory access
PDMPs affect crime, which appears plausible. Furthermore, small changes in the underlying
reduced-form effects (numerator and denominator of the Wald estimate) can lead to large
changes in the implied structural effect. Finally, the structural effect represents a local average
treatment effect, capturing how Rx drug abuse impacts crime for the marginal misuser who is
deterred from misusing Rx drugs due to the access restrictions (though they may substitute into
other drugs, or transition into treatment and complete abstinence). Nevertheless, this exercise
provides some validation that the effect sizes are of a plausible order of magnitude, being
consistent with prior “first-order” effects of the policy on Rx opioid misuse and also consistent
with descriptive data on the percent of opioid misusers who are arrested.
6.

Conclusion

The misuse of opioids in the United States has quadrupled in the last 15 years and has
reached epidemic proportions. In an attempt to mitigate opioid misuse almost every state has
implemented a PDMP, and while the early literature on the effects of PDMPs did not find these
programs to be effective, numerous recent studies have found a significant effect of mandatory-

46

Data from the 2014 NSDUH indicate that among young adults ages 18-24, who had ever misused opioid pain
relievers, 31.1% had reported being arrested.

36

access PDMPs on both the misuse of opioids and opioid related deaths (Grecu, Dave, and Saffer
2018; Buchmueller and Carey 2018; Alpert, Powell, and Pacula 2017). However, there are costs
associated with PDMPs, particularly mandatory-access PDMPs, and there is still some debate
regarding the appropriateness of PDMP legislation.
Furthermore, while the recent opioid epidemic has its roots within the formal healthcare
system and originated with the rapid growth in the prescribing of opioid analgesics, it is unclear
how restricting Rx opioids per se within the healthcare system would impact societal outcomes
and population well-being. On the one hand, such restrictions may reduce overall misuse and
adverse health consequences, though there may also be unintended costs due to the possibility
that individuals may substitute to other illicit drugs or more dangerous supply channels to
continue their habit. This study contributes to this debate and presents some of the first empirical
analyses on the broader spillover impact of PDMP mandates on non-health related domains. Our
study also more generally informs the question of how policies that specifically restrict the
prescribing of opioids (and other controlled drugs) impact an important societal outcome, overall
crime.
We find consistent evidence that stricter and well-deployed PDMPs, but not voluntary
PDMPs, have led to a reduction in criminal activity. Our main estimates suggest that the stricter
PDMP regulations reduced overall crime by about 5%, which is driven by reductions in violent
crimes (4%), specifically homicides, as well as property crime (5%), specifically burglary and
motor vehicle theft.47 Though PDMPs were not implemented as a tool to fight crime, its
implementation has affected crime to an extent comparable to more controversial and costly

47

The decline in property crime is consistent with a large literature that links substance use to crime and finds
evidence of an economic effect whereby addicts may resort to property crime as a way to fund drug habits
(Carpenter 2007; Silverman and Spruill 1977; Manzoni et al 2006).

37

policies, such as increasing the size of the police force by approximately 10% (Evans and Owens
2007; Chalfin and McCrary 2007)48.
The reduction in violent crime, and in particular homicides, may reflect the
pharmacologic and systemic effects linking substance misuse to crime. Prior work has found that
mandatory PDMPs have led to robust reductions in opioid misuse and overdose-related
mortality. Even if some of these individuals are substituting into heroin or alternate underground
supply sources for Rx drugs, the reduction in crime we find implies that on the net the marginal
Rx drug misuser, who is impacted by the PDMP restrictions, has less exposure to the illicit drug
market (which is strongly associated with violence, homicides, and gun-related deaths; Werb et
al. 2011), has less exposure to the pharmacologic effects of the drugs (which may further help to
reduce violence and aggression), and has less of an incentive to resort to crime to fund their drug
addiction.49
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Government Accountability
Office (GAO), and the President’s Opioid Commission (U.S. GAO 2009; Christie et al. 2017)
have all stressed that in order for PDMPs to be effective, providers must access the data. They
underscore the importance of moving towards universal registration and utilization, and
recommend that all states institute mandatory access provisions. PDMP mandates are
proliferating, though these mandates continue to face some opposition by physician and dentist
groups on the grounds that they are intrusive, burdensome and difficult to implement in practice,

48

To put this in cotext, given the cost-weighted crime elasticity of -0.21 to -0.47 of police and crime (Chalfin and
McCrary, 2017), the 4%-6% decrease in the expected cost of total crime driven by the implementation of mandated
access PDMP has an effect comparable to a 10% increase in the police force. Given the high cost of expanding
policing services as the annual salary of a police officer in 2018 is $65,400 as estimated by the Bureau of Labor
statistics (last accessed October 1st, 2019), expanding PDMP to mandated access PDMP may be a cost-effective tool
to fight crime.
49
While individuals who are already addicted to Rx opioids may enter the underground market to substitute towards
illicit drugs, there will be newer cohorts that will not become addicted to Rx opioids as a result of the restrictions
and hence that substitution would be less likely to occur over time.

38

take up time that could be otherwise spent treating patients, and can result in substantial punitive
consequences for prescribers (Haffajee et al. 2015). At the end of our sample period, in 2017, 18
states, representing 33% of the population had required that providers must use the PDMP prior
to prescribing a controlled drug; the rest continued to leave PDMP registration and use to the
discretion of the providers or mandated use in limited circumstances. Our estimates for violent
Part I offenses suggest that expanding strict PDMP mandates from the 33% coverage rate to
universal coverage across the U.S. could reduce violent crime by about 3.4% or by about 42,408
offenses.50 This would result in economic cost savings of up to $9.8 billion annually.51 Overall,
these findings specifically provide additional evidence that prescription drug monitoring
programs are an effective social policy tool to mitigate the negative consequences of opioid
misuse, and more broadly indicate that opioid policies can have important spillover effects into
other non-health related domains such as crime that should be considered in any cost-benefit
calculus.

50

Table 2 and Appendix Table A1 reported that mandatory PDMP provisions reduce violent crime by between 4%
and 6%, or on average 5%. Expanding coverage by 67% (from 33% to universal coverage) would therefore result in
approximately (0.67*5) 3.4% reduction in violent crime. In 2017, the FBI reported 1,247,321 violent Part I crimes
(see https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/topic-pages/tables/table-1). Thus, a 3.4%
reduction translates into 42,408 fewer offenses. Since property crime might be rebounding by the end of our
observation window, we do not include these in our calculations.
51
McCollister et al. (2010) present crime-specific estimates, combining the tangible and intangible costs, for Part I
and some Part 2 crimes. Aggregating their violent crime estimates, based on the specific shares of each offense in
total violent crimes for 2008, and converting to 2017 dollars yields the total cost of a violent offense as $230,205.

39

References
Abadie, Alberto and Javier Gardeazabal (2003) The Economic Costs of Conflicf: A Case Study of the
Basque Country. American Economic Review 93(1): 112-132.
Ali, M. M., Dowd, W. N., Classen, T., Mutter, R., & Novak, S. P. (2017). Prescription drug monitoring
programs, nonmedical use of prescription drugs, and heroin use: Evidence from the National
Survey of Drug Use and Health. Addictive behaviors, 69, 65-77.
Alpert, A., Powell, D. and Pacula, R.L., 2018. Supply-side drug policy in the presence of substitutes:
Evidence from the introduction of abuse-deterrent opioids. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 10(4), pp.1-35.
Anderson, David A. 1999. "Aggregate Burden of Crime, The." Journal of Law and Economics. 42:611.
Anderson, David A. 2011. "The Cost of Crime." Foundations and Trends® in Microeconomics 7
(3):209-265. doi: 10.1561/0700000047.
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2010). The credibility revolution in empirical economics: How better
research design is taking the con out of econometrics. Journal of economic perspectives, 24(2),
3-30.
Bachhuber, M.A., Saloner, B., Cunningham, C.O. and Barry, C.L. 2014. "Medical cannabis laws and
opioid analgesic overdose mortality in the United States, 1999-2010." JAMA internal medicine
174(10): 1668-1673.
Blumstein A (1995) Youth Violence, Guns, and the Illicit Drug Industry. Journal of Criminal
Law and Criminology 86: 10-36
Borgschulte, Mark, Adriana Corredor-Waldron and Guillermo Marshall (2018) A Path Out: Prescription
Drug Abuse, Treatment and Suicide. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 149: 169184
Brady, Joanne E., Hannah Wunsch, Charles DiMaggio, Barbara H. Lang, James Giglio, and Guohua Li.
2014. "Prescription drug monitoring and dispensing of prescription opioids." Public Health
Reports 129 (2):139-147.
Brummett, C. M., Waljee, J. F., Goesling, J., Moser, S., Lin, P., Englesbe, M. J., ... & Nallamothu, B. K.
(2017). New persistent opioid use after minor and major surgical procedures in US adults. JAMA
surgery, 152(6), e170504-e170504.
Buchmueller, T.C. and Carey, C. 2018. "The effect of prescription drug monitoring programs on opioid
utilization in medicare." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(1): 77-112.
Cameron, Colin, Douglas Miller (2015) A Practicioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference. Journal of
Human Resources 50(2): 317-372
Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller (2008) Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference
with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): pp 414-427
Carpenter, Christopher. 2007. "Heavy alcohol use and crime: evidence from underage drunk-driving
laws." The Journal of Law and Economics 50 (3):539-557.
Colman, Gregory and Dhaval Dave (2018) It's About Time: Effects of the Affordable Care Act
Dependent Coverage Mandate on TIme Use. Contemporary Economic Policy 36(1): 44-58
Corman, Hope, and Naci Mocan. 2000. "A time-series analysis of crime: deterrence and drug-abuse in
New York City." American Economic Review 90(3): 584-604.
Corman, H., Dave, D.M. and Reichman, N.E. 2014. "Effects of welfare reform on women's crime."
International Review of Law and Economics 40: 1-14.
Council of Economic Advisors. 2017. The Underestimated Cost of the Opioid Crisis.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/The%20Underestimated%20Cost
%20of%20the%20Opioid%20Crisis.pdf, Accessed August 6, 2018.
Cuellar, A. E., Markowitz, S., & Libby, A. M. (2004). Mental health and substance abuse treatment and
juvenile crime. Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 59-68.

40

Dasgupta, N., Freifeld, C., Brownstein, J.S., Menone, C.M., Surratt, H.L., Poppish, L., Green, J.L.,
Lavonas, E.J. and Dart, R.C. 2013. "Crowdsourcing black market prices for prescription opioids."
Journal of Medical Internet Research 15(8).
Davis, W.M., 1996. "Psychopharmacologic violence associated with cocaine abuse: kindling of a limbic
dyscontrol syndrome?." Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry
20(8): 1273-1300.
Dekker, Anthony H. 2007. "What is being done to address the new drug epidemic." J Am Osteopath
Assoc 107 (9 supplement 5).
DeSimone, Jeff (2007) The Effect of Cocaine Prices on Crime. Economic Inquiry 39(4)
Dobkin, Carlos and Nancy Nicosia (2009) The War on Drugs: Methamphetamine, Public Health, and
Crime. American Economic Review 99(1); 324-349
Evans, W.N., Lieber, E.M. and Power, P., 2019. How the reformulation of OxyContin ignited the heroin
epidemic. Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(1), pp.1-15.
Florence, Curtis, Chao Zhou, Feijun Luo, Likang Xu (2016) The Economic Burden of Prescription
Opioid Overdose, Abuse, and Dependence in the United States, 2013. Medical Care 54(10: 901906
Fryer, Roland, Paul Heaton, Steve Levitt and Kevin Murphy (2013) Measuring Crack Cocaine and Its
Impact. Economic Inquiry 51(3): 1651-1681
Grecu, A.M., Dave, D.M. and Saffer, H., 2019. Mandatory access prescription drug monitoring programs
and prescription drug abuse. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(1), pp.181-209.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Michael Willis (2000) The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in Urban
Crime Rates. The Review of Economics and Statistics 82(4): 519-529
Haegerich, Tamara M., Leonard J. Paulozzi, Brian J. Manns, and Christopher M. Jones. 2014. "What we
know, and don’t know, about the impact of state policy and systems-level interventions on
prescription drug overdose." Drug and alcohol dependence 145:34-47.
Haffajee, R.L., Jena, A.B. and Weiner, S.G. 2015. "Mandatory use of prescription drug monitoring
programs." Journal of the American Medical Association 313(9): 891-892.
Hansen, Bruce E. (2018) Econometrics. University of Wisconsin
Hansen, Ryan N., Gerry Oster, John Edelsberg, George E. Woody, and Sean D. Sullivan. 2011.
"Economic costs of nonmedical use of prescription opioids." The Clinical journal of pain 27
(3):194-202.
Jena, Anupam B., Dana Goldman, Lesley Weaver, and Pinar Karaca-Mandic. 2014. "Opioid prescribing
by multiple providers in Medicare: retrospective observational study of insurance claims." Bmj
348:g1393.
Jones, Christopher M. 2013. "Heroin use and heroin use risk behaviors among nonmedical users of
prescription opioid pain relievers–United States, 2002–2004 and 2008–2010." Drug and alcohol
dependence 132 (1):95-100.
Kaestner, R. and Ziedan, E., 2019. Mortality and Socioeconomic Consequences of Prescription Opioids:
Evidence from State Policies (No. w26135). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaplan, Jacob. Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data: Offenses Known and Clearances by
Arrest, 1960-2017. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2019-02-10. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100707V10
Kolodny, Andrew, David Courtwright, Catherine Hwang, Peter Kreiner, John L. Eadie, Thomas Clark,
Caleb Alexaner (2015) The Prescription Opioid and Heroin Crisis: A Public Health Approach to
an Epidemic of Addiction. Annual Review of Public Health 36: 559-574.
Levitt, S., & Rubio, M. (2005). Understanding crime in Colombia and what can be done about
it. Institutional Reforms: The Case of Colombia, 131.
Li, Guohua, Joanne E. Brady, Barbara H. Lang, James Giglio, Hannah Wunsch, and Charles DiMaggio.
2014. "Prescription drug monitoring and drug overdose mortality." Injury epidemiology 1 (1):9.
Liang, D., Bao, Y., Wallace, M., Grant, I. and Shi, Y. 2018. "Medical Cannabis Legalization and Opioid
Prescriptions: Evidence on US Medicaid Enrollees during 1993-2014." Addiction.
41

Lyapustina, T., Rutkow, L., Chang, H.-Y., Daubresse, M., Ramji, A. F., Faul, M., … Alexander, G. C.
(2016). Effect of a “pill mill” law on opioid prescribing and utilization: The case of Texas. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 159, 190–197. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.12.025
Maher, L. and D. Dixon (1999) Policing and Public Health: Harm Minimization and Law Enforcement in
a Street-Level Drug Market. British Journal of Criminology 39(4): 488-512
Maher, L. And D. Dixon (2001) The Cost of Crackdowns: Policing Cabramatta’s Heroin Market.
Current Issues in Criminal Justice 13(1): 5-22
Mallatt, Justine (2019) Unintended Consequences of Prescription Monitoring: Policy-Induced
Substitution to Illicit Drugs. Working Paper. Accessed on from:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1HKUVUR44hBAa7_yCx-LmUuw1JKY4j-ic/view
Maltz, Michael D. 1999. Bridging gaps in police crime data: DIANE Publishing.
Maltz, Michael D. Joseph Targonski (2002) A Note on the Use of County-Level UCR Data. Journal of
Quantitative Criminology 18(3): pp 297-318
Manchikanti, L., Datta, S., Gupta, S., Munglani, R., Bryce, D. A., Ward, S. P., ... & Hirsch, J. A. (2010).
A critical review of the American Pain Society clinical practice guidelines for interventional
techniques: part 2. Therapeutic interventions. Pain physician, 13(4), E215-64.
Marcotte, Dave and Sara Markowitz (2011) A Cure for Crime? Psycho-pharmaceuticals and crime trends.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30(1): 29-56
Markowitz, Sara (2005) Alcohol, Drugs and Violent Crime. International Review of Law and Economics
25(1): 20-44
McCollister, K.E., French, M.T. and Fang, H. 2010. "The cost of crime to society: New crime-specific
estimates for policy and program evaluation." Drug and alcohol dependence 108(1): pp.98-109.
McRae, Dave. 2014. “The 2014 Indonesian Elections and Australia-Indonesia Relations.” Centre for
Indonesian Law, Islam, and Society Policy Paper 7, December 14,
http://law.unimelb.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/1547823/CILISPolicyPaper7McRae_v2_w
ithoutbleed2.pdf.
McDonald, D. C., Carlson, K., & Izrael, D. (2012). Geographic variation in opioid prescribing in the
US. The journal of Pain, 13(10), 988-996.
Meara, Ellen, Jill R. Horwitz, Wilson Powell, Lynn McClelland, Weiping Zhou, A. James O'Malley, and
Nancy E. Morden. 2016. "State legal restrictions and prescription-opioid use among disabled
adults." New England Journal of Medicine 375 (1):44-53.
Meinhofer, A., 2018. Prescription drug monitoring programs: The role of asymmetric information on drug
availability and abuse. American Journal of Health Economics, 4(4), pp.504-526.
Miron, J. A. (1999). Violence and the US Prohibitions of Drugs and Alcohol. American Law and
Economics Review, 1(1), 78-114.
Moore, T.J., Glenmullen, J. and Furberg, C.D., 2010. "Prescription drugs associated with reports of
violence towards others." PloS one 5(12): e15337.
Moore, B.C., Easton, C.J. and McMahon, T.J., 2011. "Drug abuse and intimate partner violence: A
comparative study of opioid-dependent fathers." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 81(2):
218-227.
Moore, Timothy and Kevin Schnepel (2018) Examining the Long Term Effects of the 2001 Australian
Heroin Shortage. Working Paper
Murray, Regan L., Stephen T. Chermack, Maureen A. Walton, Jamie Winters, Brenda M. Booth, and
Frederic C. Blow. 2008. "Psychological aggression, physical aggression, and injury in nonpartner
relationships among men and women in treatment for substance-use disorders." Journal of
studies on alcohol and drugs 69 (6):896-905.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., Edwin M. Kilbourne, and Hema A. Desai. 2011. "Prescription drug monitoring
programs and death rates from drug overdose." Pain Medicine 12 (5):747-754.
Pedersen, Willy, and Torbjørn Skardhamar. 2010. "Cannabis and crime: findings from a longitudinal
study." Addiction 105 (1):109-118.
Pezalla, E. J., Rosen, D., Erensen, J. G., Haddox, J. D., & Mayne, T. J. (2017). Secular trends in opioid
42

prescribing in the USA. Journal of Pain Research, 10, 383–387.
http://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S129553
Rasmussen, D, B. Benson, D. Sollars (!993) Spatial competition in illicit drug markets: The
Consequences of Increased Drug War Enforcement. Review of Regional Studies, 123-219
Rees, D.I., Sabia, J.J., Argys, L.M., Latshaw, J. and Dave, D. 2019. "With a little help from my friends:
The effects of naloxone access and good samaritan laws on opioid-related deaths." Journal of
Law and Economics, Forthcoming.
Reifler, L. M., Droz, D., Bailey, J. E., Schnoll, S. H., Fant, R., Dart, R. C., & Bucher Bartelson, B.
(2012). Do prescription monitoring programs impact state trends in opioid abuse/misuse?. Pain
Medicine, 13(3), 434-442.
Sajan, A., Corneil, T. and Grzybowski, S. 1998. "The street value of prescription drugs." Canadian
Medical Association Journal 159(2): 139-142.
Simeone, R. (2017). Doctor shopping behavior and the diversion of prescription opioids. Substance
abuse: research and treatment, 11, 1178221817696077.
Stucke, R.S., Kelly, J.L., Mathis, K.A., Hill, M.V. and Barth, R.J., 2018. Association of the use of a
mandatory prescription drug monitoring program with prescribing practices for patients
undergoing elective surgery. JAMA surgery, 153(12), pp.1105-1110.
Sullivan, J. P., & Elkus, A. (2008). State of siege: Mexico’s criminal insurgency. Small Wars Journal, 12,
1-12.
Surrat, H.L., Kurtz, S.P., Cicero, T.J. and Dart, R.C. June 2012. "Street prices of prescription opioids
diverted to the illicit market." In 74th Annual Meeting College of Problems of Drug Dependence
(CPDD). Palm Springs, CA.
Szalavitz, Maia, and Khary K. Rigg. 2017. "The curious (dis) connection between the opioid epidemic
and crime." Substance use & misuse 52 (14):1927-1931.
Ulmer, JT & Steffensmeier, D. 2014. "The age and crime relationship: Social variation, social
explanations." in The Nurture Versus Biosocial Debate in Criminology: On the Origins of
Criminal Behavior and Criminality. SAGE Publications Inc., pp. 377-396.
White, Alan G., Howard G. Birnbaum, Milena N. Mareva, Maham Daher, Susan Vallow, Jeff Schein, and
Nathaniel Katz. 2005. "Direct costs of opioid abuse in an insured population in the United
States." Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy 11 (6):469-479.
World Health Organization. 2009. Clinical Guidelines for Withdrawal Management and Treatment of
Drug Dependence in Closed Settings. Geneva. Available
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK310654/. Accessed August 8, 2018.

43

44

Figure 1: Dynamic Effects of MA PDMP on Total Crime
A. Total Crime Rate

B. Cost Adjusted Total Crime Rate

.1
.1

.05

0

0

-.1

-.05

-.2

-.1

-.3
-4

-3

-2

0

1

Coefficients

2

3

4

-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

Coefficients

Notes: This event study uses the PDAPS dates of mandatory access implementation. The outcome is total crime rates (crimes per
100,000 residents) and cost-adjusted total crime rates. The coefficient corresponding to the year prior to the implementation (t=-1) of
mandated access PDMP is normalized to zero.

Figure 2: Dynamic Effects of MA PDMP on Violent Crime
A. Violent Crime Rate

B. Cost Adjusted Violent

.1
.1

0

0

-.1
-.1

-.2

-.2
-.3
-4

-3

-2

0

1

Coefficients

2

3

4

-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

Coefficients

Notes: This event study uses the PDAPS dates of mandatory access implementation. The outcome is violent crime rates (crimes per
100,000 residents) and cost-adjusted violent crime rates. The coefficient corresponding to the year prior to the implementation (t=-1)
of mandated access PDMP is normalized to zero.

Figure 3: Dynamic Effects of MA PDMP on Property Crime
A. Property Crime Rate

B. Cost Adjusted Property
.2

.1

.1
.05

0

0

-.1

-.05

-.1

-.2
-4

-3

-2

0

1

Coefficients

2

3

4

-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

Coefficients

Notes: This event study uses the PDAPS dates of mandatory access implementation. The outcome is violent crime rates (crimes per
100,000 residents) and cost-adjusted violent crime rates. The coefficient corresponding to the year prior to the implementation (t=-1)
of mandated access PDMP is normalized to zero.

Figure 4: Dynamic Effects of Voluntary PDMP on Total Crime
.1

0

-.1

-.2
-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

Coefficients

Notes: This event study uses the PDAPS dates of voluntary implementation. The outcome is total crime rates (crimes per 100,000
residents). The coefficient corresponding to the year prior to the implementation (t=-1) of voluntary PDMP is normalized to zero.

Figure 5: Randomization Inference, Mandated Access
Treatment effect
-.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02

A. Total Crime Rate

0

100

200

300

Iteration

Treatment effect
-.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

B. Cost-Adjusted Total Crime Rate

0

100

200

300

Iteration

Notes: This randomization inference exercise estimates the DD specification 300 times after “reshuffling” the indicator for whether a state has a mandatory access PDMP and estimates the
effect of a mandated access PDMP relative to a voluntary PDMP.

Table 1: Summary Statistics, Crime Rate per 100,000 Residents
Full Sample
Subsample Reports 12 Months
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Panel A: Offenses Known (per 100,000 population covered)
Total
2,240.07
(27,420.41)
3,253.86
(39,638.11)
Violent
212.77
(635.58)
298.90
(751.33)
Property
2,027.33
(27,149.56)
2,954.97
(39,269.62)
Homicide
2.39
(14.90)
3.25
(14.67)
Rape
19.75
(46.67)
27.59
(43.16)
Robbery
38.02
(287.74)
58.13
(407.75)
Assault
152.82
(417.94)
210.19
(402.53)
Burglary
410.50
(779.26)
562.46
(976.06)
Larceny
1,487.74
(26,643.28)
2,193.23
(38,571.12)
MV Theft
129.09
(1,355.15)
199.28
(1,939.42)
Agencies
22,779
9,136
Observations
243,986
115,892
Panel B: Homicide Circumstances (per 100,000 population covered)
Full Sample
City Pop>10,000
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Murders
11.82
(27.02)
10.56
(9.79)
Weapon Firearm
7.18
(24.28)
7.83
(8.53)
Weapon Knife
1.74
(7.27)
1.10
(1.31)
Victim 18-39
6.18
(20.95)
6.95
(7.15)
Victim Over 40
4.32
(13.15)
2.61
(2.66)
Offender 18-39
5.88
(14.12)
4.65
(4.12)
Offender Over 40
3.05
(18.24)
1.14
(1.32)
Victim Male
8.41
(24.26)
8.83
(8.81)
Victim Female
3.36
(12.42)
1.72
(1.81)
Victim Male 18-39
4.76
(19.31)
6.09
(6.61)
Victim Male Over 40
2.84
(11.16)
1.98
(2.26)
Victim Female 18-39
1.40
(8.13)
0.85
(1.22)
Victim Female Over 40
1.47
(7.23)
0.62
(0.96)
Agencies
8,988
316
Observations
39,069
4,740

Table 1 (Continued) : Summary Statistics, Crime Rate per 100,000 Residents
Full Sample
Subsample Reports 12 Months
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Panel C: Arrests (per 100,000 population covered)
Total
866.27
(16,742.59)
807.01
(3,038.45)
Violent
147.61
(3,333.44)
171.00
(543.45)
Property
718.66
(13,448.34)
636.01
(2,600.73)
Murder
2.49
(24.15)
2.65
(15.15)
Rape
7.10
(22.09)
7.70
(16.77)
Robbery
20.07
(117.09)
26.79
(155.91)
Assault
117.95
(3,316.69)
133.86
(396.72)
Burglary
93.31
(573.89)
109.80
(714.87)
Larceny
594.45
(6,943.70)
493.76
(1,764.37)
MV Theft
30.91
(6,600.40)
32.45
(339.83)
Total 18-39
416.53
(1,640.12)
498.71
(2,063.25)
Violent 18-39
94.82
(358.51)
110.85
(393.01)
Property 18-39
321.71
(1,361.07)
387.86
(1,737.45)
Total 40 Plus
162.36
(3,332.54)
156.01
(700.40)
Violent 40 Plus
65.00
(3,299.19)
38.84
(137.83)
Property 40 Plus
97.35
(423.49)
117.18
(600.08)
N Agencies
22,640
3,987
Notes: The first two columns present summary statistics for the entire sample. The last two
columns present summary statistics for the subsample used in this analysis. The analysis using
offenses known to police and arrest file are restricted to agencies that reported crimes all 12
months while the Supplementary Homicide Report analysis uses agencies that correspond to a
city of at least 10,000 residents and that report at least one homicide in each year of study.
Offenses known data is available until 2017 and arrest data is available until 2016.

Table 2: The Effect of PDMP on Total, Violent and Property Crimes
FBI UCR Offenses Known
Violent

Total
Panel A: Ln Crime Rates
PDMP
-0.029**
-0.023
(0.014)
(0.015)
MA
-0.022
-0.052*
(0.025)
(0.029)
Observations
115,892
115,892
Total MA Effect
-0.052*
-0.075**
(0.028)
(0.031)
Panel B: Ln Cost-Adjusted Crime Rates
PDMP
-0.024
-0.026
(0.022)
(0.024)
MA
-0.064**
-0.052*
(0.028)
(0.029)
Observations
115,882
115,882
Total MA Effect
-0.087**
-0.078**
(0.034)
(0.031)
Agency FE
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
State Trend
N
N
Treatment Trend
N
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y

Property

-0.022
(0.020)
-0.057*
(0.029)
115,892
-0.078**
(0.034)

-0.040
(0.031)
-0.058**
(0.028)
115,891
-0.097***
(0.034)

-0.042
(0.031)
-0.044
(0.029)
115,891
-0.086**
(0.034)

-0.000
(0.019)
-0.040*
(0.023)
115,891
-0.041
(0.027)

-0.025
(0.015)
-0.016
(0.026)
115,895
-0.041
(0.031)

-0.018
(0.015)
-0.049
(0.030)
115,895
-0.066*
(0.034)

-0.026
(0.021)
-0.053*
(0.029)
115,895
-0.079**
(0.036)

0.023
(0.019)
-0.039
(0.027)
115,882
-0.016
(0.028)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.019
(0.025)
-0.061**
(0.030)
115,871
-0.080**
(0.037)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.022
(0.027)
-0.045
(0.032)
115,871
-0.068*
(0.032)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

0.026
(0.021)
-0.030
(0.029)
115,871
-0.004
(0.028)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.030
(0.023)
-0.038
(0.026)
115,895
-0.069*
(0.034)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.031
(0.023)
-0.035
(0.028)
115,895
-0.066*
(0.036)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.020
(0.022)
-0.045
(0.030)
115,895
-0.065*
(0.036)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Note: Models weighted by population agency. Standard erros are clustered by state and reported in parentheses. All models controls for demographic factors (%
minors, % age 18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization,
marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other socioeconomic variables
(income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). **** pvalue≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table 3: The Effect of PDMP on Crime Categories, Ln Crime Rate
FBI UCR Offenses Known
Panel A: Homicide
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect
Panel B: Rape
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect
Panel C: Robbery
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect
Panel D: Assault
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect
Agency FE
Year FE
State Trend
Treatment Trend
Weight Agency Pop
Cluster State

-0.005
(0.017)
-0.048*
(0.027)
115,891
-0.053
(0.034)

-0.004
(0.019)
-0.052**
(0.024)
115,891
-0.056*
(0.029)

0.024
(0.017)
-0.034
(0.021)
115,891
-0.010
(0.023)

-0.152
(0.107)
-0.309
(0.252)
115,833
-0.461
(0.348)

-0.170
(0.125)
-0.224
(0.175)
115,833
-0.394
(0.283)

0.001
(0.046)
-0.098
(0.071)
115,833
-0.096
(0.062)

-0.016
(0.029)
-0.057*
(0.032)
115,889
-0.073**
(0.035)

-0.023
(0.029)
-0.025
(0.033)
115,889
-0.048
(0.033)

0.010
(0.016)
-0.026
(0.027)
115,889
-0.015
(0.027)

-0.035
(0.036)
-0.047
(0.036)
115,886
-0.083*
(0.046)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.033
(0.036)
-0.061*
(0.036)
115,886
-0.093*
(0.047)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.012
(0.023)
-0.054*
(0.030)
115,886
-0.066*
(0.036)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

(Continued) Table 3: The Effect of PDMP on Crime Categories , Ln Crime Rate
FBI UCR Offenses Known
Panel E: Burglary
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect
Panel F: Larceny
PDMP
MA
Observations
Total MA Effect

-0.035
(0.023)
-0.052
(0.036)
115,895
-0.087**
(0.039)

-0.029
(0.023)
-0.081**
(0.038)
115,895
-0.110***
(0.041)

-0.013
(0.023)
-0.091**
(0.039)
115,895
-0.105**
(0.045)

-0.041
(0.035)
-0.017
(0.039)
115,895
-0.057
(0.067)

-0.036
(0.035)
-0.040
(0.051)
115,895
-0.076
(0.073)

-0.096
(0.070)
-0.016
(0.044)
115,895
-0.112
(0.088)

Panel G: MV Theft
PDMP

-0.060
-0.076**
-0.040
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.029)
MA
-0.103***
-0.024
-0.037
(0.037)
(0.030)
(0.031)
Observations
115,894
115,894
115,894
Total MA Effect
-0.163***
-0.100**
-0.078
(0.054)
(0.049)
(0.047)
Agency FE
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
State Trend
N
N
Y
Treatment Trend
N
Y
N
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y
Y
Notes: Models weighted by population agency. Standard errors are clustered by state, and
reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors (% minors, % age 18-25,
%males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws,
Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana
laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other
socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of
residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). ****
p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table 4: The Effect of PDMP on Homicide Circumstances

Murders
Panel A: No Trend
PDMP

-0.025
(0.035)
MA
-0.116**
(0.047)
Total MA Effect
-0.141**
(0.067)
Panel C: Treatment Trend
PDMP
-0.024
(0.037)
MA
-0.122***
(0.042)
Total MA Effect
-0.145**
(0.061)
Agency FE
Y
Year FE
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Cluster State
Y

Weapon
Firearms

FBI UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports
Weapon
Victim
Victim
Knife
18-39
Over 40

Offender
18-39

Offender
Over 40

-0.012
(0.047)
-0.126**
(0.058)
-0.138
(0.086)

0.041
(0.045)
-0.037
(0.030)
0.004
(0.050)

-0.019
(0.047)
-0.129**
(0.055)
-0.148*
(0.083)

-0.028
(0.039)
-0.085**
(0.033)
-0.113*
(0.056)

-0.026
(0.049)
-0.002
(0.051)
-0.028
(0.081)

-0.068
(0.041)
-0.029
(0.056)
-0.097
(0.080)

-0.009
(0.049)
-0.138**
(0.051)
-0.147*
(0.080)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.038
(0.047)
-0.023
(0.045)
0.015
(0.051)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.019
(0.047)
-0.127**
(0.052)
-0.146*
(0.082)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.028
(0.043)
-0.084**
(0.040)
-0.112**
(0.051)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.007
(0.049)
-0.086*
(0.047)
-0.093
(0.073)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.056
(0.042)
-0.081
(0.059)
-0.137*
(0.074)
Y
Y
Y
Y

(Continued) Table 4: The Effect of PDMP on Homicide Circumstances

Panel B: State Trend
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Observations
Agency FE
Year FE
Weight Agency Pop
Cluster State

Murders

Weapon
Firearms

0.018
(0.033)
-0.075**
(0.034)
-0.058
(0.050)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.034
(0.048)
-0.074
(0.045)
-0.040
(0.068)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

FBI UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports
Weapon
Victim
Victim
Knife
18-39
Over 40
0.066
(0.059)
-0.028
(0.048)
0.038
(0.057)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.020
(0.039)
-0.069*
(0.039)
-0.049
(0.060)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.008
(0.046)
-0.083*
(0.045)
-0.091
(0.066)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

Offender
18-39

Offender
Over 40

0.017
(0.055)
-0.088**
(0.039)
-0.071
(0.070)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.041
(0.060)
-0.133**
(0.053)
-0.174**
(0.078)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Models weighted by population agency. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors
(% minors, % age 18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana
decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other
socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and
less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table 5 : The Effect of PDMP on Demographic Composition of Homicide Victim and Offenders
FBI UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports
Panel A: Male Victim
PDMP

Male Victim
-0.020
(0.042)
-0.111**
(0.041)
-0.131*
(0.066)

-0.022
0.048
(0.041)
(0.040)
MA
-0.102**
-0.063*
(0.048)
(0.034)
Total MA Effect
-0.124*
-0.015
(0.071)
(0.052)
Panel B: Female Victim
Female Victim
PDMP
-0.007
-0.004
-0.046
(0.035)
(0.039)
(0.047)
MA
-0.144** -0.160** -0.141**
(0.056)
(0.066)
(0.061)
Total MA Effect
-0.151** -0.163** -0.187**
(0.073)
(0.073)
(0.086)
Agency FE
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
State Trend
N
N
Y
Treatment Trend
N
Y
N
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y
Y

Male Victim 18-39
-0.019
-0.019
0.039
(0.049)
(0.049)
(0.044)
-0.120** -0.121**
-0.062
(0.054)
(0.051)
(0.043)
-0.140
-0.140*
-0.023
(0.084)
(0.082)
(0.062)

Male Victim Over 40
-0.022
-0.023
0.044
(0.037) (0.040)
(0.042)
-0.057
-0.053
-0.047
(0.036) (0.050)
(0.056)
-0.079
-0.076
-0.004
(0.056) (0.057)
(0.070)

Female Victim 18-39
-0.016
-0.023
-0.030
(0.047)
(0.046)
(0.058)
-0.130+
-0.100
-0.075
(0.065)
(0.075)
(0.064)
-0.145
-0.122
-0.105
(0.086)
(0.094)
(0.105)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Female Victim Over 40
-0.002
0.006
-0.089
(0.051) (0.056)
(0.061)
-0.097 -0.133**
-0.167***
(0.063) (0.062)
(0.061)
-0.099
-0.127
-0.256***
(0.098) (0.087)
(0.085)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(Continued) Table 5 : The Effect of PDMP on Demographic Composition of Homicide Victim and Offenders
FBI UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports
Panel C: Male Offender
PDMP

-0.045
(0.046)
MA
-0.070
(0.046)
Total MA Effect
-0.115*
(0.066)
Panel D: Female Offender
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Observations
Agency FE
Year FE
State Trend
Treatment Trend
Weight Agency Pop
Cluster State

-0.018
(0.080)
0.059
(0.057)
0.041
(0.115)
4,740
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

Male Offender
-0.034
-0.014
(0.048)
(0.042)
-0.121***
-0.118***
(0.042)
(0.036)
-0.155**
-0.133**
(0.059)
(0.060)
Female Offender
-0.014
(0.081)
0.041
(0.074)
0.027
(0.119)
4,740
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

0.009
(0.090)
0.001
(0.072)
0.011
(0.120)
4,740
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Male Offender 18-39
-0.025
-0.007
0.015
(0.051)
(0.051)
(0.053)
-0.019 -0.100** -0.095**
(0.049)
(0.046)
(0.039)
-0.044
-0.107
-0.079
(0.080)
(0.072)
(0.068)

Male Over 40
-0.053
(0.039)
-0.078
(0.065)
-0.130
(0.079)

-0.064
(0.039)
-0.026
(0.058)
-0.090
(0.081)

Female Offender18-39
-0.023
-0.009
0.022
(0.085)
(0.088)
(0.110)
0.123*
0.059
0.003
(0.070)
(0.098)
(0.091)
0.099
0.050
0.025
(0.133)
(0.139)
(0.134)
4,740
4,740
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Female Offender Over 40
-0.066
-0.057
-0.059
(0.054)
(0.056)
(0.072)
-0.018
-0.056
-0.052
(0.047)
(0.071)
(0.074)
-0.084
-0.113
-0.111
(0.068)
(0.077)
(0.098)
4,740
4,740
4,740
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.043
(0.060)
-0.135**
(0.058)
-0.179**
(0.087)

Notes: Models weighted by population agency. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors (% minors, % age
18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization,
medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate,
poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *pvalue<0.10

Figure A1: Dynamic Effects of Modern Fully Accessible PDMP
Using Horwitz et al (2018)
A. Total

B. Violent

C. Property

.05

.04

.04

.02

.02
0

0

0
-.02

-.02
-.05

-.04

-.04
-.06

-.06

-.1
-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

-4

-3

Coefficients

-2

0

1

2

3

4

-4

D. Cost Adj Total

E. Cost Adj. Violent

0

0

-.05

-.05

-.05

-.1

-.1
0

1

2

Coefficients

3

4

1

2

3

4

F. Cost Ad. Property

0

-2

0

.05

.05

-3

-2

Coefficients

.05

-4

-3

Coefficients

-.1
-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

Coefficients

3

4

-4

-3

-2

0

1

2

3

4

Coefficients

Notes: This event study uses the dates of implementation from Horwitz et al (2018). The outcomes are total, violent and property
crime rates (crimes per 100,000 residents) and cost-adjusted total, violent, and property crime rates. The coefficient corresponding to
the year prior to the implementation (t=-1) of PDMP as defined in Horwitz et al (2018) is normalized to zero.

Figure A2: Randomization Inference, Modern Fully Accessible PDMP Dates
Using Horwitz et al (2018) dates
Treatment effect
-.04 -.03 -.02 -.01 0 .01

A. Total Crime Rate

0

100

200

300

Iteration

Treatment effect
-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02

B. Cost-Adjusted Total Crime Rate

0

100

200

300

Iteration

Notes: This randomization inference exercise estimates the DD specification 300 times after “reshuffling” the indicator for whether a state has a PDMP and estimates the total effect of PDMP
implementation as defined in Horwitz et al (2018)

Table A1: The Effect of PDMP on Total, Violent and Property Ln Arrest Rates
Total
Panel A: All Ages
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Panel B: Ages 18-39
PDMP

-0.065**
(0.028)
0.023
(0.035)
-0.042
(0.049)

-0.046
(0.029)
MA
-0.001
(0.038)
Total MA Effect
-0.048
(0.053)
Panel C: Age 40 and Over
PDMP
-0.041
(0.029)
MA
0.011
(0.036)
Total MA Effect
-0.030
(0.053)
Observations
51,513
Agency FE
Y
Year FE
Y
State Trend
N
Treatment Trend
N
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Cluster State
Y

Violent

Property

-0.043
(0.030)
-0.084***
(0.030)
-0.128***
(0.041)

-0.055**
(0.024)
-0.058***
(0.019)
-0.113****
(0.029)

-0.065
(0.039)
-0.046
(0.040)
-0.111**
(0.060)

-0.052
(0.042)
-0.113****
(0.024)
-0.165****
(0.047)

-0.030
(0.026)
-0.060***
(0.018)
-0.090****
(0.026)

-0.061*
(0.032)
0.054
(0.038)
-0.007
(0.050)

-0.037
(0.031)
-0.066*
(0.035)
-0.103***
(0.045)

-0.066**
(0.028)
-0.052**
(0.023)
-0.118****
(0.033)

-0.026
(0.031)
-0.105***
(0.034)
-0.130***
(0.044)

-0.048*
(0.026)
-0.070***
(0.025)
-0.118***
(0.033)

-0.053
(0.038)
-0.053
(0.039)
-0.106*
(0.059)

-0.040
(0.041)
-0.115****
(0.024)
-0.155***
(0.046)

-0.026
(0.027)
-0.061***
(0.018)
-0.087***
(0.027)

-0.046
(0.031)
0.021
(0.041)
-0.025
(0.054)

-0.023
(0.031)
-0.093*
(0.040)
-0.116***
(0.049)

-0.060+
(0.033)
-0.069*
(0.029)
-0.129****
(0.040)

-0.026
(0.032)
-0.066**
(0.029)
-0.091**
(0.041)
51,513
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.042
(0.025)
-0.055**
(0.021)
-0.097***
(0.029)
51,513
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.068*
(0.040)
-0.034
(0.041)
-0.103
(0.065)
51,513
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.053
(0.043)
-0.111****
(0.028)
-0.164***
(0.055)
51,513
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.028
(0.027)
-0.074***
(0.023)
-0.102***
(0.032)
51,513
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.033
(0.032)
0.033
(0.042)
0.000
(0.055)
51,513
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.019
(0.034)
-0.035
(0.034)
-0.055
(0.045)
51,513
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.050+
(0.026)
-0.040+
(0.024)
-0.090***
(0.031)
51,513
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Notes: Models weighted by population agency. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors (% minors, % age 18-25, %males
age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws,
beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college
degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table A2: The Effect of PDMP on Ln Arrest Rates, Crime Categories
Murder
Rape
Panel A: All Ages, No Trend
PDMP
0.024
-0.088**
(0.023)
(0.040)
MA
-0.035
0.005
(0.043)
(0.055)
Total MA Effect
-0.001
-0.083
(0.043)
(0.070)
Panel B: All Ages, Treated State Trend
PDMP
0.027
-0.072*
(0.023)
(0.042)
MA
-0.053
-0.078
(0.042)
(0.054)
Total MA Effect
-0.018
-0.148**
(0.039)
(0.065)
Panel C: All Ages, State Trend
PDMP
-0.006
-0.085*
(0.046)
(0.045)
MA
-0.032
-0.053
(0.045)
(0.060)
Total MA Effect
-0.025
-0.136**
(0.056)
(0.065)
Agency FE
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y

FBI UCR Arrest Rate
Robbery
Assault
Burglary

Larceny

MV Theft

-0.006
(0.025)
-0.057+
(0.032)
-0.055
(0.044)

-0.092*
(0.047)
-0.028
(0.042)
-0.119*
(0.067)

-0.064*
(0.035)
-0.032
(0.044)
-0.095
(0.065)

-0.076*
(0.038)
0.089*
(0.039)
0.027
(0.056)

0.031
(0.057)
-0.059
(0.066)
-0.019
(0.080)

-0.000
(0.025)
-0.084***
(0.030)
-0.077*
(0.040)

-0.076
(0.051)
-0.113****
(0.029)
-0.186***
(0.057)

-0.049
(0.033)
-0.109*
(0.055)
-0.157**
(0.075)

-0.054
(0.037)
-0.028
(0.037)
-0.071
(0.044)

0.054
(0.057)
-0.176**
(0.072)
-0.121
(0.087)

0.013
(0.023)
-0.029
(0.032)
-0.012
(0.042)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.066
(0.049)
-0.057**
(0.025)
-0.123***
(0.042)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.043 -0.083***
(0.031)
(0.030)
-0.093**
-0.000
(0.044)
(0.026)
-0.140** -0.088**
(0.060)
(0.034)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.048
(0.045)
-0.128**
(0.053)
-0.172**
(0.065)
Y
Y
Y
Y

(Continued) Table A2: The Effect of PDMP on Ln Arrest Rates, Crime Categories
Murder
Panel D: Age 18-39, No trend
PDMP
0.019
(0.024)
MA
-0.034
(0.045)
Total MA Effect
-0.004
(0.044)
Panel E: 18-39, Treated State Trend
PDMP
0.025
(0.024)
MA
-0.062
(0.042)
Total MA Effect
-0.030
(0.040)
Panel F:18-39, State Trend
PDMP
0.014
(0.054)
MA
-0.048
(0.043)
Total MA Effect
-0.023
(0.061)
Agency FE
Y
Year FE
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Cluster State
Y

FBI UCR Arrest Rate
Robbery
Assault
Burglary

Larceny

MV Theft

-0.096**
(0.039)
0.026
(0.048)
-0.066
(0.064)

-0.000
(0.024)
-0.064**
(0.030)
-0.058
(0.043)

-0.082*
(0.047)
-0.033
(0.043)
-0.115*
(0.067)

-0.041
(0.036)
-0.038
(0.050)
-0.076
(0.072)

-0.067*
(0.037)
0.048
(0.041)
-0.004
(0.057)

0.067
(0.056)
-0.106
(0.080)
-0.029
(0.081)

-0.081*
(0.041)
-0.048
(0.041)
-0.125**
(0.056)

0.004
(0.025)
-0.086***
(0.028)
-0.075*
(0.039)

-0.066
(0.052)
-0.115****
(0.030)
-0.178***
(0.056)

-0.026
(0.034)
-0.112*
(0.061)
-0.135
(0.081)

-0.046
(0.038)
-0.059
(0.039)
-0.095**
(0.045)

0.090
(0.056)
-0.226**
(0.086)
-0.131
(0.086)

-0.095**
(0.047)
-0.025
(0.044)
-0.122**
(0.056)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.023
(0.022)
-0.042
(0.030)
-0.014
(0.039)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.059
(0.049)
-0.053*
(0.027)
-0.112**
(0.043)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.038
(0.035)
-0.095*
(0.051)
-0.135*
(0.069)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.075**
(0.033)
-0.019
(0.031)
-0.100**
(0.037)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.005
(0.058)
-0.169**
(0.065)
-0.166**
(0.076)
Y
Y
Y
Y

Rape

(Continued) Table A2: The Effect of PDMP on Ln Arrest Rates, Crime Categories
Murder
Rape
Panel G: Age Over 40, No Trend
PDMP
0.021
-0.043
(0.016)
(0.030)
MA
0.005
0.001
(0.024)
(0.048)
Total MA Effect
0.028
-0.049
(0.029)
(0.061)
Panel H: Age Over 40 Treated State Trend
PDMP
0.021
-0.025
(0.017)
(0.030)
MA
0.001
-0.090*
(0.031)
(0.048)
Total MA Effect
0.027
-0.117*
(0.030)
(0.059)
Panel I: Age Over 40, State Trend
PDMP
-0.027
-0.008
(0.029)
(0.031)
MA
0.021
-0.081*
(0.033)
(0.044)
Total MA Effect
0.000
-0.085
(0.031)
(0.054)
Agency FE
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y

FBI UCR Arrest Rate
Robbery
Assault
Burglary

Larceny

MV Theft

0.019
(0.027)
-0.055
(0.034)
-0.030
(0.054)

-0.085*
(0.046)
-0.020
(0.043)
-0.100
(0.068)

-0.013
(0.030)
-0.010
(0.045)
-0.029
(0.064)

-0.044
(0.038)
0.069
(0.046)
0.036
(0.061)

0.045
(0.047)
-0.152*
(0.079)
-0.091
(0.076)

0.025
(0.027)
-0.086**
(0.036)
-0.052
(0.051)

-0.068
(0.049)
-0.109***
(0.032)
-0.172***
(0.062)

-0.011
(0.030)
-0.022
(0.049)
-0.037
(0.066)

-0.030
(0.039)
-0.004
(0.041)
-0.024
(0.049)

0.061
(0.048)
-0.233**
(0.093)
-0.159*
(0.085)

0.054
(0.033)
-0.074**
(0.036)
-0.022
(0.056)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.070
(0.045)
-0.064**
(0.026)
-0.133***
(0.046)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.013
(0.025)
-0.033
(0.041)
-0.052
(0.053)
Y
Y
Y
Y

-0.064**
(0.028)
0.003
(0.031)
-0.066*
(0.036)
Y
Y
Y
Y

0.009
(0.052)
-0.192***
(0.069)
-0.170**
(0.065)
Y
Y
Y
Y

Notes: Models weighted by agency’s population. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models
control for demographic factors (% minors, % age 18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws,
Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer
taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment
rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). **** pvalue≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table A3: The Effect of PDMP on Drug Arrest Rates
FBI UCR Arrest Rate
Age 18-39

All Ages
Panel A: Total
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Panel B: Marijuana
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Panel C: Other Drug
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Agency FE
Year FE
State Trend
Treatment Trend
Weight Agency Pop
Cluster State

Age Over 40

-0.123
(0.073)
-0.010
(0.076)
-0.102
(0.112)

-0.104
(0.078)
-0.107
(0.111)
-0.187
(0.128)

-0.045
(0.064)
-0.088
(0.083)
-0.142
(0.107)

-0.111
(0.076)
0.001
(0.077)
-0.078
(0.113)

-0.088
(0.080)
-0.115
(0.114)
-0.178
(0.132)

-0.032
(0.064)
-0.095
(0.085)
-0.134
(0.110)

-0.167**
(0.063)
-0.034
(0.066)
-0.183+
(0.098)

-0.158**
(0.067)
-0.084
(0.090)
-0.226**
(0.105)

-0.071
(0.062)
-0.065
(0.073)
-0.143
(0.098)

-0.019
(0.105)
0.075
(0.111)
0.114
(0.172)

0.009
(0.112)
-0.068
(0.144)
-0.014
(0.183)

-0.040
(0.084)
0.036
(0.120)
-0.004
(0.164)

-0.003
(0.108)
0.109
(0.113)
0.169
(0.178)

0.028
(0.116)
-0.049
(0.147)
0.029
(0.187)

-0.016
(0.088)
0.059
(0.125)
0.045
(0.172)

-0.091
(0.083)
0.100
(0.090)
0.052
(0.136)

-0.065
(0.091)
-0.033
(0.125)
-0.062
(0.150)

-0.048
(0.077)
0.057
(0.108)
0.014
(0.148)

-0.155*
(0.088)
0.044
(0.085)
-0.078
(0.113)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.122
(0.087)
-0.124
(0.123)
-0.208
(0.138)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.145
(0.088)
-0.123
(0.102)
-0.260*
(0.142)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.130
(0.093)
0.044
(0.085)
-0.051
(0.115)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.095
(0.093)
-0.139
(0.122)
-0.192
(0.139)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.094
(0.089)
-0.143
(0.099)
-0.227
(0.142)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.197***
(0.063)
0.045
(0.085)
-0.130
(0.097)
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.175***
(0.061)
-0.065
(0.119)
-0.213*
(0.122)
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

-0.172**
(0.074)
-0.044
(0.094)
-0.212
(0.127)
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

(Continued) Table A3: The Effect of PDMP on Drug Arrest Rates
FBI UCR Arrest Rate
Age 18-39

All Ages
Panel D: Heroin and Coke
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Panel D: Synthetic Drugs
PDMP
MA
Total MA Effect
Observations
Agency FE
Year FE
State Trend
Treatment Trend
Weight Agency Pop
Cluster State

Age Over 40

-0.034
(0.103)
-0.135
(0.114)
-0.158
(0.166)

-0.052
(0.100)
-0.044
(0.147)
-0.075
(0.193)

-0.037
(0.065)
0.028
(0.210)
-0.014
(0.226)

-0.036
(0.096)
-0.081
(0.122)
-0.106
(0.176)

-0.052
(0.094)
0.005
(0.178)
-0.027
(0.217)

-0.019
(0.074)
0.052
(0.217)
0.034
(0.251)

-0.065
(0.079)
-0.062
(0.104)
-0.130
(0.145)

-0.080
(0.076)
0.015
(0.154)
-0.056
(0.185)

-0.042
(0.077)
0.040
(0.188)
-0.001
(0.221)

0.041
(0.116)
-0.167
(0.125)
-0.104
(0.153)
51,353
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

0.058
(0.114)
-0.254+
(0.137)
-0.172
(0.171)
51,353
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

0.058
(0.098)
-0.142
(0.149)
-0.074
(0.156)
51,353
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

0.012
(0.115)
-0.140
(0.123)
-0.115
(0.154)
51,353
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

0.023
(0.114)
-0.197
(0.137)
-0.149
(0.172)
51,353
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

0.068
(0.093)
-0.116
(0.143)
-0.034
(0.155)
51,353
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

-0.039
(0.079)
-0.130
(0.104)
-0.164
(0.121)
51,354
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

-0.027
(0.081)
-0.192+
(0.108)
-0.202
(0.124)
51,354
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

0.060
(0.077)
-0.126
(0.106)
-0.046
(0.114)
51,354
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Note: Models weighted by agency’s population. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors (% minors, % age
18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana decriminalization, marijuana legalization,
medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate,
poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *pvalue<0.10

Table A4: The Effect of PDMP on Total, Violent and Property Crime (2003-2017)
Modern, Fully Accessible PDMP Systems (Horwitz et al, 2018)
Crime Rates (2003-2017)
Cost-Adjusted Crime Rates (2003-2017)
Ln Arrest Rate (2003-2016)
Total
Violent
Property
Total
Violent
Property
Total
Violent
Property
Panel A: PDPAS, no trend
PDMP Horwitz
-0.038*** -0.031** -0.039**
-0.032**
-0.029
-0.037**
-0.034*
-0.031
-0.033
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.020)
Observations
115,892
115,891
115,895
115,882
115,871
115,895
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
3778
485.4
3294
633.3
586.9
46.51
753.7
206.5
547.1
Panel C: Treated State-Trend
PDMP Horwitz
-0.038*** -0.030** -0.039***
-0.031**
-0.028
-0.036**
-0.041***
-0.035*
-0.041**
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.020)
(0.016)
Observations
115,892
115,891
115,895
115,882
115,871
115,895
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
3778
485.4
3294
633.3
586.9
46.51
753.7
206.5
547.1
Panel B: PDPAS , trend
PDMP Horwitz
-0.036*** -0.022** -0.038***
-0.020
-0.016
-0.032**
-0.041*** -0.038*** -0.042***
(0.012)
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.015)
Observations
115,892
115,891
115,895
115,882
115,871
115,895
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
3778
485.4
3294
633.3
586.9
46.51
753.7
206.5
547.1
Agency FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State Trend
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
Treatment Trend
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Notes: Models weighted by agency’s population. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors
(% minors, % age 18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana
decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other
socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and
less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table A5: The Effect of PDMP on Crime Categories, FBI UCR Offenses Known and Arrests
Modern, Fully Accessible PDMP Systems (Horwitz et al, 2018)
Homicide
Rape
Robbery
Assault
Burglary
Larceny
MV Theft
Panel A: Offenses Known, No Trend (2003-2017)
PDMP Horwitz
-0.034**
-0.012
-0.028*
-0.039***
-0.033
-0.060**
-0.044*
(0.013)
(0.046)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.023)
(0.027)
(0.025)
Observations
115,891
115,833 115,889
115,886
115,895
115,895
115,894
Mean Pre-MA
5.882
29.09
154.8
296
706.5
2222
365.4
Panel C: Offenses Known, Treatment Trend (2003-2017)
PDMP Horwitz
-0.033**
-0.008
-0.027
-0.038***
-0.033
-0.061**
-0.0428*
(0.013)
(0.045)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.024)
Observations
115,891
115,833 115,889
115,886
115,895
115,895
115,894
Mean Pre-MA
5.882
29.09
154.8
296
706.5
2222
365.4
Panel B: Offenses Known, State-Trend (2003-2017)
PDMP Horwitz
-0.025**
-0.016
-0.019*
-0.035***
-0.024
-0.066**
-0.030*
(0.011)
(0.044)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.023)
(0.027)
(0.016)
Observations
115,891
115,833 115,889
115,886
115,895
115,895
115,894
Mean Pre-MA
5.882
29.09
154.8
296
706.5
2222
365.4
Agency FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(Continued) Table A5: The Effect of PDMP on Crime Categories, FBI UCR Offenses Known and Arrests
Modern, Fully Accessible PDMP Systems (Horwitz et al, 2018)
Homicide
Rape
Robbery
Assault
Burglary
Larceny
MV Theft
Panel D: Arrests, No Trend (2003-2016)
PDMP Horwitz
0.005
-0.028
0.013
-0.053**
0.011
-0.037*
-0.057
(0.018)
(0.035) (0.021)
(0.025)
(0.028)
(0.022)
(0.042)
Observations
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
4.099
8.171
42.17
152.1
98.18
410.8
38.11
Panel F: Arrests, Treatment Trend (2003-2016)
PDMP Horwitz
0.005
-0.034
0.013
-0.059*
0.007
-0.046***
-0.063
(0.018)
(0.035) (0.020)
(0.025)
(0.026)
(0.017)
(0.042)
Observations
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
4.099
8.171
42.17
152.1
98.18
410.8
38.11
Panel E: Arrests, State-Trend (2003-2016)
PDMP Horwitz
-0.006
-0.065** 0.011
-0.063****
-0.005
-0.044**
-0.124****
(0.020)
(0.025) (0.025)
(0.016)
(0.029)
(0.017)
(0.028)
Observations
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
51,513
Mean Pre-MA
4.099
8.171
42.17
152.1
98.18
410.8
38.11
Agency FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Weight Agency Pop
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Cluster State
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Notes: Models weighted by agency’s population. Standard errors are clustered by state, and reported in parentheses. All models control for demographic factors
(% minors, % age 18-25, %males age 18-25, %males), drug and alcohol policies (ID laws, PER laws, Naloxone laws, Good Samaritan laws, marijuana
decriminalization, marijuana legalization, medical marijuana laws, BAC laws, beer taxes), police composition (ln officers per 100,000 residents) and other
socioeconomic variables (income per capita, unemployment rate, poverty rate and share of residents that have a college degree, some college, high school, and
less than high school). **** p-value≤0.001, *** p-value≤0.01, * *p-value≤0.05, *p-value<0.1

