                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    RESOLVING NEW KEYNESIAN ANOMALIES WITH WEALTH IN THE UTILITY
                             FUNCTION

                                       Pascal Michaillat
                                       Emmanuel Saez

                                     Working Paper 24971
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24971


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         August 2018, Revised December 2019




Previously circulated as "A New Keynesian Model with Wealth in the Utility Function." We
thank Sushant Acharya, Adrien Auclert, Gadi Barlevi, Marco Bassetto, Jess Benhabib, Florin
Bilbiie, Jeffrey Campbell, Edouard Challe, Varanya Chaubey, John Cochrane, Behzad Diba,
Gauti Eggertsson, Erik Eyster, Francois Gourio, Pete Klenow, Olivier Loisel, Neil Mehrotra, Emi
Nakamura, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, David Sraer, Jon Steinsson, Harald Uhlig, and Ivan Werning
for helpful discussions and comments. This work was supported by the Institute for Advanced
Study and the Berkeley Center for Equitable Growth. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Resolving New Keynesian Anomalies with Wealth in the Utility Function
Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 24971
August 2018, Revised December 2019
JEL No. E31,E32,E43,E52,E71

                                          ABSTRACT

At the zero lower bound, the New Keynesian model predicts that output and inflation collapse to
implausibly low levels, and that government spending and forward guidance have implausibly
large effects. To resolve these anomalies, we introduce wealth into the utility function; the
justification is that wealth is a marker of social status, and people value status. Since people
partly save to accrue social status, the Euler equation is modified. As a result, when the marginal
utility of wealth is sufficiently large, the dynamical system representing the zero-lower-bound
equilibrium transforms from a saddle to a source—which resolves all the anomalies.


Pascal Michaillat
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
pascal_michaillat@brown.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
                                          I.   Introduction

A current issue in monetary economics is that the New Keynesian model makes several anomalous
predictions when the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates (ZLB) is binding: implausibly large
collapse of output and inflation (Eggertsson & Woodford, 2004; Eggertsson, 2011; Werning, 2011);
implausibly large effect of forward guidance (Del Negro, Giannoni, & Patterson, 2015; Carlstrom,
Fuerst, & Paustian, 2015; Cochrane, 2017); and implausibly large effect of government spending
(Christiano, Eichenbaum, & Rebelo, 2011; Woodford, 2011; Cochrane, 2017).
   Several papers have developed variants of the New Keynesian model that behave well at the ZLB
(Gabaix, 2016; Diba & Loisel, 2019; Cochrane, 2018; Bilbiie, 2019; Acharya & Dogra, 2019); but these
variants are more complex than the standard model. In some cases the derivations are complicated
by bounded rationality or heterogeneity. In other cases the dynamical system representing the
equilibrium—normally composed of an Euler equation and a Phillips curve—includes additional
differential equations that describe bank-reserve dynamics, price-level dynamics, or the evolution of
the wealth distribution. Moreover, a good chunk of the analysis is conducted by numerical simulations.
Hence, it is sometimes difficult to grasp the nature of the anomalies and their resolutions.
   It may therefore be valuable to strip the logic to the bone. We do so using a New Keynesian
model in which relative wealth enters the utility function. The justification for the assumption is that
relative wealth is a marker of social status, and people value high social status. We deviate from
the standard model only minimally: the derivations are the same; the equilibrium is described by a
dynamical system composed of an Euler equation and a Phillips curve; the only difference is an extra
term in the Euler equation. We also veer away from numerical simulations and establish our results
with phase diagrams describing the dynamics of output and inflation given by the Euler-Phillips
system. The model’s simplicity and the phase diagrams allow us to gain new insights into the
anomalies and their resolutions.1
    1Our approach relates to the work of Michaillat & Saez (2014), Ono & Yamada (2018), and
Michau (2018). By assuming wealth in the utility function, they obtain non-New-Keynesian models
that behave well at the ZLB. But their results are not portable to the New Keynesian framework
because they require strong forms of wage or price rigidity (exogenous wages, fixed inflation, or



                                                   1
    Using the phase diagrams, we begin by depicting the anomalies in the standard New Keynesian
model. First, we find that output and inflation collapse to unboundedly low levels when the ZLB
episode is arbitrarily long-lasting. Second, we find that there is a duration of forward guidance above
which any ZLB episode, irrespective of its duration, is transformed into a boom. Such boom is
unbounded when the ZLB episode is arbitrarily long-lasting. Third, we find that there is an amount of
government spending at which the government-spending multiplier becomes infinite when the ZLB
episode is arbitrarily long-lasting. Furthermore, when government spending exceeds this amount, an
arbitrarily long ZLB episode prompts an unbounded boom.
    The phase diagrams also pinpoint the origin of the anomalies: they arise because the Euler-Phillips
system is a saddle at the ZLB. In normal times, by contrast, the Euler-Phillips system is source, so
there are no anomalies. In economic terms, the anomalies arise because household consumption
(given by the Euler equation) responds too strongly to the real interest rate. Indeed, since the only
motive for saving is future consumption, households are very forward-looking, and their response to
interest rates is strong.
    Once wealth enters the utility function, however, the Euler equation is “discounted”—in the sense
of McKay, Nakamura, & Steinsson (2017)—which alters the properties of the Euler-Phillips system.
People now save partly because they enjoy holding wealth; this is a present consideration, which
does not require them to look into the future. As people are less forward-looking, their consumption
responds less to interest rates; this creates discounting.
    With enough marginal utility of wealth, the discounting is strong enough to transform the
Euler-Phillips system from a saddle to a source at the ZLB and thus eliminate all the anomalies.
First, output and inflation never collapse at the ZLB: they are bounded below by the ZLB steady
state. Second, when the ZLB episode is long enough, the economy necessarily experiences a slump,
downward nominal wage rigidity). Our approach also relates to the work of Fisher (2015) and
Campbell et al. (2017), who build New Keynesian models with government bonds in the utility
function. The bonds-in-the-utility assumption captures special features of government bonds relative
to other assets, such as safety and liquidity (for example, Krishnamurthy & Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012).
While their assumption and ours are conceptually different, they affect equilibrium conditions in a
similar way. These papers use their assumption to generate risk-premium shocks (Fisher) and to
alleviate the forward-guidance puzzle (Campbell et al.).



                                                   2
irrespective of the duration of forward guidance. Third, government-spending multipliers are always
finite, irrespective of the duration of the ZLB episode.
   Apart from its anomalies, the standard New Keynesian model has several other intriguing prop-
erties at the ZLB—some labeled “paradoxes” because they defy usual economic logic (Eggertsson,
2010; Werning, 2011; Eggertsson & Krugman, 2012). Our model shares these properties. First, the
paradox of thrift holds: when households desire to save more than their neighbors, the economy
contracts and they end up saving the same amount as the neighbors. The paradox of toil also holds:
when households desire to work more, the economy contracts and they end up working less. The
paradox of flexibility is present too: the economy contracts when prices become more flexible.
Last, the government-spending multiplier is above one, so government spending stimulates private
consumption.


                       II.   Justification for Wealth in the Utility Function

Before delving into the model, we justify our assumption of wealth in the utility function.
   The standard model assumes that people save to smooth consumption over time, but it has long
been recognized that people seem to enjoy accumulating wealth irrespective of future consumption.
Describing the European upper class of the early 20th century, Keynes (1919, chap. 2) noted that
“The duty of saving became nine-tenths of virtue and the growth of the cake the object of true
religion. . . . Saving was for old age or for your children; but this was only in theory—the virtue
of the cake was that it was never to be consumed, neither by you nor by your children after you.”
Irving Fisher added that “A man may include in the benefits of his wealth . . . the social standing he
thinks it gives him, or political power and influence, or the mere miserly sense of possession, or the
satisfaction in the mere process of further accumulation” (Fisher, 1930, p. 17). Fisher’s perspective is
interesting since he developed the theory of saving based on consumption smoothing.
   Neuroscientific evidence confirms that wealth itself provides utility, independently of the
consumption it can buy. Camerer, Loewenstein, & Prelec (2005, p. 32) note that “brain-scans
conducted while people win or lose money suggest that money activates similar reward areas as



                                                   3
do other ‘primary reinforcers’ like food and drugs, which implies that money confers direct utility,
rather than simply being valued only for what it can buy.”
    Among all the reasons why people may value wealth, we focus on social status: we postulate that
people enjoy wealth because it provides social status. We therefore introduce relative (not absolute)
wealth into the utility function.2 The assumption is convenient: in equilibrium everybody is the
same, so relative wealth is zero. And the assumption seems plausible. Adam Smith, Ricardo, John
Rae, J.S. Mill, Marshall, Veblen, and Frank Knight all believed that people accumulate wealth to
attain high social status (Steedman, 1981). More recently, a broad literature has documented that
people seek to achieve high social status, and that accumulating wealth is a prevalent pathway to do
so (Weiss & Fershtman, 1998; Heffetz & Frank, 2011; Fiske, 2010; Anderson, Hildreth, & Howland,
2015; Cheng & Tracy, 2013; Ridgeway, 2014; Mattan, Kubota, & Cloutier, 2017).3


                III.   New Keynesian Model with Wealth in the Utility Function

We extend the New Keynesian model by assuming that households derive utility not only from
consumption and leisure but also from relative wealth. To simplify derivations and be able to
represent the equilibrium with phase diagrams, we use an alternative formulation of the New
Keynesian model, inspired by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe, & Uribe (2001) and Werning (2011). Our
formulation features continuous time instead of discrete time; self-employed households instead of
firms and households; and Rotemberg (1982) pricing instead of Calvo (1983) pricing.
     2Cole, Mailath, & Postlewaite (1992, 1995) develop models in which relative wealth does not
directly confer utility but has other attributes such that people behave as if wealth entered their utility
function. In one such model, wealthier individuals have higher social rankings, which allows them
to marry wealthier partners and enjoy higher utility.
     3The wealth-in-the-utility assumption has been found useful in models of long-run growth
(Kurz, 1968; Konrad, 1992; Zou, 1994; Corneo & Jeanne, 1997; Futagami & Shibata, 1998), risk
attitudes (Robson, 1992; Clemens, 2004), asset pricing (Bakshi & Chen, 1996; Gong & Zou, 2002;
Kamihigashi, 2008; Michau, Ono, & Schlegl, 2018), life-cycle consumption (Zou, 1995; Carroll,
2000; Francis, 2009; Straub, 2019), social stratification (Long & Shimomura, 2004), international
macroeconomics (Fisher, 2005; Fisher & Hof, 2005), financial crises (Kumhof, Ranciere, & Winant,
2015), and optimal taxation (Saez & Stantcheva, 2018). Such usefulness lends further support to the
assumption.




                                                    4
A.   Assumptions

The economy is composed of a measure 1 of self-employed households. Each household j ∈ [0, 1]
produces yj (t) units of a good j at time t, sold to other households at a price p j (t). The household’s
production function is yj (t) = ah j (t), where a > 0 represents the level of technology, and h j (t) is
hours of work. Working causes a disutility κh j (t), where κ > 0 is the marginal disutility of labor.
     The goods produced by households are imperfect substitutes for one another, so each household
exercises some monopoly power. Moreover, households face a quadratic cost when they change
their price: changing a price at a rate π j (t) = pÛj (t)/p j (t) causes a disutility γ π j (t)2 /2. The parameter
γ > 0 governs the cost to change prices and thus price rigidity.
     Each household consumes goods produced by other households. Household j buys quantities
c jk (t) of the goods k ∈ [0, 1]. These quantities are aggregated into a consumption index

                                                ∫   1                             ϵ/(ϵ−1)
                                    c j (t) =            c jk (t) (ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                                                            dk                 ,
                                                 0


where ϵ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between goods. The consumption index yields utility
ln(c j (t)). Given the consumption index, the relevant price index is

                                                 ∫      1                      1/(1−ϵ)
                                                                    1−ϵ
                                       p(t) =                p j (t)      di               .
                                                     0


When households optimally allocate their consumption expenditure across goods, p(t) is the price
of one unit of consumption index. The inflation rate is defined as π (t) = p(t)/p(t).
                                                                           Û

     Households save using government bonds. Since we postulate that people derive utility from their
relative real wealth, and since bonds are the only store of wealth, holding bonds directly provides
utility. Formally, holding a nominal quantity of bonds b j (t) yields utility

                                                   b j (t) − b(t)
                                                                 
                                                 u                  .
                                                         p(t)




                                                                5
                                                                                        ∫1
The function u : R → R is increasing and concave, b(t) =                                 0
                                                                                             bk (t) dk is average nominal wealth,
and [b j (t) − b(t)]/p(t) is household j’s relative real wealth.
    Bonds earn a nominal interest rate i h (t) = i(t) + σ , where i(t) ≥ 0 is the nominal interest rate
set by the central bank, and σ ≥ 0 is a spread between the monetary-policy rate (i(t)) and the rate
used by households for savings decisions (i h (t)). The spread σ captures the efficiency of financial
intermediation (Woodford, 2011); the spread is large when financial intermediation is severely
disrupted, as during the Great Depression and Great Recession. The law of motion of household j
bond holdings is

                                                                          ∫     1
                                          h
                           bÛj (t) = i (t)b j (t) + p j (t)yj (t) −                 pk (t)c jk (t) dk − τ (t).
                                                                            0

                                                                                                ∫1
The term i h (t)b j (t) is interest income; p j (t)yj (t) is labor income;                       0
                                                                                                     pk (t)c jk (t) dk is consumption
expenditure; and τ (t) is a lump-sum tax (used among other things to service government debt).
    Lastly, the problem of household j is to choose time paths for yj (t), p j (t), h j (t), π j (t), c jk (t) for
all k ∈ [0, 1], and b j (t) to maximize the discounted sum of instantaneous utilities

                            ∞                                 b j (t) − b(t)               γ
                       ∫                                                                          
                                                                                                   2
                                e   −δt
                                              ln(c j (t)) + u                  − κh j (t) − π j (t) dt,
                        0                                           p(t)                   2

where δ > 0 is the time discount rate. The household faces four constraints: production function;
law of motion of good j’s price, pÛj (t) = π j (t)p j (t); law of motion of bond holdings; and demand for
good j coming from other households’ maximization,

                                                                           −ϵ
                                                                p j (t)
                                                                
                                                       yj (t) =                  c(t),
                                                                p(t)

               ∫1
where c(t) =    0
                    ck (t) dk is aggregate consumption. The household also faces a borrowing constraint
preventing Ponzi schemes. The household takes as given aggregate variables, initial wealth b j (0),
and initial price p j (0). All households face the same initial conditions, so they will behave the same.




                                                                    6
B.    Euler Equation and Phillips Curve

The equilibrium is described by a system of two differential equations: an Euler equation and a
Phillips curve. The Euler-Phillips system governs the dynamics of output y(t) and inflation π (t).
Here we present the system; formal and heuristic derivations are in online appendices A and B; a
discrete-time version is in online appendix C.
     The Phillips curve arises from households’ optimal pricing decisions:

                                                         ϵκ
                                     πÛ (t) = δπ (t) −      [y(t) − y n ] ,                            (1)
                                                         γa

where
                                                     ϵ −1 a
                                              yn =       · .                                          (2)
                                                       ϵ  κ

The Phillips curve is not modified by wealth in the utility function.
     The steady-state Phillips curve, obtained by setting πÛ = 0 in (1), describes inflation as a linearly
increasing function of output:
                                                  ϵκ
                                            π=        (y − y n ) .                                    (3)
                                                 δγ a

We see that y n is the natural level of output: the level at which producers keep their prices constant.
     The Euler equation arises from households’ optimal consumption-savings decisions:

                                  y(t)
                                  Û
                                       = r (t) − r n + u 0(0) [y(t) − y n ] ,                         (4)
                                  y(t)

where r (t) = i(t) − π (t) is the real monetary-policy rate and


                                          r n = δ − σ − u 0(0)y n .                                   (5)


     The marginal utility of wealth, u 0(0), enters the Euler equation, so unlike the Phillips curve, the
Euler equation is modified by the wealth-in-the-utility assumption. To understand why consumption-




                                                      7
savings choices are affected by the assumption, we rewrite the Euler equation as

                                      y(t)
                                      Û
                                           = r h (t) − δ + u 0(0)y(t),                               (6)
                                      y(t)

where r h (t) = r (t)+σ is the real interest rate on bonds. In the standard equation, consumption-savings
choices are governed by the financial returns on wealth, given by r h (t), and the cost of delaying
consumption, given by δ . Here, people also enjoy holding wealth, so a new term appears to capture
the hedonic returns on wealth: the marginal rate of substitution between wealth and consumption,
u 0(0)y(t). In the marginal rate of substitution, the marginal utility of wealth is u 0(0) because in
equilibrium all households hold the same wealth so relative wealth is zero; the marginal utility of
consumption is 1/y(t) because consumption utility is log. Thus the wealth-in-the-utility assumption
operates by transforming the rate of return on wealth from r h (t) to r h (t) + u 0(0)y(t).
    Because consumption-savings choices depend not only on interest rates but also on the marginal
rate of substitution between wealth and consumption, future interest rates have less impact on today’s
consumption than in the standard model: the Euler equation is discounted. In fact, the discrete-time
version of Euler equation (4) features discounting exactly as in McKay, Nakamura, & Steinsson
(2017) (see online appendix C).
    The steady-state Euler equation is obtained by setting yÛ = 0 in (4):


                                        u 0(0)(y − y n ) = r n − r .                                 (7)


The equation describes output as a linearly decreasing function of the real monetary-policy rate—as
in the old-fashioned, Keynesian IS curve. We see that r n is the natural rate of interest: the real
monetary-policy rate at which households consume a quantity y n .
    The steady-state Euler equation is deeply affected by the wealth-in-the-utility assumption. To
understand why, we rewrite (7) as
                                            r h + u 0(0)y = δ .                                      (8)




                                                     8
The standard steady-state Euler equation boils down to r h = δ . It imposes that the financial rate
of return on wealth equals the time discount rate—otherwise households would not keep their
consumption constant. With wealth in the utility function, the returns on wealth are not only financial
but also hedonic. The total rate of return becomes r h + u 0(0)y, where the hedonic returns are
measured by u 0(0)y. The steady-state Euler equation imposes that the total rate of return on wealth
equals the time discount rate, so it now involves output y. When the real interest rate r h is higher,
people have a financial incentive to save more and postpone consumption. They keep consumption
constant only if the hedonic returns on wealth fall enough to offset the increase in financial returns:
this requires output to decline. As a result, with wealth in the utility function, the steady-state Euler
equation describes output as a decreasing function of the real interest rate—as in the traditional IS
curve, but through a different mechanism.
    The wealth-in-the-utility assumption adds one parameter to the equilibrium conditions: u 0(0).
Accordingly, we compare two submodels:

Definition 1. The New Keynesian (NK) model has zero marginal utility of wealth: u 0(0) = 0. The
wealth-in-the-utility New Keynesian (WUNK) model has sufficient marginal utility of wealth:

                                                         ϵκ
                                             u 0(0) >        .                                       (9)
                                                        δγ a

    The NK model is the standard model; the WUNK model is the extension proposed in this paper.
When prices are fixed (γ → ∞), condition (9) becomes u 0(0) > 0; when prices are perfectly flexible
(γ = 0), condition (9) becomes u 0(0) > ∞. Hence, at the fixed-price limit, the WUNK model only
requires an infinitesimal marginal utility of wealth; at the flexible-price limit, the WUNK model is
not well-defined. In the WUNK model we also impose δ > (ϵ − 1)/γ in order to accommodate
                                                                 p

positive natural rates of interest.4
   4Indeed, using (2) and (9), we see that in the WUNK model

                                        u 0(0)y n   1 ϵ −1
                                                  > 2·     .
                                            δ      δ    γ




                                                   9
C.    Natural Rate of Interest and Monetary Policy

The central bank aims to maintain the economy at the natural steady state, where inflation is at zero
and output at its natural level.
     In normal times, the natural rate of interest is positive, and the central bank is able to maintain
the economy at the natural steady state using the simple policy rule i(π (t)) = r n + ϕπ (t). The
corresponding real policy rate is r (π (t)) = r n + (ϕ − 1) π (t). The parameter ϕ ≥ 0 governs the
response of interest rates to inflation: monetary policy is active when ϕ > 1 and passive when ϕ < 1.
     When the natural rate of interest is negative, however, the natural steady state cannot be
achieved—because this would require the central bank to set a negative nominal policy rate, which
would violate the ZLB. In that case, the central bank moves to the ZLB: i(t) = 0, so r (t) = −π (t).
     What could cause the natural rate of interest to be negative? A first possibility is a banking
crisis, which disrupts financial intermediation and raises the interest-rate spread (Woodford, 2011;
Eggertsson, 2011). The natural rate of interest turns negative when the spread is large enough:
σ > δ − u 0(0)y n . Another possibility in the WUNK model is drop in consumer sentiment, which
leads households to favor saving over consumption, and can be parameterized by an increase in the
marginal utility of wealth. The natural rate of interest turns negative when the marginal utility is
large enough: u 0(0) > (δ − σ )/y n .


D.    Properties of the Euler-Phillips System

We now establish the properties of the Euler-Phillips systems in the NK and WUNK models by
constructing their phase diagrams.5 The diagrams are displayed in figure 1.
     We begin with the Phillips curve, which gives πÛ . First, we plot the locus πÛ = 0, which we label
This implies that the natural rate of interest, r n = δ [1 − u 0(0)y n /δ ], is bounded above:

                                                      1 ϵ −1
                                                                
                                        n
                                       r <δ 1− 2 ·                 .
                                                     δ      γ

For the WUNK model to accommodate positive p     natural rates of interest, the upper bound on the
natural rate must be positive, which requires δ > (ϵ − 1)/γ .
   5The properties are rederived using an algebraic approach in online appendix D.



                                                    10
 Figure 1. Phase Diagrams of the Euler-Phillips System in the NK and WUNK Models

A. NK model: normal times, active monetary                B. WUNK model: normal times, active monetary
policy                                                    policy




               C. NK model: ZLB                                       D. WUNK model: ZLB




The figure displays phase diagrams for the dynamical system generated by the Euler equation (4)
and Phillips curve (1): y is output; π is inflation; y n is the natural level of output; the Euler line is the
locus yÛ = 0; the Phillips line is the locus πÛ = 0; the trajectories are solutions to the Euler-Phillips
system linearized around its steady state, plotted for t going from −∞ to +∞. The four panels
contrast various cases. The NK model is the standard New Keynesian model. The WUNK model
is the same model, except that the marginal utility of wealth is not zero but is sufficiently large to
satisfy (9). In normal times, the natural rate of interest r n is positive, and the monetary-policy rate
is given by i = r n + ϕπ ; when monetary policy is active, ϕ > 1. At the ZLB, the natural rate of
interest is negative, and the monetary-policy rate is zero. The figure shows that in the NK model, the
Euler-Phillips system is a source in normal times with active monetary policy (panel A); but the
system is a saddle at the ZLB (panel C). In the WUNK model, by contrast, the Euler-Phillips system
is a source both in normal times and at the ZLB (panels B and D). (Panels A and B display a nodal
source, but the system could also be a spiral source, depending on the value of ϕ; in panel D the
system is always a nodal source.)


                                                     11
“Phillips.” The locus is given by the steady-state Phillips curve (3): it is linear, upward sloping, and
goes through the point [y = y n , π = 0]. Second, we plot the arrows giving the directions of the
trajectories solving the Euler-Phillips system. The sign of πÛ is given by the Phillips curve (1): any
point above the Phillips line (where πÛ = 0) has πÛ > 0, and any point below the line has πÛ < 0. So
inflation is rising above the Phillips line and falling below it.
    We next turn to the Euler equation, which gives y.
                                                    Û Whereas the Phillips curve is the same in the
NK and WUNK models, and in normal times and at the ZLB, the Euler equation is different in each
case. We therefore proceed case by case.
    We start with the NK model in normal times and with active monetary policy (panel A). The
Euler equation (4) becomes
                                             yÛ
                                                = (ϕ − 1)π,
                                             y

with ϕ > 1. The locus yÛ = 0, labeled “Euler,” is simply the horizontal line π = 0. Since the Phillips
and Euler lines only intersect at the point [y = y n , π = 0], we conclude that the Euler-Phillips system
admits a unique steady state with zero inflation and natural output. Next we examine the sign of y.
                                                                                                 Û
As ϕ > 1, any point above the Euler line has yÛ > 0, and any point below the line has yÛ < 0. Since
all the trajectories solving the Euler-Phillips system move away from the steady state in the four
quadrants delimited by the Phillips and Euler lines, we conclude that the Euler-Phillips system is a
source.
    We then consider the WUNK model in normal times with active monetary policy (panel B). The
Euler equation (4) becomes
                                    yÛ
                                       = (ϕ − 1)π + u 0(0) (y − y n ) ,
                                    y

with ϕ > 1. We first use the Euler equation to compute the Euler line (locus yÛ = 0):

                                                u 0(0)
                                         π =−          (y − y n ).
                                                ϕ−1

The Euler line is linear, downward sloping (as ϕ > 1), and goes through the point [y = y n , π = 0].
Since the Phillips and Euler lines only intersect at the point [y = y n , π = 0], we conclude that the



                                                    12
Euler-Phillips system admits a unique steady state, with zero inflation and output at its natural level.
Next we use the Euler equation to determine the sign of y.
                                                        Û As ϕ > 1, any point above the Euler line
has yÛ > 0, and any point below it has yÛ < 0. Hence, the solution trajectories move away from the
steady state in all four quadrants of the phase diagram; we conclude that the Euler-Phillips system is
a source. In normal times with active monetary policy, the Euler-Phillips system therefore behaves
similarly in the NK and WUNK models.
   We next turn to the NK model at the ZLB (panel C). The Euler equation (4) becomes

                                             yÛ
                                                = −π − r n .
                                             y

Thus the Euler line (locus yÛ = 0) shifts up from π = 0 in normal times to π = −r n > 0 at the ZLB.
We infer that the Euler-Phillips system admits a unique steady state, where inflation is positive and
output is above its natural level. Furthermore, any point above the Euler line has yÛ < 0, and any
point below it has yÛ > 0. As a result, the solution trajectories move toward the steady state in the
southwest and northeast quadrants of the phase diagram, whereas they move away from it in the
southeast and northwest quadrants. We infer that the Euler-Phillips system is a saddle.
   We finally move to the WUNK model at the ZLB (panel D). The Euler equation (4) becomes

                                    yÛ
                                       = −π − r n + u 0(0) (y − y n ) .
                                    y

First, this differential equation implies that the Euler line (locus yÛ = 0) is given by


                                       π = −r n + u 0(0)(y − y n ).                                  (10)


So the Euler line is linear, upward sloping, and goes through the point [y = y n +r n /u 0(0), π = 0]. The
Euler line has become upward sloping because the real monetary-policy rate, which was increasing
with inflation when monetary policy was active, has become decreasing with inflation at the ZLB
(r = −π ). Since r n ≤ 0, the Euler line has shifted inward of the point [y = y n , π = 0], explaining




                                                    13
why the central bank is unable to achieve the natural steady state at the ZLB. And since the slope of
the Euler line is u 0(0) while that of the Phillips line is ϵκ/(δγ a), the WUNK condition (9) ensures
that the Euler line is steeper than the Phillips line at the ZLB. From the Euler and Phillips lines, we
infer that the Euler-Phillips system admits a unique steady state, in which inflation is negative and
output is below its natural level.6
   Second, the differential equation shows that any point above the Euler line has yÛ < 0, and any
point below it has yÛ > 0. Hence, in all four quadrants of the phase diagram, the trajectories move
away from the steady state. We conclude that the Euler-Phillips system is a source. At the ZLB, the
Euler-Phillips system therefore behaves very differently in the NK and WUNK models.
   With passive monetary policy in normal times, the phase diagrams of the Euler-Phillips system
would be similar to the ZLB phase diagrams—except that the Euler and Phillips lines would intersect
at [y = y n , π = 0]. In particular, the Euler-Phillips system would be a saddle in the NK model and a
source in the WUNK model.
   For completeness, we also plot sample solutions to the Euler-Phillips system. The trajectories are
obtained by linearizing the Euler-Phillips system at its steady state.7 When the system is a source,
there are two unstable lines (trajectories that move away from the steady state in a straight line). At
t → −∞, all other trajectories are in the vicinity of the steady state and move away tangentially to
one of the unstable lines. At t → +∞, the trajectories move to infinity parallel to the other unstable
line. When the system is a saddle, there is one unstable line and one stable line (trajectory that goes
to the steady state in a straight line). All other trajectories come from infinity parallel to the stable
line when t → −∞, and move to infinity parallel to the unstable line when t → +∞.
   The next propositions summarize the results:

Proposition 1. Consider the Euler-Phillips system in normal times. The system admits a unique
steady state, where output is at its natural level, inflation is zero, and the ZLB is not binding. In the
   6We also check that the intersection of the Euler and Phillips lines has positive output (online
appendix D).
   7Technically the trajectories only approximate the exact solutions; but the approximation is
accurate in the neighborhood of the steady state.




                                                   14
NK model, the system is a source when monetary policy is active but a saddle when monetary policy
is passive. In the WUNK model, the system is a source whether monetary policy is active or passive.

Proposition 2. Consider the Euler-Phillips system at the ZLB. In the NK model, the system admits
a unique steady state, where output is above its natural level and inflation is positive; furthermore,
the system is a saddle. In the WUNK model, the system admits a unique steady state, where output is
below its natural level and inflation is negative; furthermore, the system is a source.

   The propositions give the key difference between the NK and WUNK models: at the ZLB, the
Euler-Phillips system remains a source in the WUNK model, whereas it becomes a saddle in the
NK model. This difference will explain why the WUNK model does not suffer from the anomalies
plaguing the NK model at the ZLB. The phase diagrams also illustrate the origin of the WUNK
condition (9). In the WUNK model, the Euler-Phillips system remains a source at the ZLB as long as
the Euler line is steeper than the Phillips line (figure 1, panel D). The Euler line’s slope at the ZLB is
the marginal utility of wealth, so that marginal utility is required to be above a certain level—which
is given by (9).
   The propositions have implications for equilibrium determinacy. When the Euler-Phillips system
is a source, the equilibrium is determinate: the only equilibrium trajectory in the vicinity of the
steady state is to jump to the steady state and stay there; if the economy jumped somewhere else,
output or inflation would diverge following a trajectory similar to those plotted in panels A, B,
and D of figure 1. When the system is a saddle, the equilibrium is indeterminate: any trajectory
jumping somewhere on the saddle path and converging to the steady state is an equilibrium (figure 1,
panel C). Hence, in the NK model, the equilibrium is determinate when monetary policy is active
but indeterminate when monetary policy is passive and at the ZLB. In the WUNK model, the
equilibrium is always determinate, even when monetary policy is passive and at the ZLB.
   Accordingly, in the NK model, the Taylor principle holds: the central bank must adhere to an
active monetary policy to avoid indeterminacy. From now on, we therefore assume that the central
bank in the NK model follows an active policy whenever it can (ϕ > 1 whenever r n > 0). In the
WUNK model, by contrast, indeterminacy is never a risk, so the central bank does not need to worry



                                                   15
about how strongly its policy rate responds to inflation. The central bank could even follow an
interest-rate peg without creating indeterminacy.
     The results that pertain to the NK model in propositions 1 and 2 are well-known (for example,
Woodford, 2001). The results that pertain to the WUNK model are close to those obtained by Gabaix
(2016, proposition 3.1), although he does not use our phase-diagram representation. Gabaix finds that
when bounded rationality is strong enough, the Euler-Phillips system is a source even at the ZLB.
He also finds that when prices are more flexible, more bounded rationality is required to maintain
the source property. The same is true here: when the marginal utility of wealth is high enough, such
that (9) holds, the Euler-Phillips system is a source even at the ZLB; and when the price-adjustment
cost γ is lower, (9) imposes a higher threshold on the marginal utility of wealth. Our phase diagrams
illustrate the logic behind these results. The Euler-Phillips system remains a source at the ZLB as
long as the Euler line is steeper than the Phillips line (figure 1, panel D). As the slope of the Euler
line is determined by bounded rationality in the Gabaix model and by marginal utility of wealth in
our model, these need to be large enough. When prices are more flexible, the Phillips line steepens,
so the Euler line’s required steepness increases: bounded rationality or marginal utility of wealth
need to be larger.


               IV.   Description and Resolution of the New Keynesian Anomalies

We now describe the anomalous predictions of the NK model at the ZLB: implausibly large drop in
output and inflation; and implausibly strong effects of forward guidance and government spending.
We then show that these anomalies are absent from the WUNK model.


A.   Drop in Output and Inflation

We consider a temporary ZLB episode, as in Werning (2011). Between times 0 and T > 0, the natural
rate of interest is negative. In response, the central bank maintains its policy rate at zero. After
time T , the natural rate is positive again, and monetary policy returns to normal. This scenario is
summarized in table 1, panel A. We analyze the ZLB episode using the phase diagrams in figure 2.



                                                  16
                                     Table 1. ZLB Scenarios

                            Timeline           Natural rate        Monetary          Government

                                                of interest          policy            spending

 A. ZLB episode

 ZLB:                       t ∈ (0,T )           rn < 0              i=0                   –

 Normal times:                t >T               rn > 0           i = r n + ϕπ             –

 B. ZLB episode with forward guidance

 ZLB:                       t ∈ (0,T )           rn < 0              i=0                   –

 Forward guidance:       t ∈ (T ,T + ∆)          rn > 0              i=0                   –

 Normal times:             t >T +∆               rn > 0           i = r n + ϕπ             –

 C. ZLB episode with government spending

 ZLB:                       t ∈ (0,T )           rn < 0              i=0                 д>0

 Normal times:                t >T               rn > 0           i = r n + ϕπ           д=0

This table describes the three scenarios analyzed in section III: the ZLB episode, in section III.A;
the ZLB episode with forward guidance, in section III.B; and the ZLB episode with government
spending, in section III.C. The parameter T > 0 gives the duration of the ZLB episode; the parameter
∆ > 0 gives the duration of forward guidance. We assume that monetary policy is active (ϕ > 1)
in normal times in the NK model; this assumption is required to ensure equilibrium determinacy
(Taylor principle). In the WUNK model, monetary policy can be active or passive in normal times.




                                                17
    We start with the NK model. We analyze the ZLB episode by going backward in time. After time
T , monetary policy maintains the economy at the natural steady state. Since equilibrium trajectories
are continuous, the economy also is at the natural steady state at the end of the ZLB, when t = T .8
    We then move back to the ZLB episode, when t < T . At time 0, the economy jumps to the unique
position leading to [y = y n , π = 0] at time T . Hence, inflation and output initially jump down to
π (0) < 0 and y(0) < y n , and then recover following the unique trajectory leading to [y = y n , π = 0].
The ZLB therefore creates a slump, with below-natural output and deflation (panel A).
    Critically, the economy is always on the same trajectory during the ZLB, irrespective of the
ZLB duration T . A longer ZLB only forces output and inflation to start from a lower position
on the trajectory at time 0. Thus, as the ZLB lasts longer, initial output and inflation collapse to
unboundedly low levels (panel C).
    Now let us examine the WUNK model. Output and inflation never collapse during the ZLB.
Initially inflation and output jump down toward the ZLB steady state, denoted [y z , π z ], so π z < π (0) <
0 and y z < y(0) < y n . They then recover following the trajectory going through [y = y n , π = 0].
Consequently the ZLB episode creates a slump (panel B), which is deeper when the ZLB lasts
longer (panel D). But unlike in the NK model, the slump is bounded below by the ZLB steady state:
irrespective of the duration of the ZLB, output and inflation remain above y z and π z , respectively,
so they never collapse. Moreover, if the natural rate of interest is negative but close to zero, such that
π z is close to zero and y z to y n , output and inflation will barely deviate from the natural steady state
during the ZLB—even if the ZLB lasts a very long time.
    The following proposition records these results:9

Proposition 3. Consider a ZLB episode between times 0 and T . The economy enters a slump:
    8The trajectories are continuous in output and inflation because households have concave
preferences over the two arguments. If consumption had an expected discrete jump, for example,
households would be able to increase their utility by reducing the size of the discontinuity.
    9The result that in the NK model output becomes infinitely negative when the ZLB becomes
infinitely long should not be interpreted literally. It is obtained because we omitted the constraint
that output must remain positive. The proper interpretation is that output falls much, much below its
natural level—in fact it converges to zero.




                                                    18
                   Figure 2. ZLB Episodes in the NK and WUNK Models

           A. NK model: short ZLB                             B. WUNK model: short ZLB




           C. NK model: long ZLB                              D. WUNK model: long ZLB




The figure describes various ZLB episodes. The timeline of a ZLB episode is presented in table 1,
panel A. Panel A displays the phase diagram of the NK model’s Euler-Phillips system at the
ZLB; it comes from figure 1, panel C. Panel B displays the phase diagram of the WUNK model’s
Euler-Phillips system at the ZLB; it comes from figure 1, panel D. Panels C and D are the same as
panels A and B, but with a longer-lasting ZLB (larger T ). The equilibrium trajectories are the unique
trajectories reaching the natural steady state (where π = 0 and y = y n ) at time T . The figure shows
that the economy slumps during the ZLB: inflation is negative and output is below its natural level
(panels A and B). In the NK model, the initial slump becomes unboundedly severe as the ZLB lasts
longer (panel C). In the WUNK model, there is no such collapse: output and inflation are bounded
below by the ZLB steady state (panel D).




                                                 19
y(t) < y n and π (t) < 0 for all t ∈ (0,T ). In the NK model, the slump becomes infinitely severe as
the ZLB duration approaches infinity: limT →∞ y(0) = limT →∞ π (0) = −∞. In the WUNK model, in
contrast, the slump is bounded below by the ZLB steady state [y z , π z ]: y(t) > y z and π (t) > π z for
all t ∈ (0,T ). In fact, the slump approaches the ZLB steady state as the ZLB duration approaches
infinity: limT →∞ y(0) = y z and limT →∞ π (0) = π z .

     In the NK model, output and inflation collapse when the ZLB is long-lasting, which is well-known
(Eggertsson & Woodford, 2004, fig. 1; Eggertsson, 2011, fig. 1; Werning, 2011, proposition 1). This
collapse is difficult to reconcile with real-world observations. The ZLB episode that started in 1995
in Japan lasted for more than twenty years without sustained deflation. The ZLB episode that started
in 2009 in the euro area lasted for more than 10 years; it did not yield sustained deflation either. The
same is true of the ZLB episode that occurred in the United States between 2008 and 2015.
     In the WUNK model, in contrast, inflation and output never collapse. Instead, as the duration
of the ZLB increases, the economy converges to the ZLB steady state. That ZLB steady state may
not be far from the natural steady state: if the natural rate of interest is only slightly negative,
inflation is only slightly below zero and output only slightly below its natural level. Gabaix (2016,
proposition 3.2) obtains a closely related result: in his model output and inflation also converge to
the ZLB steady state when the ZLB is arbitrarily long.


B.   Forward Guidance

We turn to the effects of forward guidance at the ZLB. We consider a three-stage scenario, as in
Cochrane (2017). Between times 0 and T , there is a ZLB episode. To alleviate the situation, the
central bank makes a forward-guidance promise at time 0: that it will maintain the policy rate at
zero for a duration ∆ once the ZLB is over. After time T , the natural rate of interest is positive again.
Between times T and T + ∆, the central bank fulfills its forward-guidance promise and keeps the
policy rate at zero. After time T + ∆, monetary policy returns to normal. This scenario is summarized
in table 1, panel B.
     We analyze the ZLB episode with forward guidance using the phase diagrams in figures 3 and



                                                   20
4. The forward-guidance diagrams are based on the ZLB diagrams in figure 1. In the NK model
(figure 3, panel A), the diagram is the same as in panel C of figure 1, except that the Euler line
π = −r n is lower because r n > 0 instead of r n < 0. In the WUNK model (figure 4, panel A), the
diagram is the same as in panel D of figure 1, except that the Euler line (10) is shifted outward
because r n > 0 instead of r n < 0.
   We begin with the NK model (figure 3). We go backward in time. After time T + ∆, monetary
policy maintains the economy at the natural steady state. Between times T and T + ∆, the economy
is in forward guidance (panel A). Following the logic of figure 2, we find that at time T , inflation
is positive and output above its natural level. They subsequently decrease over time, following the
unique trajectory leading to the natural steady state at time T + ∆. Accordingly, the economy booms
during forward guidance. Furthermore, as forward guidance lengthens, inflation and output at time
T become higher.
   We look next at the ZLB episode, between times 0 and T . Since equilibrium trajectories are
continuous, the economy is at the same point at the end of the ZLB and at the beginning of forward
guidance. The boom engineered during forward guidance therefore improves the situation at the
ZLB. Instead of reaching the natural steady state at time T , the economy reaches a point with positive
inflation and above-natural output, so at any time before T , inflation and output tend to be higher
than without forward guidance (panel B).
   Forward guidance can actually have tremendously strong effects in the NK model. For small
durations of forward guidance, the position at time T is below the ZLB unstable line. It is therefore
connected to trajectories coming from the southwest quadrant of the phase diagram (panel B). As
the ZLB lasts longer, initial output and inflation collapse. When the duration of forward guidance
is such that the position at time T is exactly on the unstable line, the position at time 0 is on the
unstable line as well (panel C). As the ZLB lasts longer, the initial position inches closer to the ZLB
steady state. For even longer forward guidance, the position at time T is above the unstable line,
so it is connected to trajectories coming from the northeast quadrant (panel D). Then, as the ZLB
lasts longer, initial output and inflation become higher and higher. As a result, if the duration of




                                                  21
                 Figure 3. NK Model: ZLB Episodes with Forward Guidance

             A. Forward guidance                           B. ZLB with short forward guidance




    C. ZLB with medium forward guidance                     D. ZLB with long forward guidance




The figure describes various ZLB episodes with forward guidance in the NK model. The timeline of
such episode is presented in table 1, panel B. Panel A displays the phase diagram of the NK model’s
Euler-Phillips system during forward guidance; it is similar to the diagram in figure 1, panel C but
with r n > 0. The equilibrium trajectory during forward guidance is the unique trajectory reaching the
natural steady state at time T + ∆. Panels B, C, and D display the phase diagram of the NK model’s
Euler-Phillips system at the ZLB; they comes from figure 1, panel C. The equilibrium trajectory
at the ZLB is the unique trajectory reaching the point determined by forward guidance at time T .
Panels B, C, and D differ in the underlying duration of forward guidance (∆): short in panel B,
medium in panel C, and long in panel D. The figure shows that the NK model suffers from an
anomaly: when forward guidance lasts sufficiently to bring [y(T ), π (T )] above the unstable line, any
ZLB episode—however long—triggers a boom (panel D). On the other hand, if forward guidance is
short enough to keep [y(T ), π (T )] below the unstable line, long-enough ZLB episodes are slumps
(panel B). In the knife-edge case where [y(T ), π (T )] falls just on the unstable line, arbitrarily long
ZLB episodes converge to the ZLB steady state (panel C).



                                                  22
forward guidance is long enough, a deep slump can be transformed into a roaring boom. Moreover,
the forward-guidance duration threshold is independent of the ZLB duration.
   In comparison, the power of forward guidance is subdued in the WUNK model (figure 4).
Between times T and T + ∆, forward guidance operates (panel A). Inflation is positive and output is
above its natural level at time T . They then decrease over time, following the trajectory leading to
the natural steady state at time T + ∆. The economy booms during forward guidance; but unlike in
the NK model, output and inflation are bounded above by the forward-guidance steady state.
   Before forward guidance comes the ZLB episode (panels B and C). Thanks to the boom
engineered by forward guidance, the situation is improved at the ZLB: inflation and output tend to be
higher than without forward guidance. Yet, unlike in the NK model, output during the ZLB episode
is always below its level at time T , so forward guidance cannot generate unbounded booms (panel D).
The ZLB cannot generate unbounded slumps either, since output and inflation are bounded below by
the ZLB steady state (panel D). Actually, for any forward-guidance duration, as the ZLB lasts longer,
the economy converges to the ZLB steady state at time 0. The implication is that forward guidance
can never prevent a slump when the ZLB lasts long enough.
   Based on these dynamics, we identify an anomaly in the NK model, which is resolved in the
WUNK model (proof details in online appendix D):

Proposition 4. Consider a ZLB episode during (0,T ) followed by forward guidance during (T ,T +∆).

 • In the NK model, there exists a threshold ∆∗ such that a forward guidance longer than ∆∗
   transforms a ZLB episode of any duration into a boom: let ∆ > ∆∗ ; for any T and for all
   t ∈ (0,T + ∆), y(t) > y n and π (t) > 0. In addition, when forward guidance is longer than ∆∗ , a
   long-enough forward guidance or ZLB episode generates an arbitrarily large boom: for any T ,
   lim∆→∞ y(0) = lim∆→∞ π (0) = +∞; and for any ∆ > ∆∗ , limT →∞ y(0) = limT →∞ π (0) = +∞.

 • In the WUNK model, in contrast, there exists a threshold T ∗ such that a ZLB episode longer than
   T ∗ prompts a slump, irrespective of the duration of forward guidance: let T > T ∗ ; for any ∆,
   y(0) < y n and π (0) < 0. Furthermore, the slump approaches the ZLB steady state as the ZLB



                                                 23
              Figure 4. WUNK Model: ZLB Episodes with Forward Guidance

             A. Forward guidance                         B. Short ZLB with forward guidance




     C. Long ZLB with forward guidance                          D. Possible trajectories




The figure describes various ZLB episodes with forward guidance in the WUNK model. The
timeline of such episode is presented in table 1, panel B. Panel A displays the phase diagram of
the WUNK model’s Euler-Phillips system during forward guidance; it is similar to the diagram in
figure 1, panel D but with r n > 0. The equilibrium trajectory during forward guidance is the unique
trajectory reaching the natural steady state at time T + ∆. Panel B displays the phase diagram of the
WUNK model’s Euler-Phillips system at the ZLB; it comes from figure 1, panel D. The equilibrium
trajectory at the ZLB is the unique trajectory reaching the point determined by forward guidance
at time T . Panel C is the same as panel B, but with a longer-lasting ZLB (larger T ). Panel D is a
generic version of panels A, B, and C, describing any duration of ZLB and forward guidance. The
figure shows that the NK model’s anomaly disappears in the WUNK model: a long-enough ZLB
episode prompts a slump irrespective of the duration of forward guidance (panel C).




                                                 24
     duration approaches infinity: for any ∆, limT →∞ y(0) = y z and limT →∞ π (0) = π z . In addition,
     the economy is bounded above by the forward-guidance steady state [y f , π f ]: for any T and ∆,
     and for all t ∈ (0,T + ∆), y(t) < y f and π (t) < π f .

     The anomaly identified in the proposition corresponds to the forward-guidance puzzle described
by Carlstrom, Fuerst, & Paustian (2015, fig. 1) and Cochrane (2017, fig. 6).10 These papers also find
that a long-enough forward guidance transforms a ZLB slump into a boom.
     In the WUNK model, this anomalous pattern vanishes. In the New Keynesian models by Gabaix
(2016), Diba & Loisel (2019), Acharya & Dogra (2019), and Bilbiie (2019), forward guidance also
has more subdued effects than in the standard model. Besides, New Keynesian models have been
developed with the sole goal of solving the forward-guidance puzzle. Among these, ours belongs to
the group that uses discounted Euler equations.11 For example, Del Negro, Giannoni, & Patterson
(2015) generate discounting from overlapping generations; McKay, Nakamura, & Steinsson (2016)
from heterogeneous agents facing borrowing constraints and cyclical income risk; Angeletos &
Lian (2018) from incomplete information; and Campbell et al. (2017) from government bonds in the
utility function (which is closely related to our approach).


C.    Government Spending

Last we consider the effects of government spending at the ZLB. We first extend the model by
assuming that the government purchases goods from all households, which are aggregated into public
consumption д(t). To ensure that government spending affects inflation and private consumption, we
also assume that the disutility of labor is convex: household j incurs disutility κ 1+ηh j (t)1+η /(1 + η)
from working, where η > 0 is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. Complete extended model,
derivations, and results are presented in online appendix E.
   10In the literature the forward-guidance puzzle takes several forms. The common element is that
future monetary policy has an implausibly strong effect on current output and inflation.
   11Other approaches to solve the forward-guidance puzzle include modifying the Phillips curve
(Carlstrom, Fuerst, & Paustian, 2015), combining reflective expectations and temporary equilibrium
(Garcia-Schmidt & Woodford, 2019), combining bounded rationality and incomplete markets (Farhi
& Werning, 2019), and introducing an endogenous liquidity premium (Bredemeier, Kaufmann, &
Schabert, 2018).



                                                    25
   In this model, the Euler equation is unchanged, but the Phillips curve is modified because
the marginal disutility of labor is not constant, and because households produce goods for the
government. The modification of the Phillips curve alters the analysis in three ways.
   First, the steady-state Phillips curve becomes nonlinear, which may introduce additional steady
states. We handle this issue as in the literature: we linearize the Euler-Phillips system around the
natural steady state without government spending, and concentrate on the dynamics of the linearized
system. These dynamics are described by phase diagrams similar to those in the basic model.
   Second, the slope of the steady-state Phillips curve is modified, so the WUNK assumption needs
to be adjusted. Instead of (3), the linearized steady-state Phillips curve is

                                          η/(1+η)
                                ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                    
                          π =−                     [(1 + η)(c − c n ) + ηд] .                     (11)
                               δγ a   ϵ

The WUNK assumption guarantees that at the ZLB, the steady-state Euler equation (with slope
u 0(0)) is steeper than the steady-state Phillips curve (now given by (11)). Hence, we need to replace
assumption (9) by
                                                            η/(1+η)
                                                  ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                                      
                                 u (0) > (1 + η)
                                  0
                                                                     .                            (12)
                                                 δγ a   ϵ

Naturally, for η = 0, this assumption reduces to (9).
   Third, public consumption enters the Phillips curve, so government spending operates through
that curve. Indeed, since η > 0 in (11), government spending shifts the steady-state Phillips curve
upward. Intuitively, given private consumption, an increase in government spending raises production
and thus marginal costs. Facing higher marginal costs, producers augment inflation.
   We now study a ZLB episode during which the government increases spending in an effort to
stimulate the economy, as in Cochrane (2017). Between times 0 and T , there is a ZLB episode. To
alleviate the situation, the government provides an amount д > 0 of public consumption. After time
T , the natural rate of interest is positive again, government spending stops, and monetary policy
returns to normal. This scenario is summarized in table 1, panel C.




                                                  26
              Figure 5. NK Model: ZLB Episodes with Government Spending

    A. ZLB with no government spending                    B. ZLB with low government spending




 C. ZLB with medium government spending                   D. ZLB with high government spending




The figure describes various ZLB episodes with government spending in the NK model. The
timeline of such episode is presented in table 1, panel C. The panels display the phase diagrams
of the linearized Euler-Phillips system for the NK model with government spending and convex
disutility of labor at the ZLB: c is private consumption; π is inflation; c n is the natural level of
private consumption; the Euler line is the locus cÛ = 0; the Phillips line is the locus πÛ = 0. The phase
diagrams have the same properties as that in figure 1, panel C, except that the Phillips line shifts
upward when government spending increases (see equation (11)). The equilibrium trajectory at the
ZLB is the unique trajectory reaching the natural steady state at time T . The four panels feature an
increasing amount of government spending (д), starting from д = 0 in panel A. The figure shows
that the NK model suffers from an anomaly: when government spending brings down the unstable
line from above to below the natural steady state, an arbitrarily long ZLB episode sees an arbitrarily
large increase in output, which triggers an unboundedly large boom (from panel B to panel D). On
the other hand, if government spending is low enough to keep the unstable line above the natural
steady state, long-enough ZLB episodes are slumps (panel B). In the knife-edge case where the
natural steady state falls just on the unstable line, arbitrarily long ZLB episodes converge to the ZLB
steady state (panel C).

                                                   27
    We start with the NK model (figure 5).12 We construct the equilibrium path by going backward
in time. At time T , monetary policy brings the economy to the natural steady state. At the ZLB,
government spending helps, but through a different mechanism than forward guidance. Forward
guidance improves the situation at the end of the ZLB, which pulls up the economy during the entire
ZLB. Government spending leaves the end of the ZLB unchanged: the economy reaches the natural
steady state. Instead, government spending shifts the Phillips line upward, and with it, the field of
trajectories. As a result, the natural steady state is connected to trajectories with higher consumption
and inflation, which improves the situation during the entire ZLB (panel A versus panel B).
    Just like forward guidance, government spending can have very strong effects in the NK model.
When spending is low, the natural steady state is below the ZLB unstable line (panel B). It is therefore
connected to trajectories coming from the southwest quadrant of the phase diagram—just as without
government spending (panel A). Then, if the ZLB lasts longer, initial consumption and inflation
fall lower. When spending is high enough that the unstable line crosses the natural steady state, the
economy is also on the unstable line at time 0 (panel C). Finally, when spending is even higher, the
natural steady state moves above the unstable line, so it is connected to trajectories coming from the
northeast quadrant (panel D). As a result, initial output and inflation are higher than previously. And
as the ZLB lasts longer, initial output and inflation become even higher, without bound.
    The power of government spending at the ZLB is much weaker in the WUNK model (figure 6).
Government spending does improves the situation at the ZLB, as inflation and consumption tend
to be higher than without spending. But as the ZLB lasts longer, the position at the beginning of
the ZLB converges to the ZLB steady state—unlike in the NK model, it does not go to infinity. So
equilibrium trajectories are bounded, and government spending cannot generate unbounded booms.
    Based on these dynamics, we isolate another anomaly in the NK model, which is resolved in the
WUNK model (proof details in online appendix F):
   12There is a small difference with the phase diagrams of the basic model: private consumption c
is on the horizontal axis instead of output y. But y = c in the basic model (government spending is
zero), so the phase diagrams with private consumption on the horizontal axis would be the same as
those with output.




                                                  28
            Figure 6. WUNK Model: ZLB Episodes with Government Spending

    A. ZLB with no government spending                    B. ZLB with low government spending




 C. ZLB with medium government spending                   D. ZLB with high government spending




The figure describes various ZLB episodes with government spending in the WUNK model. The
timeline of such episode is presented in table 1, panel C. The panels display the phase diagrams of
the linearized Euler-Phillips system for the WUNK model with government spending and convex
disutility of labor at the ZLB: c is private consumption; π is inflation; c n is the natural level of
private consumption; the Euler line is the locus cÛ = 0; the Phillips line is the locus πÛ = 0. The phase
diagrams have the same properties as that in figure 1, panel D, except that the Phillips line shifts
upward when government spending increases (see equation (11)). The equilibrium trajectory at the
ZLB is the unique trajectory reaching the natural steady state at time T . The four panels feature an
increasing amount of government spending (д), starting from д = 0 in panel A. The figure shows
that the NK model’s anomaly disappears in the WUNK model: the government-spending multiplier
is finite when the ZLB becomes arbitrarily long-lasting; and equilibrium trajectories are bounded
irrespective of the duration of the ZLB.




                                                   29
Proposition 5. Consider a ZLB episode during (0,T ), accompanied by government spending д > 0.
Let c(t; д) and y(t; д) be private consumption and output at time t; let s > 0 be some incremental
government spending; and let

                        y(0; д + s/2) − y(0; д − s/2)     c(0; д + s/2) − c(0; д − s/2)
            m(д, s) =                                 =1+
                                      s                                 s

be the government-spending multiplier.

 • In the NK model, there exists a government spending д∗ such that the government-spending
   multiplier becomes infinitely large when the ZLB duration approaches infinity: for any s > 0,
   limT →∞ m(д∗, s) = +∞. In addition, when government spending is above д∗ , a long-enough ZLB
   episode generates an arbitrarily large boom: for any д > д∗ , limT →∞ c(0; д) = +∞.

 • In the WUNK model, in contrast, the multiplier has a finite limit when the ZLB duration
   approaches infinity: for any д and s, when T → ∞, m(д, s) converges to

                                                                  η
                                   1+   u 0 (0)δγ a              η/(1+η)               .            (13)
                                                           ϵ
                                             ϵκ       ·   ϵ−1               − (1 + η)

   Moreover, the economy is bounded above for any ZLB duration: let c д be private consumption in the
   ZLB steady state with government spending д; for anyT and for all t ∈ (0,T ), c(t; д) < max(c д, c n ).

   The anomaly that a finite amount of government spending may generate an infinitely large
boom as the ZLB becomes arbitrarily long-lasting is reminiscent of the findings by Christiano,
Eichenbaum, & Rebelo (2011, fig. 2), Woodford (2011, fig. 2), and Cochrane (2017, fig. 5). They find
that in the NK model government spending is exceedingly powerful when the ZLB is long-lasting.
   In the WUNK model, this anomaly vanishes. Diba & Loisel (2019) and Acharya & Dogra (2019)
also obtain more realistic effects of government spending at the ZLB. In addition, Bredemeier,
Juessen, & Schabert (2018) obtain moderate multipliers at the ZLB by introducing an endogenous
liquidity premium in the New Keynesian model.




                                                          30
                         V.   Other New Keynesian Properties at the ZLB

Beside the anomalous properties described in section IV, the New Keynesian model has several
other intriguing properties at the ZLB: the paradoxes of thrift, toil, and flexibility; and a government-
spending multiplier greater than one. We now show that the WUNK model shares these properties.
     In the NK model these properties are studied in the context of a temporary ZLB episode. An
advantage of the WUNK model is that we can simply work with a permanent ZLB episode. We
assume that the natural rate of interest is permanently negative, and the central bank keeps the policy
rate at zero forever. The only equilibrium is at the ZLB steady state, where the economy is in a
slump: inflation is negative and output is below its natural level. The ZLB equilibrium is represented
in figure 7: it is the intersection of a Phillips line, describing the steady-state Phillips curve, and an
Euler line, describing the steady-state Euler equation. When an unexpected and permanent shock
occurs, the economy jumps to a new ZLB steady state; we use the graphs to study such jumps.


A.   Paradox of Thrift

We first study an increase in the marginal utility of wealth (u 0(0)). The steady-state Phillips curve is
unaffected, but the steady-state Euler equation changes. Using (5), we rewrite the steady-state Euler
equation (10):
                                         π = −δ + σ + u 0(0)y .

Increasing the marginal utility of wealth steepens the Euler line, which moves the economy inward
along the Phillips line. Output and inflation therefore decrease (figure 7, panel A). The following
proposition gives the results:

Proposition 6. At the ZLB in the WUNK model, the paradox of thrift holds: an unexpected and
permanent increase in the marginal utility of wealth reduces output and inflation but does not affect
relative wealth.

     The paradox of thrift was first discussed by Keynes, but it also appears in the New Keynesian
model (Eggertsson, 2010, p. 16; Eggertsson & Krugman, 2012, p. 1486). When the marginal utility of



                                                   31
wealth is higher, people want to increase their wealth holdings relative to their peers, so they favor
saving over consumption. But in equilibrium, relative wealth is fixed at zero because everybody
is the same; the only way to increase saving relative to consumption is to reduce consumption. In
normal times, the central bank would offset this drop in aggregate demand by reducing nominal
interest rates. This is not an option at the ZLB, so output falls.


B.   Paradox of Toil

Next we consider a reduction in the disutility of labor (κ). In this case, the steady-state Phillips
curve changes while the steady-state Euler equation does not. Using (2), we rewrite the steady-state
Phillips curve (3):
                                               ϵκ     ϵ −1
                                         π=        y−      .
                                              δγ a     δγ

Reducing the disutility of labor flattens the Phillips line, which moves the economy inward along
the Euler line. Thus, both output and inflation decrease (figure 7, panel B). Since hours worked and
output are related by h = y/a, hours fall as well. The following proposition states the results:

Proposition 7. At the ZLB in the WUNK model, the paradox of toil holds: an unexpected and
permanent reduction in the disutility of labor reduces output, inflation, and hours worked.

     The paradox of toil was discovered by Eggertsson (2010, p. 15) and Eggertsson & Krugman
(2012, p. 1487). It operates as follows. With lower disutility of labor, real marginal costs are lower,
and the natural level of output is higher: producers would like to sell more. To increase sales, they
reduce their prices by reducing inflation. At the ZLB, nominal interest rates are fixed, so the decrease
in inflation raises real interest rates—which renders households more prone to save. In equilibrium,
this lowers output and hours worked.13
   13An increase in technology (a) would have the same effect as a reduction in the disutility of
labor: it would lower output, inflation, and hours.




                                                  32
                    Figure 7. WUNK model: Other Properties at the ZLB

              A. Paradox of thrift                                  B. Paradox of toil




            C. Paradox of flexibility                  D. Above-one government-spending multiplier




The figure describes four comparative statics of the WUNK model at the ZLB. In panels A, B,
and C, the Euler and Phillips lines are the same as in figure 1, panel D. In panel D, the Euler
and Phillips lines are the same as in figure 6. The ZLB equilibrium is at the intersection of the
Euler and Phillips lines: output/consumption is below its natural level and inflation is negative.
Panel A illustrates the paradox of thrift: increasing the marginal utility of wealth steepens the Euler
line, which depresses output and inflation without changing relative wealth. Panel B illustrates the
paradox of toil: reducing the disutility of labor moves the Phillips line outward, which depresses
output, inflation, and hours worked. Panel C illustrates the paradox of flexibility: decreasing the
price-adjustment cost rotates the Phillips line counterclockwise around the natural steady state,
which depresses output and inflation. Panel D shows that the government-spending multiplier is
above one: increasing government spending shifts the Phillips line upward, which raises private
consumption and therefore increases output more than one-for-one.




                                                  33
C.    Paradox of Flexibility

We then examine a decrease in the price-adjustment cost (γ ). The steady-state Euler equation is
not affected, but the steady-state Phillips curve is. Equation (3) shows that decreasing the price-
adjustment cost leads to a counterclockwise rotation of the Phillips line around the natural steady
state. This moves the economy downward along the Euler line, so output and inflation decrease
(figure 7, panel C). The following proposition records the results:

Proposition 8. At the ZLB in the WUNK model, the paradox of flexibility holds: an unexpected and
permanent decrease in price-adjustment cost reduces output and inflation.

     The paradox of flexibility was discovered by Werning (2011, pp. 13–14) and Eggertsson &
Krugman (2012, pp. 1487–1488). Intuitively, with a lower price-adjustment cost, producers are keener
to adjust their prices to bring production closer to the natural level of output. Since production is
below the natural level at the ZLB, producers are keener to reduce their prices to stimulate sales.
This accentuates the existing deflation, which translates into higher real interest rates. As a result,
households are more prone to save, which in equilibrium depresses output.


D.    Above-One Government-Spending Multiplier

We finally look at an increase in government spending (д), using the model with government
spending introduced in section IV.C. From (11) we see that increasing government spending shifts
the Phillips line upward, which moves the economy upward along the Euler line: both private
consumption and inflation increase (figure 7, panel D). Since private consumption increases when
public consumption does, the government-spending multiplier dy/dд = 1 + dc/dд is greater than
one. The ensuing proposition gives the results (proof details in online appendix F):

Proposition 9. At the ZLB in the WUNK model, an unexpected and permanent increase in
government spending raises private consumption and inflation. Hence the government-spending
multiplier dy/dд is above one; its value is given by (13).




                                                  34
   Christiano, Eichenbaum, & Rebelo (2011), Eggertsson (2011), and Woodford (2011) also show
that at the ZLB in the New Keynesian model, the government-spending multiplier is above one.
The intuition is the following. With higher government spending, real marginal costs are higher for
a given level of sales to households. Producers pass the cost increase through into prices, which
raises inflation. At the ZLB, the increase in inflation lowers real interest rates—as nominal interest
rates are fixed—which deters households from saving. In equilibrium, this leads to higher private
consumption and a multiplier above one.


                     VI.   Empirical Assessment of the WUNK Assumption

In the WUNK model, the marginal utility of wealth is assumed to be high enough that the steady-state
Euler equation is steeper than the steady-state Phillips curve at the ZLB. We assess this assumption
using US evidence.
   As a first step, we re-express the WUNK assumption in terms of estimable statistics. We obtain
the following condition (derivations in online appendix G):

                                                      λ
                                              δ − rn > ,                                             (14)
                                                      δ

where δ is the time discount rate, r n is the average natural rate of interest, and λ is the coefficient
on output gap in a New Keynesian Phillips curve. The term δ − r n measures the marginal rate of
substitution between wealth and consumption, u 0(0)y n . It indicates how high the marginal utility of
wealth is and thus how steep the steady-state Euler equation is at the ZLB. The term λ/δ indicates
how steep the steady-state Phillips curve is. The δ comes from the denominator of the slopes of
the Phillips curves (3) and (11); the λ measures the rest of the slope coefficients. Condition (14) is
expressed in terms of sufficient statistics, so it applies both when the disutility of labor is linear (in
which case it is equivalent to (9)) and when the disutility of labor is convex (in which case it is
equivalent to (12)). We now survey the literature to obtain estimates of r n , λ, and δ .




                                                   35
A.   Natural Rate of Interest

A large number of macroeconometric studies have estimated the natural rate of interest, using
different statistical models, methodologies, and data. Recent studies obtain comparable estimates
of the natural rate for the United States: around 2% per annum on average between 1985 and 2015
(Williams, 2017, fig. 1). Accordingly, we use r n = 2% as our estimate.


B.   Output-Gap Coefficient in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve

Many studies have estimated New Keynesian Phillips curves. Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Moller, & Stock
(2014, sec. 5) offer a synthesis for the United States. They generate estimates of the New Keynesian
Phillips curve using an array of US data, methods, and specifications found in the literature. They
find significant uncertainty around the estimates, but in many cases the output-gap coefficient is
positive and very small. Overall, their median estimate of the output-gap coefficient is λ = 0.004
(table 5, row 1), which we use as our estimate.


C.    Time Discount Rate

Since the 1970s, many studies have estimated time discount rates using field and laboratory
experiments and real-world behavior. Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue (2002, table 1) survey
43 such studies. The estimates are quite dispersed, but the majority of them points to high discount
rates, much higher than prevailing market interest rates. We compute the mean estimate in each of
the studies covered by the survey, and then compute the median value of these means. We obtain an
annual discount rate of δ = 35%.
     There is one immediate limitation with the studies discussed by Frederick, Loewenstein, &
O’Donoghue: they use a single rate to exponentially discount future utility. But exponential
discounting does not describe reality well because people seem to choose more impatiently for the
present than for the future—they exhibit present-focused preferences (Ericson & Laibson, 2019).
Recent studies have moved away from exponential discounting and allowed for present-focused
preferences, including quasi-hyperbolic (β-δ ) discounting. Andersen et al. (2014, table 3) survey



                                                  36
16 such studies, concentrating on experimental studies with real incentives. We compute the mean
estimate in each study and then the median value of these means; we obtain an annual discount rate
of δ = 43%. Accordingly, even after accounting for present-focus, time discounting remains high.
We use δ = 43% as our estimate.14


D.    Assessment

We now combine our estimates of r n , λ, and δ to assess the WUNK assumption. Since λ is estimated
using quarters as units of time, we re-express r n and δ as quarterly rates: r n = 2%/4 = 0.5%
per quarter, and δ = 43%/4 = 10.8% per quarter. We conclude that (14) comfortably holds:
δ − r n = 0.108 − 0.005 = 0.103, which is much larger than λ/δ = 0.004/0.108 = 0.037. Hence the
WUNK assumption holds in US data.
     The discount rate used here (43% per annum) is much higher than discount rates used in
macroeconomic models (typically less than 5% per annum). This is because our discount rate is
calibrated from microevidence, while the discount rate in macroeconomic models is calibrated to
match observed real interest rates.
   14There are two potential issues with the experiments discussed in Andersen et al. (2014). First,
many are run with university students instead of subjects representative of the general population.
There does not seem to be systematic differences in discounting between student and non-student
subjects, however (Cohen et al., 2019, sec. 6A). Hence, using students is unlikely to bias the estimates
reported by Andersen et al.. Second, all the experiments elicit discount rates using financial flows,
not consumption flows. As the goal is to elicit the discount rate on consumption, this could be
problematic (Cohen et al., 2019, sec. 4B); the problems could be exacerbated if subjects derive
utility from wealth. To assess this potential issue, suppose first (as in most of the literature) that
monetary payments are consumed at the time of receipt, and that the utility function is locally
linear. Then the experiments deliver estimates of the relevant discount rate (Cohen et al., 2019,
sec. 4B). If these conditions do not hold, the experimental findings are more difficult to interpret. For
instance, if subjects optimally smooth their consumption over time by borrowing and saving, then
the experiments only elicit the interest rate faced by subjects, and reveal nothing about their discount
rate (Cohen et al., 2019, sec. 4B). In that case, we should rely on experiments using time-dated
consumption rewards instead of monetary rewards. Such experiments directly deliver estimates of
the discount rate. Many such experiments have been conducted; a robust finding is that discount
rates are systematically higher for consumption rewards than for monetary rewards (Cohen et al.,
2019, sec. 3A). Hence, the estimates presented in Andersen et al. are, if anything, lower bounds on
actual discount rates.




                                                   37
   This discrepancy occasions two remarks. First, the wealth-in-the-utility assumption is advanta-
geous because it accords with the fact that people exhibit double-digit time discount rates and yet
are willing to save at single-digit interest rates. In the standard model, by contrast, the discount rate
necessarily equals the real interest rate in steady state, so the model cannot have δ  5%.
   Second, the WUNK assumption would also hold with discount rates below 43%. Indeed, (14)
holds for discount rates as low as 27% because δ − r n = (0.27/4) − 0.005 = 0.062 is greater than
λ/δ = 0.004/(0.27/4) = 0.059. An annual discount rate of 27% is at the low end of available
microestimates: in 11 of the 16 studies in Andersen et al. (2014, table 3), the bottom of the estimate
range is above 27%; and in 13 of the 16 studies, the mean estimate is above 27%.
   Finally, while our model omits firms and assumes that households are both producers and
consumers, in reality firms and households are often separate entities that could have different
discount rates. With different discount rates, (14) would become

                                                        λ
                                            δh − rn >      ,
                                                        δf

where δ h is households’ discount rate and δ f is firms’ discount rate. Clearly, if firms have a low
discount rate, the WUNK assumption is less likely to be satisfied. If we use δ h = 43%, r n = 2%, and
λ = 0.004, we find that the WUNK condition holds as long as firms have an annual discount rate above
16% because δ h − r n = (0.43/4) − 0.005 = 0.103 is greater than λ/δ f = 0.004/(0.16/4) = 0.100. A
discount rate of 16% is only slightly above that reported by large US firms: in a survey of 228 CEOs,
Poterba & Summers (1995) find an average annual real discount rate of 12.2%; and in a survey of 86
CFOs, Jagannathan et al. (2016, p. 447) find an average annual real discount rate of 12.7%.


                                          VII.   Conclusion

This paper proposes an extension of the New Keynesian model that is immune to the anomalies
that plague the standard model at the ZLB. The extended model deviates only minimally from the
standard model: relative wealth enters the utility function, which only adds an extra term in the Euler




                                                   38
equation. Yet, when the marginal utility of wealth is sufficiently high, the model behaves well at
the ZLB: even when the ZLB is long-lasting, there is no collapse of inflation and output, and both
forward guidance and government spending have limited, plausible effects. The extended model
also retains other properties of the standard model at the ZLB: the paradoxes of thrift, toil, and
flexibility; and a government-spending multiplier greater than one.
   Our analysis would apply more generally to any New Keynesian model representable by a
discounted Euler equation and a Phillips curve (for example, Del Negro, Giannoni, & Patterson,
2015; Gabaix, 2016; McKay, Nakamura, & Steinsson, 2017; Campbell et al., 2017; Beaudry & Portier,
2018; Angeletos & Lian, 2018). Wealth in the utility function is a simple way to generate discounting;
but any model with discounting would have similar phase diagrams and properties. Hence, for such
models to behave well at the ZLB, there is only one requirement: that discounting is strong enough
to make the steady-state Euler equation steeper than the steady-state Phillips curve at the ZLB; the
source of discounting is unimportant. In the real world, several discounting mechanisms might
operate at the same time and reinforce each other. A model blending these mechanisms would be
even more likely to behave well at the ZLB.


                                            References

Acharya, Sushant, and Keshav Dogra,“Understanding HANK: Insights from a PRANK,” 2019,
  https://perma.cc/E5JY-HL55.
Andersen, Steffen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutstrom,“Discounting
  Behavior: A Reconsideration,” European Economic Review 71 (2014), 15–33.
Anderson, Cameron, John A.D. Hildreth, and Laura Howland,“Is the Desire for Status a Fundamental
  Human Motive? A Review of the Empirical Literature,” Psychological Bulletin 141 (2015), 574–601.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian,“Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge,”
  American Economic Review 108 (2018), 2477–2512.
Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen,“The Spirit of Capitalism and Stock-Market Prices,” American
  Economic Review 86 (1996), 133–157.



                                                 39
Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier,“Real Keynesian Models and Sticky Prices,” NBER Working
  Paper 24223, 2018.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe,“The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal
  of Economic Theory 96 (2001), 40–69.
Bilbiie, Florin O.,“Heterogeneity and Determinacy: An Analytical Framework,” CEPR Discussion
  Paper 12601, 2019.
Bredemeier, Christian, Falko Juessen, and Andreas Schabert,“Fiscal Multipliers and Monetary
  Policy: Reconciling Theory and Evidence,” 2018, https://perma.cc/6ZER-P2UD.
Bredemeier, Christian, Christoph Kaufmann, and Andreas Schabert,“Interest Rate Spreads and
  Forward Guidance,” ECB Working Paper 2186, 2018.
Calvo, Guillermo A.,“Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics 12 (1983), 383–398.
Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec,“Neuroeconomics: How Neuroscience
  Can Inform Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature 43 (2005), 9–64.
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi,“Forward
  Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes Since the Financial Crisis,” in Martin Eichenbaum and
  Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, chap. 4, Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press, 2017.
Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian,“Inflation and Output in New
  Keynesian Models with a Transient Interest Rate Peg,” Journal of Monetary Economics 76 (2015),
  230–243.
Carroll, Christopher D.,“Why Do the Rich Save So Much?” in Joel B. Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas
  Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press, 2000.
Cheng, Joey T., and Jessica L. Tracy,“The Impact of Wealth on Prestige and Dominance Rank
  Relationships,” Psychological Inquiry 24 (2013), 102–108.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo,“When Is the Government Spending




                                              40
  Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy 119 (2011), 78–121.
Clemens, Christiane,“Status, Risk-Taking and Intertemporal Substitution in an Endogenous Growth
  Model,” Journal of Economics 83 (2004), 103–123.
Cochrane, John H.,“The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” Journal of Monetary Economics 92 (2017),
  47–63.
Cochrane, John H.,“Michelson-Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The Radical Implications of Stable
  Quiet Inflation at the Zero Bound,” in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2017, chap. 2, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018.
Cohen, Jonathan D., Keith M. Ericson, David Laibson, and John M. White,“Measuring Time
  Preferences,” Journal of Economic Perspectives forthcoming (2019).
Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite,“Social Norms, Savings Behavior, and
  Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 100 (1992), 1092–1125.
Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite,“Incorporating Concern for Relative
  Wealth Into Economic Models,” Quarterly Review 19 (1995), 12–21.
Corneo, Giacomo, and Olivier Jeanne,“On Relative Wealth Effects and the Optimality of Growth,”
  Economics Letters 54 (1997), 87–92.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson,“The Forward Guidance Puzzle,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 574, 2015.
Diba, Behzad, and Olivier Loisel,“Pegging the Interest Rate on Bank Reserves: A Resolution of
  New Keynesian Puzzles and Paradoxes,” 2019, https://perma.cc/U6RL-7PDM.
Eggertsson, Gauti B.,“The Paradox of Toil,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 443,
  2010.
Eggertsson, Gauti B.,“What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” in Daron Acemoglu
  and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2010, chap. 2, Chicago: University
  of Chicago Press, 2011.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman,“Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2012), 1469–1513.




                                               41
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford,“Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,” American
  Economic Review 94 (2004), 76–79.
Ericson, Keith M., and David Laibson,“Intertemporal Choice,” in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano
  DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Foundations and
  Applications, vol. 2, chap. 1, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2019.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning,“Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
  Markets,” American Economic Review 109 (2019), 3887–3928.
Fisher, Irving, The Theory of Interest, as determined by Impatience to Spend Income and Opportunity
  to Invest it, New York: Macmillan, 1930.
Fisher, Jonas D.M.,“On the Structural Interpretation of the Smets-Wouters Risk Premium Shock,”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47 (2015), 511–516.
Fisher, Walter H.,“Current Account Dynamics in a Small Open-Economy Model of Status Seeking,”
  Review of International Economics 13 (2005), 262–282.
Fisher, Walter H., and Franz X. Hof,“Status Seeking in the Small Open Economy,” Journal of
  Macroeconomics 27 (2005), 209–232.
Fiske, Susan T.,“Interpersonal Stratification: Status, Power, and Subordination,” in Susan T. Fiske,
  Daniel T. Gilbert, and Gardner Lindzey, eds., Handbook of Social Psychology, vol. 2, chap. 26,
  Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010.
Francis, Johanna L.,“Wealth and the Capitalist Spirit,” Journal of Macroeconomics 31 (2009),
  394–408.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue,“Time Discounting and Time Prefer-
  ence: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2002), 351–401.
Futagami, Koichi, and Akihisa Shibata,“Keeping One Step Ahead of the Joneses: Status, the
  Distribution of Wealth, and Long Run Growth,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
  36 (1998), 109–126.
Gabaix, Xavier,“A Behavioral New Keynesian Model,” NBER Working Paper 22954, 2016.
Garcia-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford,“Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox




                                                42
  of Perfect-Foresight Analysis,” American Economic Review 109 (2019), 86–120.
Gong, Liutang, and Heng-fu Zou,“Direct Preferences for Wealth, the Risk Premium Puzzle, Growth,
  and Policy Effectiveness,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 26 (2002), 247–270.
Heffetz, Ori, and Robert H. Frank,“Preferences for Status: Evidence and Economic Implications,” in
  Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O. Jackson, eds., Handbook of Social Economics, vol.
  1A, chap. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011.
Jagannathan, Ravi, David A. Matsa, Iwan Meier, and Vefa Tarhan,“Why Do Firms Use High
  Discount Rates?” Journal of Financial Economics 120 (2016), 445–463.
Kamihigashi, Takashi,“The Spirit of Capitalism, Stock Market Bubbles and Output Fluctuations,”
  International Journal of Economic Theory 4 (2008), 3–28.
Keynes, John Maynard, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, London: Macmillan, 1919.
Konrad, Kai A.,“Wealth Seeking Reconsidered,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 18
  (1992), 215–227.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,“The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt,”
  Journal of Political Economy 120 (2012), 233–267.
Kumhof, Michael, Romain Ranciere, and Pablo Winant,“Inequality, Leverage, and Crises,” American
  Economic Review 105 (2015), 1217–1245.
Kurz, Mordecai,“Optimal Economic Growth and Wealth Effects,” International Economic Review 9
  (1968), 348–357.
Long, Ngo Van, and Koji Shimomura,“Relative Wealth, Status-Seeking, and Catching-Up,” Journal
  of Economic Behavior & Organization 53 (2004), 529–542.
Mattan, Bradley D., Jennifer T. Kubota, and Jasmin Cloutier,“How Social Status Shapes Person
  Perception and Evaluation: A Social Neuroscience Perspective,” Perspectives on Psychological
  Science 12 (2017), 468–507.
Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, and James H. Stock,“Empirical Evidence on
  Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Journal of Economic Literature 52
  (2014), 124–188.




                                               43
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson,“The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited,”
  American Economic Review 106 (2016), 3133–3158.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson,“The Discounted Euler Equation: A Note,”
  Economica 84 (2017), 820–831.
Michaillat, Pascal, and Emmanuel Saez,“An Economical Business-Cycle Model,” NBER Working
  Paper 19777, 2014.
Michau, Jean-Baptiste,“Secular Stagnation: Theory and Remedies,” Journal of Economic Theory
  176 (2018), 552–618.
Michau, Jean-Baptiste, Yoshiyasu Ono, and Matthias Schlegl,“Wealth Preference and Rational
  Bubbles,” CESifo Working Paper 7148, 2018.
Ono, Yoshiyasu, and Katsunori Yamada,“Difference or Ratio: Implications of Status Preference on
  Stagnation,” Australian Economic Papers 57 (2018), 346–362.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers,“A CEO Survey of US Companies’ Time Horizons
  and Hurdle Rates,” MIT Sloan Management Review 37 (1995), 43–53.
Ridgeway, Cecilia L.,“Why Status Matters for Inequality,” American Sociological Review 79 (2014),
  1–16.
Robson, Arthur J.,“Status, the Distribution of Wealth, Private and Social Attitudes to Risk,”
  Econometrica 60 (1992), 837–857.
Rotemberg, Julio J.,“Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review of Economic
  Studies 49 (1982), 517–531.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva,“A Simpler Theory of Capital Taxation,” Journal of
  Public Economics 162 (2018), 120–142.
Steedman, Ian,“Time Preference, the Rate of Interest and Abstinence from Accumulation,” Australian
  Economic Papers 20 (1981), 219–234.
Straub, Ludwig,“Consumption, Savings, and the Distribution of Permanent Income,” 2019, https:
  //perma.cc/ZU3P-7P7B.
Weiss, Yoram, and Chaim Fershtman,“Social Status and Economic Performance: A Survey,”




                                               44
  European Economic Review 42 (1998), 801–820.
Werning, Ivan,“Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper
  17344, 2011.
Williams, John C.,“Comment on ‘Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest’,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 48 (2017), 295–303.
Woodford, Michael,“The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review
  91 (2001), 232–237.
Woodford, Michael,“Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (2011), 1–35.
Zou, Heng-fu,“The Spirit of Capitalism and Long-Run Growth,” European Journal of Political
  Economy 10 (1994), 279–293.
Zou, Heng-fu,“The Spirit of Capitalism and Savings Behavior,” Journal of Economic Behavior &
  Organization 28 (1995), 131–145.




                                              45
Published in: Review of Economics and Statistics
Available at: https://www.pascalmichaillat.org/11.html




     Resolving New Keynesian Anomalies with Wealth
             in the Utility Function: Online Appendices

                                  Pascal Michaillat, Emmanuel Saez

                                               December 2019


A. Formal derivation of Euler equation & Phillips curve                                                       1
    A.1. Household’s problem .             .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    1
    A.2. Equilibrium          .    .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    3
B. Heuristic derivation of Euler equation & Phillips curve                                                    4
    B.1. Euler equation            .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
    B.2. Phillips curve       .    .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
C. Euler equation & Phillips curve in discrete time                                                          8
    C.1. Assumptions          .    .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
    C.2. Household’s problem .             .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
    C.3. Equilibrium          .    .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   9
    C.4. Log-linearization         .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
D. Proofs                                                                                                    14
    D.1. Alternative proof of proposition 1              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
    D.2. Alternative proof of proposition 2              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
    D.3. Complement to the proof of proposition 4 .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
E. Model with government spending                                                                            20
    E.1. Assumptions          .    .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
    E.2. Euler equation & Phillips curve .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
    E.3. Linearized Euler-Phillips system                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
    E.4. Phase diagrams            .   .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
F. Proofs with government spending                                                                           28
    F.1.   Complement to the proof of proposition 5 .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
    F.2. Complement to the proof of proposition 9 .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
G. WUNK assumption in terms of estimable statistics                                                          30
    G.1. Linear disutility of labor .          .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
    G.2. Convex disutility of labor            .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
 Online Appendix A.                  Formal derivation of Euler equation & Phillips curve

We derive the two differential equations that describe the equilibrium of the New Keynesian
model with wealth in the utility function: the Phillips curve, given by (1); and the Euler equation,
given by (4).


A.1.   Household’s problem

We begin by solving household j ’s problem. The current-value Hamiltonian of the problem is

              ϵ                                              b j (t) − b(t)        κ               γ
                      ∫ 1                                                
       Hj =        ln         c jk (t)(ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                              dk + u                           − yjd (p j (t), t) − π j (t)2
            ϵ −1          0                                        p(t)            a               2
                                                                 ∫ 1                           
          + A j (t) i h (t)b j (t) + p j (t)yjd (p j (t), t) −        pk (t)c jk (t) dk − τ (t) + Bj (t)π j (t)p j (t),
                                                                            0


with control variables c jk (t) for all k ∈ [0, 1] and π j (t), state variables b j (t) and p j (t), and costate
variables A j (t) and Bj (t). Note that we have used the production and demand constraints to
substitute yj (t) and h j (t) out of the Hamiltonian. (To ease notation we now drop the time index t .)
    We apply the necessary conditions for a maximum to the household’s problem given by Ace-
moglu (2009, theorem 7.9). These conditions form the basis of the model’s equilibrium conditions.
    The first optimality conditions are ∂Hj /∂c jk = 0 for all k ∈ [0, 1]. They yield

                                                            c jk
                                                                   −1/ϵ
                                                    1
(A1)                                                                            = A j pk .
                                                 cj         cj

Appropriately integrating (A1) over all k ∈ [0, 1] and using the expressions for the consumption
and price indices,

                                                    ∫       1
                                                                                                 ϵ/(ϵ−1)
(A2)                                    c j (t) =                c jk (t)  (ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                                                                           dk
                                                        0
                                                    ∫       1
                                                                                          1/(1−ϵ)
(A3)                                     p(t) =                  p j (t)
                                                                       1−ϵ
                                                                                    di               ,
                                                        0


we find

                                                                                1
(A4)                                                          Aj =                   .
                                                                            pc j




                                                                      1
Moreover, combining (A1) and (A4), we obtain
                                                                            −ϵ
                                                             pk
                                                                   
(A5)                                                  c jk =                        cj .
                                                             p

Integrating (A5) over all j ∈ [0, 1], we get the usual demand for good k :
                                                                                             −ϵ
                                                                             pk
                                                          ∫    1
                                                                                     
(A6)                                      ykd (pk )   =            c jk dj =                       c,
                                                           0                 p

                 c j dj is aggregate consumption. We use this expression for ykd (pk ) in household k ’s
            ∫1
where c =   0
Hamiltonian. Equation (A5) also implies that
                                                                                     −ϵ
                                                                               pk
                               ∫     1                    ∫       1
                                                                           
                                         pk c jk dk =                 pk                   c j dk = pc j .
                                 0                            0                p

This means that when consumption expenditure is allocated optimally across goods, the price of
one unit of consumption index is p .
   The second optimality condition is ∂Hj /∂b j = δ A j − AÛ j , which gives

                                       AÛ j              0 bj − b
                                                                 
                                              h   1
                                     −      =i +      ·u            − δ.
                                       Aj        pA j         p

Using (A4) and i h = i + σ , we obtain the household’s Euler equation:

                                     cÛj                    0 bj − b
                                                                    
(A7)                                     = i + σ − π + c ju            − δ.
                                     cj                          p

This equation describes the optimal path for household j ’s consumption.
   The third optimality condition is ∂Hj /∂π j = 0, which yields


(A8)                                                      Bj p j = γ π j .

Differentiating (A8) with respect to time, we obtain

                                                       BÛ j πÛ j
(A9)                                                       =     − πj .
                                                       Bj π j

   The last optimality condition is ∂Hj /∂p j = δ Bj − BÛ j , which implies

                               κ ϵyj
                                ·    − (ϵ − 1)A j yj + Bj π j = δ Bj − BÛ j .
                               a pj



                                                                       2
Reshuffling the terms then yields

                                                    ϵ    κ         BÛ j
                                                            
                              (ϵ − 1)yj A j
                         πj −                pj −      ·       =δ − .
                                  Bj p j          ϵ − 1 aA j       Bj

Finally, incorporating (A4), (A8), and (A9), we obtain the household’s Phillips curve:

                             πÛ j      (ϵ − 1)yj p j    ϵ   κc j
                                                                
(A10)                             =δ +               −    ·        .
                             πj          γc j π j   p ϵ −1 a

This equation describes the optimal path for the price set by household j .


A.2.    Equilibrium

We now describe the equilibrium of the model. Since all households face the same initial condi-
tions, they all behave the same. We therefore drop the subscripts j and k on all the variables. In
particular, all households hold the same wealth, so relative wealth is zero: b j = b . In addition,
production and consumption are equal in equilibrium: y = c .
   Accordingly, the household’s Phillips curve, given by (A10), simplifies to

                                                  ϵκ
                                      πÛ = δπ −      (y − y n ) ,
                                                  γa

where

                                                 ϵ −1 a
(A11)                                     yn =       · .
                                                   ϵ  κ

And the household’s Euler equation, given by (A7), simplifies to

                                    yÛ
                                       = r − r n + u 0(0)(y − y n ),
                                    y

where r = i − π and


(A12)                                  r n = δ − σ − u 0(0)y n .

These differential equations are the Phillips curve (1) and Euler equation (4).




                                                   3
Online Appendix B.            Heuristic derivation of Euler equation & Phillips curve

To better understand and interpret the continuous-time Euler equation and Phillips curve, we
complement the formal derivations of online appendix A with heuristic derivations, as in Blan-
chard and Fischer (1989, pp. 40–42).


B.1.     Euler equation

The Euler equation says that households save in an optimal fashion: they cannot improve their
situation by shifting consumption a little bit across time.
       Consider a household delaying consumption of one unit of output from time t to time t + dt .
The unit of output, invested at a real interest rate r h (t), becomes 1 + r h (t)dt at time t + dt . Given
log consumption utility, the marginal utility from consumption at any time t is e −δt /y(t). Hence,
the household forgoes e −δt /y(t) utils at time t and gains

                                                            e −δ (t+dt)
                                         [1 + r h (t)dt]
                                                            y(t + dt)

utils at time t + dt .
       Since people enjoy holding wealth, the one unit of output saved between t and t + dt provides
hedonic returns in addition to financial returns. The marginal utility from real wealth at time t is
e −δt u 0(0). Hence, by holding an extra unit of real wealth for a duration dt , the household gains
e −δt u 0(0)dt utils.
       At the optimum, reallocating consumption over time does not affect utility, so the following
holds:
                                e −δt                e −δ (t+dt)
                          0=−        + 1 + r h (t)dt               + e −δt u 0(0)dt .
                                y(t)                   y(t + dt)
Divided by e −δt /y(t), this condition becomes

                                                          y(t)
                            1 = [1 + r h (t)dt]e −δdt             + u 0(0)y(t)dt .
                                                        y(t + dt)

Furthermore, up to second-order terms, the following approximations are valid:


                                       e −δdt = 1 − δdt
                                   y(t + dt)        y(t)
                                                     Û
                                              =1+        dt
                                     y(t)           y(t)
                                         1
                                               = 1 − xdt,         for any x .
                                     1 + xdt




                                                        4
Hence, up to second-order terms, the previous condition gives

                                                      y(t)
                                                            
                                  h                   Û
                        1 = 1 + r (t)dt (1 − δdt) 1 −      dt + u 0(0)y(t)dt .
                                        
                                                      y(t)

Keeping only first-order terms, we obtain

                                                          y(t)
                                                          Û
                            1 = 1 − δdt + r h (t)dt −          dt + u 0(0)y(t)dt .
                                                          y(t)

Reshuffling the terms and dividing by dt , we conclude that

                                      y(t)
                                      Û
                                           = r h (t) − δ + u 0(0)y(t).
                                      y(t)

We obtain the Euler equation (4) from here by noting that r h (t) = r (t) + σ and introducing the
natural rate of interest r n given by (A12).


B.2.   Phillips curve

The Phillips curve says that households price in an optimal fashion: they cannot improve their
situation by shifting inflation a little bit across time.
    Consider a household delaying one percentage point of inflation from time t to time t + dt .
Given the quadratic price-change disutility, the marginal disutility from inflation at any time t is
e −δt γ π (t). Hence, at time t , the household avoids a disutility of

                                             e −δt γ π (t) × 1%.

And, at time t + dt , the household incurs an extra disutility of


                                       e −δ (t+dt)γ π (t + dt) × 1%.

    Delaying inflation by one percentage point reduces the household’s price between times t
and t + dt by dp(t) = −1% × p(t). The price drop then affects sales. Since the price elasticity of
demand is −ϵ , sales increase by


                                dy(t) = −ϵy(t) × −1% = ϵy(t) × 1%.




                                                     5
Accordingly, the household’s revenue grows by


                    d(p(t)y(t)) = p(t)dy(t) + y(t)dp(t) = (ϵ − 1)y(t)p(t) × 1%.

    With a higher revenue, the household can afford to consume more. Since in equilibrium all
prices are the same, equal to p(t), the increase in revenue raises consumption by

                                         d(p(t)y(t))
                               dc(t) =               = (ϵ − 1)y(t) × 1%.
                                            p(t)

Hence, between times t and t + dt , the utility of consumption increases by

                                     e −δt
                                           dc(t) = e −δt (ϵ − 1) × 1%.
                                     y(t)

    At the same time, because production is higher, the household must work more. Hours worked
are extended by
                                               dy(t) ϵy(t)
                                     dh(t) =        =      × 1%.
                                                 a     a
As a result, between times t and t + dt , the disutility of labor is elevated by

                                                           κϵy(t)
                                    e −δt κdh(t) = e −δt          × 1%.
                                                             a

    At the optimum, shifting inflation across time does not affect utility, so the following holds:

                                                                                             y(t)
0 = e −δt γ π (t) × 1% − e −δ (t+dt)γ π (t + dt) × 1% + e −δt (ϵ − 1) × 1% × dt − e −δt κϵ        × 1% × dt .
                                                                                              a

Divided by e −δt × 1%, this condition yields

                                                                             y(t)
                     0 = γ π (t) − e −δdt γ π (t + dt) + (ϵ − 1) × dt − κϵ        × dt .
                                                                              a

Furthermore, up to second-order terms, the following approximations hold:


                                           e −δdt = 1 − δdt
                                       π (t + dt) = π (t) + πÛ (t)dt .

Therefore, up to second-order terms, the previous condition gives

                                                                      y(t)
                   0 = γ π (t) − (1 − δdt)γ [π (t) + πÛ (t)dt] − κϵ        dt + (ϵ − 1)dt
                                                                       a


                                                     6
Then, keeping only first-order terms, we obtain

                                                            y(t)
                         0 = δγ π (t)dt − γ πÛ (t)dt − κϵ        dt + (ϵ − 1)dt .
                                                             a

Rearranging the terms and dividing by γdt , we conclude that

                                                ϵκ         ϵ −1 a
                                                                  
                              πÛ (t) = δπ (t) −     y(t) −     ·     .
                                                γa           ϵ   κ

Once we introduce the natural level of output y n given by (A11), we obtain the Phillips curve (1).
    The Phillips curve implies that without price-adjustment cost (γ = 0), households would
produce at the natural level of output. This result comes from the monopolistic nature of com-
petition. Without price-adjustment cost, it is optimal to charge a relative price that is a markup
ϵ/(ϵ − 1) over the real marginal cost. In turn, the real marginal cost is the marginal rate of substi-
tution between labor and consumption divided by the marginal product of labor. In equilibrium,
all relative prices are 1, the marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption is
κ/(1/y) = κy , and the marginal product of labor is a . Hence, optimal pricing requires

                                                  ϵ   κy
                                           1=       ·    .
                                                ϵ −1 a

Combined with (A11), this condition implies y = y n .
    The derivation also elucidates why in steady state, inflation is positive whenever output is
above its natural level. When inflation is positive, a household can reduce its price-adjustment
cost by lowering its inflation. Since pricing is optimal, however, there cannot exist any profitable
deviation from the equilibrium. This means that the household must also incur a cost when it
lowers inflation. A consequence of lowering inflation is that the price charged by the household
drops, which stimulates its sales and production. The absence of profitable deviation imposes
that the household incurs a cost when production increases. In other words, production must be
excessive: output must be above its natural level.




                                                   7
       Online Appendix C.                            Euler equation & Phillips curve in discrete time

We recast the model of section III in discrete time, and we rederive the Euler equation and Phillips
curve. This reformulation might be helpful to compare our model to the textbook New Keynesian
model, which is presented in discrete time (Woodford 2003; Gali 2008). The reformulation also
shows that introducing wealth in the utility function yields a discounted Euler equation.


C.1.     Assumptions

The assumptions are the same in the discrete-time model as in the continuous-time model, except
for government bonds. In discrete time, households trade one-period government bonds. Bonds
purchased in period t have a price q(t) and pay one unit of money in period t + 1. The nominal
interest rate on government bonds is defined as i h (t) = − ln(q(t)).


C.2.     Household’s problem
                                                    n                                                   o∞
Household j chooses sequences yj (t), p j (t), h j (t), c jk (t) k=0 , b j (t)
                                                                                      1
                                                                                   to maximize the discounted
                                                                               t=0
sum of instantaneous utilities

       ∞
                  (                                                                                                 2)
                        ϵ                                           b         b(t)                γ    p
                                ∫                                                               
                                         1
                                                                      j (t) −                             j (t)
             βt
       Õ
                           ln                c jk (t)(ϵ−1)/ϵ dk + u                  − κh j (t) −               −1      dt,
       t=0
                      ϵ −1          0                                     p(t)                    2 p j (t − 1)

where β < 1 is the time discount factor. The maximization is subject to three constraints. First,
there is a production function: yj (t) = ah j (t). Second, there is the demand for good j :
                                                                       −ϵ
                                                            p j (t)
                                                            
                                                   yj (t) =                  c(t) ≡ yjd (p j (t), t).
                                                            p(t)

The demand for good j is the same as in continuous time because the allocation of consumption
expenditure across goods is a static decision, so it is unaffected by the representation of time.
And third, there is a budget constraint:
                            ∫       1
                                        pk (t)c jk (t) dk + q(t)b j (t) + τ (t) = p j (t)yj (t) + b j (t − 1).
                                0


Household j is also subject to a solvency constraint preventing Ponzi schemes. Lastly, household j
takes as given the initial conditions b j (−1) and p j (−1), as well as the sequences of aggregate
variables {p(t), q(t), c(t)}t=
                            ∞
                               0.




                                                                             8
    The Lagrangian of the household’s problem is

        ∞
                  ϵ                                        b j (t) − b(t)     κ d                 γ    p j (t)
                        ∫ 1                                                                                  2
             t
        Õ
Lj =      β           ln         c jk (t)(ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                                 dk + u                     − yj (p j (t), t) −                 −1
     t=0
              ϵ −1           0                                   p(t)         a                   2 p j (t − 1)
                                                    ∫ 1                                         
                     d
   + A j (t) p j (t)yj (p j (t), t) + b j (t − 1) −      pk (t)c jk (t) dk − q(t)b j (t) − τ (t)
                                                        0


where A j (t) is a Lagrange multiplier. We have used the production and demand constraints to
substitute h j (t) and yj (t) out of the Lagrangian.
    The necessary conditions for a maximum to the household’s problem are standard first-order
conditions. The first optimality conditions are ∂L j /∂c jk (t) = 0 for all k ∈ [0, 1] and all t . As in
continuous time, these conditions yield

                                                                    1
(A13)                                               A j (t) =                 .
                                                                p(t)c j (t)

    The second optimality condition is ∂L j /∂b j (t) = 0 for all t , which gives

                                                  b j (t) − b(t)
                                                                
                                                    1
                             q(t)A j (t) =      u       0
                                                                   + βA j (t + 1).
                                           p(t)         p(t)

Using (A13), we obtain the household’s Euler equation:

                                            b j (t) − b(t)          p(t)c j (t)
                                                          
(A14)                       q(t) = c j (t)u 0
                                                             +β                     .
                                                  p(t)          p(t + 1)c j (t + 1)

    The third optimality condition is ∂L j /∂p j (t) = 0 for all t , which yields

    κ ϵyj (t)       γ        p j (t)                                  p j (t + 1) p j (t + 1)
                                                                                             
  0= ·        −                       − 1 + (1 − ϵ)A j (t)yj (t) + βγ                         −1 .
    a p j (t) p j (t − 1) p j (t − 1)                                   p j (t)2     p j (t)

Multiplying this equation by p j (t)/γ and using (A13), we obtain the household’s Phillips curve:

             p j (t)     p j (t)        p j (t + 1) p j (t + 1)      ϵκ        ϵ − 1 p j (t)yj (t)
                                                                
(A15)                             −1 =β                         − 1 + yj (t) −      ·              .
          p j (t − 1) p j (t − 1)          p j (t)     p j (t)       γa          γ    p(t)c j (t)

C.3.    Equilibrium

We now describe the equilibrium. Since all households face the same initial conditions, they
all behave the same, so we drop the subscripts j and k on all the variables. In particular, all
households hold the same wealth, so relative wealth is zero: b j (t) = b(t). In addition, production




                                                                9
and consumption are equal in equilibrium: y(t) = c(t).
    Accordingly, from (A14) we obtain the Euler equation

                                                            p(t)y(t)
(A16)                           q(t) = u 0(0)y(t) + β                    .
                                                        p(t + 1)y(t + 1)

Moreover, combining (A15) and (A11), we obtain the Phillips curve

                  p(t)     p(t)         p(t + 1) p(t + 1)      ϵ − 1 y(t)
                                                                       
(A17)                             −1 =β                   −1 +            −1 .
                p(t − 1) p(t − 1)         p(t)     p(t)          γ    yn

C.4.    Log-linearization

To obtain the standard expressions of the Euler equation and Phillips curve, we log-linearize
(A16) and (A17) around the natural steady state: where y = y n , π = 0, and i = r n . To that end, we
introduce the log-deviation of output from its steady-state level: ŷ(t) = ln(y(t)) − ln(y n ). We also
introduce the inflation rate between periods t and t + 1: π (t + 1) = ln(p(t + 1)) − ln(p(t)).


Euler equation.    We start by log-linearizing the Euler equation (A16).
    We first take the log of the left-hand side of (A16). Using the discrete-time definition of the
nominal interest rate faced by households, i h (t), we obtain ln(q(t)) = −i h (t). At the natural steady
state, the monetary-policy rate is i = r n , so the interest rate faced by households is i h = r n + σ ,
and ln(q(t)) = −r n − σ .
    Next we take the log of the right-hand side of (A16). We obtain Λ ≡ ln(Λ1 + Λ2 ), where

                                                               p(t)y(t)
                            Λ1 ≡ u 0(0)y(t),      Λ2 ≡ β                    .
                                                           p(t + 1)y(t + 1)

For future reference, we compute the values of Λ, Λ1 , and Λ2 at the natural steady state. At the
natural steady state, the log of the left-hand side of (A16) equals −r n − σ , which implies that the
log of the right-hand side of (A16) must also equal −r n − σ . That is, at the natural steady state,
Λ = −r n − σ . Moreover, at that steady state, Λ1 = u 0(0)y n . And, since inflation is zero and output
is constant at that steady state, Λ2 = β .
    Using these results, we obtain a first-order approximation of Λ(Λ1, Λ2 ) around the natural
steady state:
                                         ∂Λ                      ∂Λ
                        Λ = −r n − σ +       [Λ1 − u 0(0)y n ] +     [Λ2 − β] .
                                         ∂Λ1                     ∂Λ2




                                                  10
Factoring out u 0(0)y n and β , and using the definitions of Λ1 and Λ2 , we obtain

                                   ∂Λ      y(t)         ∂Λ      p(t)y(t)
                                                                            
                    n               n
(A18)        Λ = −r − σ + u (0)y ·
                              0
                                       ·        −1 +β ·    ·                 −1 .
                                   ∂Λ1      yn          ∂Λ2 p(t + 1)y(t + 1)

Since Λ = ln(Λ1 + Λ2 ), we obviously have

                                        ∂Λ   ∂Λ    1
                                           =    =       .
                                        ∂Λ1 ∂Λ2 Λ1 + Λ2

In (A18), the derivatives are evaluated at the natural state, so

                                     ∂Λ   ∂Λ      1
                                        =    = 0          .
                                     ∂Λ1 ∂Λ2 u (0)y n + β

Hence, (A18) becomes

                            u 0(0)y n   y(t)          β           p(t)y(t)
                                                                              
                    n
(A19)        Λ = −r − σ + 0                  −1 + 0                            −1 .
                         u (0)y n + β y n        u (0)y n + β p(t + 1)y(t + 1)

   Last, up to second-order terms, we have ln(x) = x − 1 around x = 1. Thus, we have the
following first-order approximations around the natural steady state:

                                    y(t)           y(t)
                                                       
(A20)                                    − 1 = ln n = ŷ(t)
                                     yn             y

and

                     p(t)y(t)                    p(t)y(t)
                                                             
                                  − 1 = ln
                 p(t + 1)y(t + 1)            p(t + 1)y(t + 1)
                                             y(t)         y(t + 1)          p(t + 1)
                                                                                
                                      = ln n − ln                    − ln
                                              y              yn               p(t)
                                        = ŷ(t) − ŷ(t + 1) − π (t + 1).

We can therefore rewrite (A19) as

                               u 0(0)y n             β
           Λ = −r n − σ +           n
                                         ŷ(t) + 0           [ŷ(t) − ŷ(t + 1) − π (t + 1)] .
                            u (0)y + β
                             0                  u (0)y n + β

Finally, introducing
                                                     β
                                           α=                 ,
                                                β + u 0(0)y n




                                                   11
we obtain
                     Λ = −r n − σ + (1 − α)ŷ(t) + α [ŷ(t) − ŷ(t + 1) − π (t + 1)] .

    In conclusion, taking the log of the Euler equation (A16) yields


                    −i h (t) = −r n − σ + (1 − α)ŷ(t) + α [ŷ(t) − ŷ(t + 1) − π (t + 1)]

Reshuffling the terms and noting that i h (t) = i(t) + σ , we obtain the log-linearized Euler equation:


(A21)                          ŷ(t) = α ŷ(t + 1) − [i(t) − r n − απ (t + 1)] .

Discounting.      Because u 0(0) > 0, we have

                                                        β
                                              α=                 < 1.
                                                   β + u 0(0)y n

Thus, because the marginal utility of wealth is positive, the Euler equation is discounted: future
output, ŷ(t + 1), appears discounted by the coefficient α < 1 in (A21). Such discounting also
appears in the presence of overlapping generations (Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson 2015;
Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins 2019); heterogeneous agents facing borrowing constraints
and cyclical income risk (McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson 2017; Acharya and Dogra 2019; Bilbiie
2019); consumers’ bounded rationality (Gabaix 2016); incomplete information (Angeletos and
Lian 2018); bonds in the utility function (Campbell et al. 2017); and borrowing costs increasing in
household debt (Beaudry and Portier 2018).
    To make discounting more apparent, we solve the Euler equation forward:

                                        +∞
                                              α k [i(t + k) − r n − απ (t + k + 1)] .
                                        Õ
                            ŷ(t) = −
                                        k=0


The effect on current output of interest rates k periods in the future is discounted by α k < 1;
hence, discounting is stronger for interest rates further in the future (McKay, Nakamura, and
Steinsson 2017, p. 821).


Phillips curve.    Next we log-linearize the Phillips curve (A17).
    We start with the left-hand side of (A17). The first-order approximations of x(x − 1) and ln(x)
around x = 1 both are x − 1. This means that up to second-order terms, we have x(x − 1) = ln(x)
around x = 1. Hence, up to second-order terms, the following approximation holds around the




                                                         12
natural steady state:

                              p(t)     p(t)                p(t)
                                                               
                                              − 1 = ln              = π (t).
                            p(t − 1) p(t − 1)            p(t − 1)

   We turn to the right-hand side of (A17) and proceed similarly. We find that up to second-order
terms, the following approximation holds around the natural steady state:

                          p(t + 1) p(t + 1)              p(t + 1)
                                                               
                        β                   − 1 = β ln              = βπ (t + 1).
                            p(t)     p(t)                  p(t)

Furthermore, (A20) implies that up to second-order terms, the ensuing approximation holds
around the natural steady state:

                                     ϵ − 1 y(t)      ϵ −1
                                                 
                                              n
                                                −1 =      ŷ(t).
                                       γ    y          γ

   Combining all these results, we obtain the log-linearized Phillips curve:

                                                            ϵ −1
(A22)                                π (t) = βπ (t + 1) +        ŷ(t).
                                                              γ




                                                   13
                                      Online Appendix D.                    Proofs

We provide alternative proofs of propositions 1 and 2. These proofs are not graphical but algebraic;
they are closer to the proofs found in the literature. We also complement the proof of proposition 4.


D.1.   Alternative proof of proposition 1

We study the properties of the dynamical system generated by the Phillips curve (1) and Euler
equation (4) in normal times. The natural rate of interest is positive and monetary policy imposes
r (π ) = r n + (ϕ − 1)π .

Steady state.    A steady state [y, π ] must satisfy the steady-state Phillips curve (3) and steady-state
Euler equation (7). These equations form a linear system:

                                                                ϵκ
                                                       π=           (y − y n )
                                                               δγ a
                                            (ϕ − 1)π = −u 0(0)(y − y n ).

As [y = y n , π = 0] satisfies both equations, it is a steady state. Furthermore the steady state
is unique because the two equations are non-parallel. In the NK model, this is obvious since
u 0(0) = 0. In the WUNK model, the slope of the second equation is −u 0(0)/(ϕ − 1). If ϕ > 1, the
slope is negative. If ϕ ∈ [0, 1), the slope is positive and strictly greater than u 0(0) and thus than
ϵκ/(δγ a) (because (9) holds). In both cases, the two equations have different slopes.

Linearization.     The Euler-Phillips system is nonlinear, so we determine its properties by lineariz-
ing it around its steady state. We first write the Euler equation and Phillips curve as


                 y(t)
                 Û = E(y(t), π (t)),               where E(y, π ) = y[(ϕ − 1)π + u 0(0)(y − y n )]
                                                                                 ϵκ
                 πÛ (t) = P(y(t), π (t)),          where P(y, π ) = δπ −            (y − y n ).
                                                                                 γa

Around the natural steady state, the linearized Euler-Phillips system is

                                                          ∂E    ∂E    y(t) − y n
                                  "            #                     "           #
                                      y(t)
                                                      
                                      Û                   ∂y    ∂π
                                                   =                              ,
                                                      
                                                                     
                                                          ∂P    ∂P
                                      πÛ (t)                               π
                                                                     
                                                      
                                                         ∂y    ∂π   
                                                                     




                                                               14
where the derivatives are evaluated at [y = y n , π = 0]. We have

                                          ∂E                          ∂E
                                             = y nu 0(0),                = y n (ϕ − 1)
                                          ∂y                          ∂π
                                          ∂P      ϵκ                ∂P
                                             =− ,                      = δ.
                                          ∂y     γa                 ∂π

Accordingly the linearized Euler-Phillips system is


                                                   u 0(0)y n         (ϕ − 1)y n            y(t) − y n
                         "            #        "                                     #"                    #
                             y(t)
                             Û
(A23)                                     =                                                                    .
                             πÛ (t)                −ϵκ/(γ a)               δ                   π (t)

We denote by M the matrix in (A23), and by µ 1 ∈ C and µ 2 ∈ C the two eigenvalues of M , assumed
to be distinct.


Solution with two real eigenvalues.             We begin by solving (A23) when µ 1 and µ 2 are real and nonzero.
Without loss of generality, we assume µ 1 < µ 2 . Then the solution takes the form


                                              y(t) − y n
                                      "                     #
(A24)                                                           = x 1e µ 1 t v 1 + x 2e µ 2 t v 2 ,
                                                π (t)

where v 1 ∈ R2 and v 2 ∈ R2 are the linearly independent eigenvectors respectively associated
with the eigenvalues µ 1 and µ 2 , and x 1 ∈ R and x 2 ∈ R are constants determined by the terminal
condition (Hirsch, Smale, and Devaney 2013, p. 35).
    From (A24), we see that the Euler-Phillips system is a source when µ 1 > 0 and µ 2 > 0.
Moreover, the solutions are tangent to v 1 when t → −∞ and are parallel to v 2 when t → +∞.
The system is a saddle when µ 1 < 0 and µ 2 > 0; in that case, the vector v 1 gives the direction of
the stable line (saddle path) while the vector v 2 gives the direction of the unstable line. Lastly,
when µ 1 < 0 and µ 2 < 0, the system is a sink. (See Hirsch, Smale, and Devaney 2013, pp. 40–44.)


Solution with two complex eigenvalues.                  Next we solve (A23) when µ 1 and µ 2 are complex conjugates.
We write the eigenvalues as µ 1 = θ + iς and µ 2 = θ − iς . We also write the eigenvector associated
with µ 1 as v 1 + iv 2 , where the vectors v 1 ∈ R2 and v 2 ∈ R2 are linearly independent. Then the
solution takes a more complicated form:

                        y(t) − y n
                    "                     #                        "                                  #"           #
                                                   θt                   cos(ςt)         sin(ςt)            x1
                                              = e [v 1, v 2 ]                                                          ,
                             π (t)                                     − sin(ςt) cos(ςt)                   x2




                                                                   15
where [v 1, v 2 ] ∈ R2×2 is a 2 × 2 matrix, and x 1 ∈ R and x 2 ∈ R are constants determined by the
terminal condition (Hirsch, Smale, and Devaney 2013, pp. 44–55).
    These solutions wind periodically around the steady state, either moving toward it (θ < 0) or
away from it (θ > 0). Hence, the Euler-Phillips system is a spiral source if θ > 0 and a spiral sink
if θ < 0. In the special case θ = 0, the solutions circle around the steady state: the Euler-Phillips
system is a center. (See Hirsch, Smale, and Devaney 2013, pp. 44–47.)


Classification.   We classify the Euler-Phillips system from the trace and determinant of M (Hirsch,
Smale, and Devaney 2013, pp. 61–64). The classification relies on the property that tr(M) = µ 1 + µ 2
and det(M) = µ 1 µ 2 . The following situations may occur in the NK and WUNK models:

  • det(M) < 0: Then the Euler-Phillips system is a saddle. This is because det(M) < 0 indicates
    that µ 1 and µ 2 are real, nonzero, and of opposite sign. Indeed, if µ 1 and µ 2 were real and of
    the same sign, det(M) = µ 1 µ 2 > 0; and if they were complex conjugates, det(M) = µ 1 µ 1 =
    Re(µ 1 )2 + Im(µ 1 )2 > 0.

  • det(M) > 0 and tr(M) > 0: Then the Euler-Phillips system is a source. This is because
    det(M) > 0 indicates that µ 1 and µ 2 are either real, nonzero, and of the same sign; or complex
    conjugates. Since in addition tr(M) > 0, µ 1 and µ 2 must be either real and positive, or complex
    with a positive real part. Indeed, if µ 1 and µ 2 were real and negative, tr(M) = µ 1 + µ 2 < 0; if
    they were complex with a negative real part, tr(M) = µ 1 + µ 1 = 2 Re(µ 1 ) < 0.

    Using (A23), we compute the trace and determinant of M :


                                  tr(M) = δ + u 0(0)y n
                                                                 ϵκ n
                                 det(M) = δu 0(0)y n + (ϕ − 1)      y .
                                                                 γa

    In the NK model, u 0(0) = 0, so tr(M) = δ > 0 and

                                                           y nϵκ
                                        det(M) = (ϕ − 1)         .
                                                            γa

If ϕ > 1, tr(M) > 0 and det(M) > 0, so the system is a source. If ϕ < 1, det(M) < 0, so the system
is a saddle.
    In the WUNK model, tr(M) > δ > 0. Further, using ϕ − 1 ≥ −1 and (9), we have

                                           ϵκ n               ϵκ
                                                                 
                                          n         n
                        det(M) ≥ δu (0)y −
                                    0
                                              y = δy u (0) −
                                                        0
                                                                    > 0.
                                           γa                δγ a




                                                  16
Since tr(M) > 0 and det(M) > 0, the system is a source.


D.2.    Alternative proof of proposition 2

We study the properties of the dynamical system generated by the Phillips curve (1) and Euler
equation (4) at the ZLB. The natural rate of interest is negative and monetary policy imposes
r (π ) = −π .

Steady state.   A steady state [y, π ] must satisfy the steady-state Phillips curve (3) and the steady-
state Euler equation (7). These equations form a linear system:

                                             ϵκ
(A25)                                  π=        (y − y n )
                                            δγ a
(A26)                                  π = −r n + u 0(0)(y − y n ).

A solution to this system with positive output is a steady state.
    In the NK model, u 0(0) = 0, so the system admits a unique solution:


                                           π z = −r n
                                                         δγ a n
                                           yz = yn −         r .
                                                          ϵκ

Since r n < 0, the solution satisfies y z > y n > 0: the solution has positive output so it is a steady
state. Hence the NK model admits a unique steady state at the ZLB: [y z , π z ], where π z > 0 (since
r n < 0) and y z > y n .
    In the WUNK model, since (9) holds, the equations (A25) and (A26) are non-parallel, so the
system admits a unique solution, denoted [y z , π z ]. Using (A25) to substitute y − y n out of (A26),
we find that

                                                       rn
(A27)                                  πz =                       .
                                              u 0(0)δγ a/(ϵκ) − 1

Condition (9) implies that the denominator is positive. Since r n < 0, we conclude that π z < 0.
    Next, combining (A25) and (A27), we obtain

                                                          rn
(A28)                                yz = yn +                      .
                                                 u 0(0) − ϵκ/(δγ a)

Since (9) holds, the denominator of the fraction is positive. As r n < 0, we conclude that y z < y n .
    Finally, to establish that [y z , π z ] is a steady state, we need to verify that y z > 0. According to




                                                    17
(A28), we need
                                                               −r n
                                                yn >                      .
                                                       u 0(0) − ϵκ/(δγ a)
Equations (5) and (9) indicate that

                                                                                    ϵκ
                               −r n = u 0(0)y n − δ             and u 0(0) −            > 0.
                                                                                   δγ a

The above inequality is therefore equivalent to

                                                  ϵκ
                                                     
                                         u (0) −
                                          0
                                                        y n > u 0(0)y n − δ .
                                                 δγ a

Eliminating u 0(0)y n on both sides, we find that this is equivalent to

                                            ϵκy n                                ϵκy n
                                        −         > −δ,          or δ 2 >              .
                                            δγ a                                  γa

Equation (A11) implies that
                                                      ϵκy n ϵ − 1
                                                           =      .
                                                       γa     γ
So we need to verify that
                                                                 ϵ −1
                                                       δ2 >           .
                                                                   γ
But we have imposed δ >
                            p
                              (ϵ − 1)/γ in the WUNK model, to accommodate a positive natural
rate of interest. We can therefore conclude that y z > 0, and that [y z , π z ] is a steady state.


Linearization.    The Euler-Phillips system is nonlinear, so we determine its properties by lineariz-
ing it. Around the ZLB steady state, the linearized Euler-Phillips system is


                                                    u 0(0)y z        −y z         y(t) − y z
                           "            #       "                           #"                 #
                               y(t)
                               Û
(A29)                                       =                                                      .
                               πÛ (t)               −ϵκ/(γ a)         δ          π (t) − π z

To obtain the matrix, denoted M , we set ϕ = 0 and replace y n by y z in the matrix from (A23).


Classification.   We classify the Euler-Phillips system (A29) by computing the trace and determi-
nant of M , as in online appendix D.1. We have tr(M) = δ + u 0(0)y z > 0 and

                                                                 ϵκ
                                                                    
                                                            z
                                            det(M) = δy u (0) −
                                                          0
                                                                       .
                                                                δγ a




                                                                18
In the NK model, u 0(0) = 0 so det(M) < 0, which implies that the Euler-Phillips system is a saddle.
In the WUNK model, (9) implies that det(M) > 0. Since in addition tr(M) > 0, the Euler-Phillips
system is a source. In fact, in the WUNK model, the discriminant of the characteristic equation
of M is strictly positive:

                                                                                       ϵκ n
              tr(M)2 − 4 det(M) = δ 2 + [u 0(0)y n ] + 2δu 0(0)y n − 4δu 0(0)y n + 4      y
                                                    2
                                                                                       γa
                                                            ϵκ n
                                  = [δ − u 0(0)y n ]2 + 4      y > 0.
                                                            γa

Hence the eigenvalues of M are real, not complex: the Euler-Phillips system is a nodal source,
not a spiral source.


D.3.   Complement to the proof of proposition 4

We characterize the forward-guidance duration ∆∗ for the NK model, and the ZLB duration T ∗ for
the WUNK model.
    In the NK model, ∆∗ is the duration of forward guidance that brings the economy on the
unstable line of the ZLB phase diagram at time T (figure 3, panel C). With longer forward guidance
(∆ > ∆∗ ), the economy is above the unstable line at time T , and so it is connected to trajectories
that come from the northeast quadrant of the ZLB phase diagram (figure 3, panel D). As a conse-
quence, during ZLB and forward guidance, inflation is positive and output is above its natural
level. Moreover, since the position of the economy at the end of the ZLB is unaffected by the
duration of the ZLB, initial output and inflation become arbitrarily high as the ZLB duration of
the ZLB approaches infinity.
    In the WUNK model, for any forward-guidance duration, the economy at time T is bound to
be in the right-hand triangle of figure 4, panel D. All the points in that triangle are connected to
trajectories that flow from the ZLB steady state, through the left-hand triangle of figure 4, panel D.
For any of these trajectories, initial inflation π (0) converges from above to the ZLB steady state’s
inflation π z as the ZLB duration T goes to infinity. Since π z < 0, we infer that for each trajectory,
there is a ZLB duration T̂ , such that for any T > T̂ , π (0) < 0. Furthermore, as showed in panel D
of figure 4, y(0) < y n whenever π (0) < 0. The ZLB duration T ∗ is constructed as T ∗ = max T̂ .
                                                                                                  

The maximum exists because the right-hand triangle is a closed and bounded subset of R2 , so
the set T̂ is a closed and bounded subset of R, which admits a maximum. We know that the set
       

 T̂ is closed and bounded because the function that maps a position at time T to a threshold T̂


is continuous.




                                                   19
                 Online Appendix E.                Model with government spending

We introduce government spending into the model of section III. We compute the model’s Euler
equation and Phillips curve, linearize them, and use the linearized equations to construct the
model’s phase diagrams.


E.1.     Assumptions

We start from the model of section III, and we assume that the government purchases a quantity
дj (t) of each good j ∈ [0, 1]. These quantities are aggregated into an index of public consumption
                                                 ∫     1
                                                                                     ϵ/(ϵ−1)
(A30)                               д(t) ≡                  дj (t)   (ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                                                               dj               .
                                                    0


Public consumption д(t) enters separately into households’ utility functions. Government expen-
diture is financed with lump-sum taxation.
       Additionally, we assume that the disutility of labor is not linear but convex. Household j incurs
disutility
                                                        κ 1+η
                                                              h j (t)1+η
                                                        1+η
from working, where η > 0 is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. The utility function is altered to
ensure that government spending affects inflation and private consumption.


E.2.     Euler equation & Phillips curve

We derive the Euler equation and Phillips curve just as in online appendix A.
       The only new step is to compute the government’s spending on each good. At any time t , the
government chooses the amount дj (t) of each good j ∈ [0, 1] to minimize the expenditure
                                                   ∫        1
                                                                p j (t)дj (t) dj
                                                        0


subject to the constraint of providing an amount of public consumption д:

                                    ∫     1
                                                                          ϵ/(ϵ−1)
                                               дj (t) (ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                                                    dj               = д(t).
                                       0




                                                                   20
To solve the government’s problem at time t , we set up a Lagrangian:

                             ∫     1
                                                                 (        ∫     1
                                                                                                         ϵ/(ϵ−1) )
                     L=                p j (t)дj (t) dj + C · д −                    дj (t)(ϵ−1)/ϵ dj                 ,
                               0                                             0


where C is a Lagrange multiplier. We then follow the same steps as in the derivation of (A6). The
first-order conditions with respect to дj (t) for all j ∈ [0, 1] are ∂L/∂дj = 0. These conditions
imply

                                                                                −1/ϵ
                                                                дj (t)
                                                                      
(A31)                                             p j (t) = C ·                          .
                                                                д(t)

Appropriately integrating (A31) over all j ∈ [0, 1], and using (A3) and (A30), we find


(A32)                                                        C = p(t).

Lastly, combining (A31) and (A32), we obtain the government’s demand for good j :
                                                                           −ϵ
                                                            p j (t)
                                                              
(A33)                                              дj (t) =                      д(t).
                                                            p(t)

   Next we solve household j ’s problem. We set up the current-value Hamiltonian:

          ϵ                                              b j (t) − b(t)          1 hκ d                 i 1+η γ
                  ∫ 1                                                
   Hj =        ln         c jk (t)(ϵ−1)/ϵ
                                          dk + u                           −            yj (p j (t), t)      − π j (t)2
        ϵ −1          0                                        p(t)            1 + η  a                       2
                                                             ∫ 1                          
      + A j (t) i h (t)b j (t) + p j (t)yjd (p j (t), t) −        pk (t)c jk (t) dk − τ (t) + Bj (t)π j (t)p j (t).
                                                                      0


   The terms featuring the consumption levels c jk (t) in the Hamiltonian are the same as in online
appendix A.1, so the optimality conditions ∂Hj /∂c jk = 0 remain the same. This implies that (A1),
(A4), and (A5) remain valid. Adding the government’s demand, given by (A33), to households’
demand, given by (A5), we obtain the total demand for good j at time t :
                                                                                                 −ϵ
                                                                                    p j (t)
                                                             ∫    1
                                                                                         
                             yjd (p j (t), t)   = дj (t) +            c jk (t) dk =                     y(t),
                                                              0                     p(t)

                             c j (t) dj measures total consumption. The expression for yjd (p j (t), t) enters
                        ∫1
where y(t) ≡ д(t) +      0
the Hamiltonian Hj .
   The terms featuring the bond holdings b j (t) in the Hamiltonian are the same as in online
appendix A.1. Therefore, the optimality condition ∂Hj /∂b j = δ A j − AÛ j remains the same, and




                                                                     21
the Euler equation (A7) remains valid. In equilibrium, the Euler equation simplifies to

                                      cÛ
(A34)                                    = r − δ + σ + u 0(0)c.
                                      c

   The terms featuring inflation π j (t) in the Hamiltonian are also the same as in online ap-
pendix A.1. Thus, the optimality condition ∂Hj /∂π j = 0 is unchanged, and (A8) and (A9) hold.
   Last, because the disutility from labor is convex, the optimality condition ∂Hj /∂p j = δ Bj − BÛ j
is modified. The condition now gives

                         ϵ  κ  1+η
                              yj     + (1 − ϵ)A j yj + Bj π j = δ Bj − BÛ j ,
                         pj a

which can be rewritten
                                                              η #
                                                 ϵ  κ  1+η yj
                                         "
                           (ϵ − 1)yj A j                              BÛ j
                      πj −                pj −                    =δ − .
                               Bj p j          ϵ −1 a        Aj       Bj

Combining this equation with (A4), (A8), and (A9), we obtain the household’s Phillips curve:

                          πÛ j      (ϵ − 1)yj p j    ϵ  κ  1+η η
                                                                     
(A35)                          =δ +               −             yj c j .
                          πj          γc j π j   p ϵ −1 a

In equilibrium, the Phillips curve simplifies to

                               (ϵ − 1)(c + д)        ϵ  κ  1+η
                                                                         
                                                                        η
(A36)                πÛ = δπ +                  1−               (c + д) c ,
                                     γc            ϵ −1 a

where c + д = y is aggregate output.


E.3. Linearized Euler-Phillips system

We now linearize the Euler-Phillips system around the natural steady state, which has zero
inflation and no government spending. The analysis of the model with government spending is
based on this linearized system.
   Since πÛ = π = д = 0 at the natural steady state, (A36) implies that the natural level of
consumption is
                                                     1/(1+η)
                                           ϵ −1                 a
                                            
                                        n
                                       c =                        .
                                             ϵ                  κ




                                                   22
Since cÛ = 0 and c = c n at the natural steady state, (A34) implies that the natural rate of interest is


                                           r n = δ − σ − u 0(0)c n .

Euler equation.   We first linearize the Euler equation (A34) around the point [c = c n , π = 0]. We
consider two different monetary-policy rules. First, when monetary policy is normal, r (π ) =
r n + (ϕ − 1) π . Then the Euler equation is cÛ = E(c, π ), where

                                 E(c, π ) = c [(ϕ − 1)π + u 0(0)(c − c n )] .

The linearized version is
                                                ∂E               ∂E
                                   cÛ = E(c n , 0) +(c − c n ) +    π,
                                                 ∂c              ∂π
where the derivatives are evaluated at [c = c n , π = 0]. We have

                                                 ∂E                     ∂E
                       E(c n , 0) = 0,              = c nu 0(0),           = c n (ϕ − 1).
                                                 ∂c                     ∂π

So the linearized Euler equation with normal monetary policy is


(A37)                               cÛ = c n [(ϕ − 1)π + u 0(0)(c − c n )] .

    Second, when monetary policy is at the ZLB, r (π ) = −π . Then the Euler equation can be
written cÛ = E(c, π ) where


                                 E(c, π ) = c [−r n − π + u 0(0)(c − c n )] .

The linearized version is
                                                ∂E               ∂E
                                   cÛ = E(c n , 0) +(c − c n ) +    π,
                                                 ∂c              ∂π
where the derivatives are evaluated at [c = c n , π = 0]. We have

                                                      ∂E                     ∂E
                        E(c n , 0) = −c nr n ,           = c nu 0(0),           = −c n .
                                                      ∂c                     ∂π

So the linearized Euler equation at the ZLB is


(A38)                               cÛ = c n [−r n − π + u 0(0)(c − c n )] .




                                                         23
In steady state, at the ZLB, the linearized Euler equation becomes


(A39)                                    π = −r n + u 0(0)(c − c n ).

Phillips curve.   Next we linearize the Phillips curve (A36) around the point [c = c n , π = 0, д = 0].
The Phillips curve can be written πÛ = P(c, π, д) where

                                     (ϵ − 1)(c + д)        ϵ  κ  1+η
                                                                               
                                                                              η
                   P(c, π, д) = δπ +                  1−               (c + д) c .
                                           γc            ϵ −1 a

The linearized version is

                                                     ∂P              ∂P    ∂P
                              πÛ = P(c n , 0, 0) +      (c − c n ) +    π+    д,
                                                     ∂c              ∂π    ∂д

where the derivatives are evaluated at [c = c n , π = 0, д = 0]. We have


                  P(c n , 0, 0) = 0
                                                                               η/(1+η)
                         ∂P    ϵ  κ  1+η                         ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                                                        
                                                     n η
                            =−             (1 + η) (c ) = −(1 + η)
                         ∂c    γ a                                 γa       ϵ
                         ∂P
                            =δ
                         ∂π
                                                                   η/(1+η)
                         ∂P    ϵ  κ  1+η               ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                                            
                                               n η
                            =−             η (c ) = −η                      .
                         ∂д    γ a                       γa   ϵ

Hence, the linearized Phillips curve is

                                              η/(1+η)
                                    ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                       
(A40)                     πÛ = δπ −                    [(1 + η) (c − c n ) + ηд] .
                                    γa   ϵ

In steady state, the linearized Phillips curve becomes

                                            η/(1+η)
                                  ϵκ ϵ − 1
                                      
(A41)                       π =−                     [(1 + η)(c − c n ) + ηд] .
                                 δγ a   ϵ

E.4.    Phase diagrams

Using the linearized Euler-Phillips system, we construct the phase diagrams of the NK and WUNK
models with government spending.




                                                        24
 A. NK model: normal times, active monetary policy             B. WUNK model: normal times, active monetary policy




                   C. NK model: ZLB                                             D. WUNK model: ZLB

FIGURE A1. Phase diagrams of the linearized Euler-Phillips system in the NK and WUNK models
with government spending

The figure displays phase diagrams for the linearized Euler-Phillips system in the model with government spending:
c is private consumption; π is inflation; c n is the natural level of consumption; the Euler line is the locus cÛ = 0;
the Phillips line is the locus πÛ = 0; the trajectories are solutions to the system, plotted for t going from −∞ to +∞.
The four panels contrast various cases. The NK model is the standard New Keynesian model. The WUNK model
is the same model, except that the marginal utility of wealth is not zero but is sufficiently large to satisfy (12). In
normal times with active monetary policy, the natural rate of interest r n is positive, the monetary-policy rate is given
by i = r n + ϕπ with ϕ > 1, and government spending is zero; the Euler-Phillips system is composed of (A37) with
ϕ > 1 and (A40) with д = 0. At the ZLB, the natural rate of interest is negative, the monetary-policy rate is zero,
and government spending is positive; the Euler-Phillips system is composed of (A38) and (A40) with д > 0. The
figure shows that in the NK model, the Euler-Phillips system is a source in normal times with active monetary policy
(panel A); but the system is a saddle at the ZLB (panel C). In the WUNK model, by contrast, the Euler-Phillips system
is a source both in normal times and at the ZLB (panels B and D). (Panels A and B display a nodal source, but the
system could also be a spiral source, depending on the value of ϕ ; in panel D the system is always a nodal source.)




                                                          25
Normal times.       We first construct the phase diagrams for normal times with active monetary
policy. The linearized Euler-Phillips system is composed of (A37) with ϕ > 1 and (A40) with д = 0.
       We construct a phase diagram with private consumption c on the horizontal axis and inflation
π on the vertical axis. We follow the methodology developed in section III: we plot the loci πÛ = 0
and cÛ = 0, and then determine the sign of πÛ and cÛ in the four quadrants of the plan delimited by
the two loci. The resulting phase diagrams are displayed in panels A and B of figure A1. They are
similar to the phase diagrams in the basic model (panels A and B of figure 1).1
       The phase diagrams show that in normal times, with active monetary policy, the Euler-Phillips
system is a source in the NK and WUNK models. An algebraic approach confirms this result. The
linearized Euler-Phillips system can be written


                                                    u 0(0)c n            (ϕ − 1)c n        c − cn
                      "        #       "                                              #"            #
                          cÛ
                                   =                       ϵ−1 η/(1+η)
                                                                                                        .
                          πÛ               −(1 + η) γϵκa                     δ               π
                                                              
                                                            ϵ

We denote the above matrix by M . We classify the Euler-Phillips system using the trace and
determinant of M , as in online appendix D.1:


                          tr(M) = δ + u 0(0)c n
                                               "                                      η/(1+η) #
                                                                         ϵκ    ϵ
                                                                             
                                                                                 − 1
                       det(M) = δc n            u 0(0) + (ϕ − 1)(1 + η)                          .
                                                                        δγ a     ϵ

       In the NK model, u 0(0) = 0 so tr(M) = δ > 0 and the sign of det(M) is given by the sign of
ϕ − 1. Accordingly when monetary policy is active (ϕ > 1), det(M) > 0: the Euler-Phillips system
is a source. In contrast, when monetary policy is passive (ϕ < 1), det(M) < 0: the Euler-Phillips
system is a saddle.
       In the WUNK model, tr(M) > δ > 0. Moreover, ϕ − 1 ≥ −1 for any ϕ ≥ 0, so we have
                                                    "                               η/(1+η) #
                                                                       ϵκ    ϵ
                                                                           
                                                                               − 1
                               det(M) ≥ δc n         u 0(0) − (1 + η)                          .
                                                                      δγ a     ϵ

The WUNK assumption (12) says that the term in square brackets is positive, so det(M) > 0. We
conclude that the Euler-Phillips system is a source whether monetary policy is active or passive.


ZLB.      We turn to the phase diagrams at the ZLB. The linearized Euler-Phillips system is composed
of (A38) and (A40) with д > 0.
   1
     The phase diagrams of figure 1 have output y on the horizontal axis instead of private consumption c . But y = c
in the basic model (government spending is zero), so phase diagrams with c on the horizontal axis would be identical.




                                                                26
   Once again, we follow the methodology developed in section III to construct the phase
diagrams. The resulting phase diagrams are displayed in panels C and D of figure A1. The diagrams
have the same properties as in the basic model (panels C and D of figure 1), but for one difference:
the Phillips line shifts upward because government spending is positive. Hence, the Phillips
line lies above the point [c = c n , π = 0]. While this shift does not affect the classification of the
Euler-Phillips system (source or saddle), it changes the location of the steady state. In fact, by
solving the system given by (A39) and (A41), we find that private consumption and inflation at the
ZLB steady state are

                                                                      ϵ−1 η/(1+η)
                                                              r n + δγϵκa             ηд
                                                                            
                                                                       ϵ
(A42)                                cд = cn +                                       η/(1+η)
                                                       u 0(0) − (1 + η) δγϵκa ϵ−ϵ 1
                                                       (1 + η)r n + u 0(0)ηд
(A43)                                πд =                                                .
                                                       δγ a      ϵ η/(1+η)
                                               u 0(0) ϵκ                     − (1 + η)
                                                                    
                                                                ϵ−1

Steady-state consumption may be above or below natural consumption, depending on the amount
of government spending. In the WUNK model, inflation may be positive or negative, depending
on the amount of government spending.
   The phase diagrams show that at the ZLB, the Euler-Phillips system is a source in the WUNK
model but a saddle in the NK model. An algebraic approach confirms this classification. Rewritten
in canonical form, the linearized Euler-Phillips system becomes


                                                        u 0(0)c n              −c n          c − cд
                       "         #       "                                            #"              #
                           cÛ
                                     =                           ϵ−1 η/(1+η)
                                                                                                          .
                           πÛ                −(1 + η) γϵκa                      δ            π − πд
                                                                    
                                                                  ϵ

We denote the above matrix by M . We classify the Euler-Phillips system using the trace and
determinant of M , as in online appendix D.1:


                                tr(M) = δ + u 0(0)c n
                                                   "                               η/(1+η) #
                                                                      ϵκ    ϵ
                                                                          
                                                                              − 1
                           det(M) = δc n            u 0(0) − (1 + η)                          .
                                                                     δγ a     ϵ

In the NK model, u 0(0) = 0 so det(M) < 0, indicating that the Euler-Phillips system is a saddle.
In the WUNK model, condition (12) implies that det(M) > 0; since we also have tr(M) > 0, we
conclude that the Euler-Phillips system is a source. We can also show that tr(M)2 − 4 det(M) > 0,
which indicates that the system is a nodal source, not a spiral source.




                                                                    27
                Online Appendix F.         Proofs with government spending

We complement the proofs of propositions 5 and 9, which pertain to the model with government
spending.


F.1.    Complement to the proof of proposition 5

We characterize the amount д∗ in the NK model, and we compute the limit of the government-
spending multiplier in the WUNK model.
       In the NK model, the amount д∗ of government spending is the amount that makes the
unstable line of the dynamical system go through the natural steady state. With less spending
than д∗ (panel B of figure 5), the natural steady state is below the unstable line and is connected
to trajectories coming from the southwest quadrant of the phase diagram. Hence, for д < д∗ ,
limT →∞ c(0; д) = −∞. With more spending than д∗ (panel D of figure 5), the natural steady state
is above the unstable line and is connected to trajectories coming from the northeast quadrant.
Hence, for д > д∗ , limT →∞ c(0; д) = +∞. Accordingly, for any s > 0, limT →∞ m(д∗, s) = +∞.
       In the WUNK model, when the ZLB is infinitely long-lasting, the economy jumps to the ZLB
steady state at time 0: limT →∞ c(0; д) = c д (д), where c д (д) is given by (A42). The steady-state
consumption c д (д) is linear in government spending д, with a coefficient in front of д of

                                                        η
                                         δγ a          η/(1+η)               .
                                                 ϵ
                                  u 0(0) ϵκ     ϵ−1               − (1 + η)

Accordingly, for any s > 0, we have

                                       limT →∞ c(0; д + s/2) − limT →∞ c(0; д − s/2)
                   lim m(д, s) = 1 +
                  T →∞                                        s
                                  c д (д + s/2) − c д (д − s/2)
                              =1+
                                                s
                                                    η
                              =1+        δγ a       η/( 1+η)
                                                                       ,
                                  u 0(0) ϵκ ϵ−ϵ 1            − (1 + η)
                                                  


which corresponds to (13).


F.2.     Complement to the proof of proposition 9

We compute the government-spending multiplier at the ZLB in the WUNK model. Private con-
sumption and inflation at the ZLB steady state are determined by (A42) and (A43). The coefficients




                                                       28
in front of government spending д in these expressions are

                               η                                         u 0(0)η
                                                    and                                         .
                    δγ a    ϵ η/(1+η)                           δγ a    ϵ η/(1+η)
              u 0(0) ϵκ                 − (1 + η)         u 0(0) ϵκ                 − (1 + η)
                                                                          
                           ϵ−1                                         ϵ−1

Since (12) holds, both coefficients are positive. Hence, an increase in д raises private consumption
and inflation. Moreover, dc/dд is given by the first of these coefficient, which immediately yields
the expression for the multiplier dy/dд = 1 + dc/dд.




                                                    29
   Online Appendix G.            WUNK assumption in terms of estimable statistics

We re-express the WUNK assumption in terms of estimable statistics. We first work on the model
with linear disutility of labor, in which the assumption is given by (9). We then turn to the model
with convex disutility of labor, in which the assumption is given by (12).


G.1.    Linear disutility of labor

When the disutility of labor is linear, the WUNK assumption is given by (9). Multiplying (9) by y n ,
we obtain
                                                        1 y nϵκ
                                          u 0(0)y n >       ·   .
                                                        δ γa
The time discount rate δ has been estimated in numerous studies. We therefore only need to
express u 0(0)y n and y n ϵκ/(γ a) in terms of estimable statistics.
    First, the definition of the natural rate of interest, given by (5), implies that u 0(0)y n = δ −σ −r n .
Following the New Keynesian literature (for example, Woodford 2011, p. 20), we set the financial-
intermediation spread to σ = 0 in normal times. Hence, in normal times, u 0(0)y n = δ − r n . Thus,
u 0(0)y n can be measured from the gap between the discount rate δ and the average natural rate
of interest r n —both of which have been estimated by many studies.
     Second, we show that y n ϵκ/(γ a) can be measured from estimates of the New Keynesian
Phillips curve. To establish this, we compute the discrete-time New Keynesian Phillips curve
arising from our continuous-time model. We start from the first-order approximation


                                     π (t) = π (t + dt) − πÛ (t + dt)dt

and use (1) to measure πÛ (t + dt). We obtain

                                                            y nϵκ y(t) − y n
                       π (t) = π (t + dt) − δπ (t + dt)dt +      ·           dt .
                                                             γa      yn

(We have replaced y(t + dt)dt by y(t)dt since the difference between the two is of second order.)
Setting the unit of time to one quarter (as in the empirical literature) and dt = 1, we obtain

                                                              y nϵκ
(A44)                             π (t) = (1 − δ )π (t + 1) +       x(t),
                                                               γa

where π (t) is quarterly inflation at time t , π (t + 1) is quarterly inflation at time t + 1, and

                                                     y(t) − y n
                                            x(t) =
                                                        yn



                                                     30
is the output gap at time t . Equation (A44) is a typical New Keynesian Phillips curve, so we can
measure y n ϵκ/(γ a) by estimating the coefficient on output gap in a standard New Keynesian
Phillips curve—which has been done many times.
    To sum up, we rewrite the WUNK assumption as

                                                        λ
                                                δ − rn > ,
                                                        δ

where δ is the time discount rate, r n is the average natural interest rate, and λ is the output-gap
coefficient in a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve. This is just (14).


G.2.   Convex disutility of labor

When the disutility of labor is convex, the WUNK assumption is given by (12):

                                         y nϵκ ϵ − 1 η/(1+η)
                                                   
                                     n      1
                              u (0)y > ·
                               0
                                                             (1 + η).
                                      δ γa       ϵ

To rewrite this condition in terms of estimating statistics, we follow the previous method. The
only change occurs when computing the discrete-time New Keynesian Phillips curve arising from
the continuous-time model. To measure πÛ (t + dt), we use (A40) with д = 0 and c = y . As a result,
(A44) becomes
                                                  y nϵκ ϵ − 1 η/(1+η)
                                                            
                      π (t) = (1 − δ )π (t + 1) +                     (1 + η)x(t),
                                                   γa     ϵ
where π (t) and π (t + 1) are quarterly inflation rates and x(t) is the output gap. This is just a typical
New Keynesian Phillips curve. Hence, again, we can measure

                                         y nϵκ ϵ − 1 η/(1+η)
                                                   
                                                             (1 + η)
                                          γa     ϵ

by estimating the output-gap coefficient in a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve.
    To conclude, just as with a linear disutility of labor, we can rewrite the WUNK assumption as

                                                        λ
                                                δ − rn > ,
                                                        δ

where δ is the time discount rate, r n is the average natural rate of interest, and λ is the output-gap
coefficient in a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve.




                                                     31
                                                References

Acemoglu, Daron. 2009. Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Acharya, Sushant, and Keshav Dogra. 2019. “Understanding HANK: Insights from a PRANK.” https://perma.
    cc/E5JY-HL55.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. 2018. “Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge.” Ameri-
    can Economic Review 108 (9): 2477–2512.
Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier. 2018. “Real Keynesian Models and Sticky Prices.” NBER Working Paper
    24223.
Bilbiie, Florin O. 2019. “Heterogeneity and Determinacy: An Analytical Framework.” CEPR Discussion
    Paper 12601.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Stanley Fischer. 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi. 2017. “Forward Guid-
    ance and Macroeconomic Outcomes Since the Financial Crisis.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016,
    edited by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, chap. 4. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2015. “The Forward Guidance Puzzle.” Federal
    Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 574.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2019. “A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory
    and Quantitative Evaluation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (1): 1–48.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2016. “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model.” NBER Working Paper 22954.
Gali, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hirsch, Morris W., Stephen Smale, and Robert L. Devaney. 2013. Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems,
    and an Introduction to Chaos. 3rd ed. Boston: Academic Press.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson. 2017. “The Discounted Euler Equation: A Note.” Eco-
    nomica 84 (336): 820–831.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.” American Economic
    Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (1): 1–35.




                                                      32
