NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIVIDUAL AND AGGREGATE LABOR SUPPLY IN HETEROGENEOUS AGENT
ECONOMIES WITH INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE MARGINS
Yongsung Chang
Sun-Bin Kim
Kyooho Kwon
Richard Rogerson
Working Paper 24985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24985

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

We thank Richard Blundell for comments as well as conference participants at Yonsei University,
Institute for Fiscal Studies and the SED Cyprus meeting. This work is supported by grants from
the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Korean Government
(NRF-2014S1A5A2A01011108). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24985.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Yongsung Chang, Sun-Bin Kim, Kyooho Kwon, and Richard Rogerson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply in Heterogeneous Agent Economies with Intensive
and Extensive Margins
Yongsung Chang, Sun-Bin Kim, Kyooho Kwon, and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 24985
September 2018
JEL No. E24,E32
ABSTRACT
We study business cycle fluctuations in heterogeneous-agent general equilibrium models that
feature both intensive and extensive margins of labor supply. A nonconvexity in the mapping
between time devoted to work and labor services combined with idiosyncratic shocks generates
operative extensive and intensive margins. We consider calibrated versions of this model that
differ in the value of a key preference parameter for labor supply and the extent of heterogeneity.
The model is able to capture the salient features of the empirical distribution of hours worked,
including how individuals transit within this distribution. We then study how the various
specifications influence labor supply responses to aggregate technology shocks. We ask to what
extent our predictions for business cycle fluctuations are affected by abstracting from the
intensive margin and instead assuming that adjustment occurs only along the extensive margin.
We find that abstracting from intensive margin adjustment can have large effects on the volatility
of aggregate hours even if fluctuations along the intensive margin are small.

Yongsung Chang
Department of Economics
Seoul National University
Seoul South Korea
yongsung.chang@gmail.com

Kyooho Kwon
Korea Development Institute
Seoul
South Korea
kwonkh98@gmail.com

Sun-Bin Kim
Department of Economics
Yonsei University
134 Shinchon-dong Seodaemoon-gu
Seoul Korea, 120-749
sunbin.kim@yonsei.ac.kr

Richard Rogerson
Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs
323 Bendheim Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rdr@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
Early representative household models used to study business cycle fluctuations (e.g., Kydland and Prescott (1982)) assumed a household that smoothly adjusts labor supply. An
immediate controversy revolved around the fact that these models were calibrated so as
to give the representative household a Frisch labor supply elasticity larger than those estimated on micro data by researchers such as MaCurdy (1981), Browning et al (1984), and
Altonji (1986). Heckman (1984) argued that this controversy was somewhat misdirected
given that the extensive margin was the dominant margin of adjustment during US business cycles and that both the business cycle models and the micro estimation exercises
abstracted from this margin.
It is now understood that the labor supply elasticity of a representative household
should capture adjustment along both the intensive and extensive margins among heterogeneous agents. However, since the study of Hansen (1985), it has become common for
macroeconomic analyses of business cycles to assume that all labor supply adjustment
occurs along the extensive margin when deriving the implications of heterogeneous agent
models for the aggregate labor supply. The usual motivation for this assumption is that
between two thirds and three quarters of business cycle fluctuations in aggregate hours are
due to changes in employment rather than hours per worker.
A natural question, but one that has not been asked in the literature, is whether
abstracting from the intensive margin is a (relatively) harmless simplification for understanding aggregate labor supply in business cycle settings. This is the question that we
address in this paper. Our main finding is that including an empirically reasonable channel
of choice along the intensive margin can have important quantitative implications for labor
market fluctuations, even if there is relatively little action along the intensive margin.
To answer this question we embed the nonconvex production model of Prescott et al.
(2009) into the incomplete markets indivisible labor framework of Chang and Kim (2007).
We first assess the ability of this model to account for various steady state observations,
including the distribution of hours of work across individuals, the transition of individuals
2

in the hours of work distribution over time, and the distribution of labor earnings and
wealth. Although the model is parsimonious, it is able to account for many stylized facts
in the data.
We note two novel aspects to our steady state calibration exercise. First, we argue that
the cross-sectional distribution of hours of work can serve as useful information regarding the extent of heterogeneity. Interestingly, based on this measure, we need a degree of
heterogeneity that is roughly double the amount captured by standard estimates of idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Because the extent of heterogeneity has important implications,
the development of simple procedures for assessing the empirically relevant amount of heterogeneity within an aggregate model is important. Second, to our knowledge, this is the
first aggregate analysis to explicitly address how individuals transition not only between
employment and non-employment but also within the hours worked distribution.
Having developed an empirically reasonable model that allows for adjustment along
the intensive and extensive margin, we study the response of the model to business cycle
shocks. To maximize comparability with the previous literature, we focus on the case in
which aggregate shocks to productivity are the (only) driving force behind business cycles.
Of particular interest is the comparison of models with an operative intensive margin to a
model that abstracts from such adjustment. For this purpose we will consider the extensivemargin-only model of Chang and Kim (2007) as our benchmark model. Importantly, we
assume that both models are calibrated to match the same aggregate steady-state moments
and are subject to the same aggregate shocks. A key question is whether the model
that abstracts from the intensive margin is a good approximation to the behavior of the
model that features an operative intensive margin. That is, we assess the extent to which
abstracting from the intensive margin is a harmless simplification.
Intuition and previous work both suggest that the answer to this question depends on
the underlying primitives of the economy, notably the willingness of individuals to substitute hours intertemporally and the extent of heterogeneity. For example, if individuals
are not very willing to substitute labor intertemporally then intuitively there will be very

3

little adjustment on the intensive margin and one might reasonably conjecture that it can
be ignored. Because there remains some disagreement about the value of this curvature
parameter we consider a set of values consistent with the range of estimates found in the
literature. Existing work also suggests that the extent of heterogeneity matters. For example, Prescott et al. (2009) showed that when there is no heterogeneity, all adjustment
takes place along the extensive margin even though the intensive margin is available. For
this reason we also consider specifications that feature different degrees of heterogeneity.
For each specification of curvature and heterogeneity, we calibrate the models to the
same aggregate (steady-state) targets and then compare the business-cycle fluctuations of
our model with that of the benchmark model in which the intensive margin is exogenously
restricted to be non-operative. Our main finding is that abstracting from the intensive margin can significantly distort inference regarding the volatility of aggregate hours. Moreover,
the direction of the distortion depends on the underlying primitives. Surprisingly, even if
variation along the intensive margin is very small, explicit modeling of the intensive margin
can have a large impact on the volatility of aggregate hours. In particular, the presence
of an intensive margin dampens the effect of increased heterogeneity on aggregate hours
volatility in an important way. We conclude that abstracting from the intensive margin is
a potentially serious issue for analyses that seek to understand the effect of heterogeneity
on the magnitude of aggregate fluctuations.
Our model also has important implications for understanding the magnitude of fluctuations in efficiency units of labor. From the perspective of understanding the role of labor
supply in accounting for fluctuations in output, this is the key dimension. An important
feature of our model is that adjustment along the intensive and extensive margins can
matter quite differently for the volatility of hours versus efficiency units. In particular,
efficiency units respond much more to fluctuations along the intensive margin than along
the extensive margin. This implies that when adjustment becomes relatively more important along the intensive margin, the relationship between changes in aggregate hours and
changes in aggregate efficiency units also changes. We show that the distinction between

4

fluctuations in hours and efficiency units is quantitatively significant.
Our analysis offers an important message regarding intensive and extensive margin
elasticities and their determinants. While it is intuitive to think that the intensive margin
elasticity is determined by the curvature parameter whereas the extensive margin elasticity
is determined by the properties of heterogeneity, we show that intensive and extensive
elasticities are not independent. That is, heterogeneity matters for the extent of adjustment
along the intensive margin, and curvature matters for the extent of adjustment along the
extensive margin.
Our analysis provides a mapping from the specification of the underlying primitives of
heterogeneity and curvature in preferences over hours of work into the curvature parameter
in a representative-agent model that would generate the same volatility in aggregate hours.
Relative to a model that only features an extensive margin, our model produces a much
smaller range of curvature values for the stand-in household, with values of Frisch elasticity
in the range between one and two. But as noted earlier, this is distinct from the mapping
that would target the volatility of efficiency units of labor.
Our paper is related to several in the literature. Kydland and Prescott (1991) and Cho
and Cooley (1994) are early business cycle models that feature adjustment along both the
intensive and extensive margin, but both do this in the context of a representative household
in which there is no heterogeneity in hours worked. Several papers have studied labor
supply in incomplete markets models. An early example is Pijoan-Mas (2006), though he
assumed all adjustment occurs along the intensive margin and did not study business cycles.
Chang and Kim (2006, 2007), study business cycles but assume that all adjustment occurs
along the extensive margin. Rogerson and Wallenius (2009) features adjustment along
both the intensive and extensive margin but features a limited degree of heterogeneity, no
uncertainty and does not study business cycles. Heathcote et al. (2014) study a model that
features multiple dimensions of heterogeneity, progressive taxation and a flexible approach
to risk-sharing, but they assume all adjustment occurs along the intensive margin and do
not study business cycles. The paper that is probably closest to ours is Erosa et al. (2016).

5

Like us, they build a model that features heterogeneity and incomplete markets and allow
for labor supply adjustment along the intensive and extensive margin. They adopt a life
cycle structure, consider a richer environment in terms of sources of heterogeneity, and
calibrate the model to evaluate the labor supply elasticity of working age males in a partial
equilibrium context. While their framework is richer, our somewhat more abstract model
is more tractable and lends itself more readily to general equilibrium analyses. But, most
importantly, we investigate very different questions: whereas they focus on calibrating their
model to evaluate its aggregate labor supply elasticity, we focus on the role that explicit
modeling of the intensive margin plays in shaping model predictions for aggregate labor
market fluctuations. We therefore view these two pieces of work as complementary.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 specifies the benchmark model and the
model with an operative intensive margin. Section 3 calibrates the different model specifications and Section 4 considers the steady state properties of the various specifications.
Section 5 studies the business cycle properties of the calibrated models. Section 6 considers an alternative model of the intensive margin in which individuals face a discrete choice
problem between full-time and part-time work. Section 7 concludes.

2. Models
In this section we describe the two models that we compare in our quantitative business
cycle analysis. The benchmark model features adjustment only along the extensive margin,
and is identical to the model in Chang and Kim (2007). The other model that we consider
extends Chang and Kim (2007) in the spirit of Prescott et al. (2009) to also allow for
adjustment along the intensive margin.

6

2.1. Benchmark Model: Extensive Margin of Adjustment Only
There is a unit measure of ex-ante identical infinitely lived individuals. Each individual
has preferences over streams of consumption (cit ) and hours of work (hit ) given by:
∞
X

1+1/γ

β t [log(cit ) − B

t=0

hit
]
1 + 1/γ

where 0 < β < 1, B > 0 and γ > 0. Each individual is endowed with a unit of time in each
period.
There is an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function that produces output using
inputs of labor services (Lt ) and capital services (Kt ) and is subject to aggregate productivity shocks (Zt ):
Yt = Zt Lαt Kt1−α .
The aggregate productivity Zt evolves with a transition probability distribution function
π Z (Z 0 |Z) = Pr(Zt+1 ≤ Z 0 |Zt = Z). In our quantitative analysis, we will assume that Zt
follows an AR(1) process in logs:
ln Zt+1 = ρZ ln Zt + εZt , εZt ∼ N (0, σ 2Z ).
Output can be used for either consumption or investment, and capital depreciates at rate
δ each period.
Individuals are also subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks, denoted by zit . The
stochastic evolution of zit is described by the same transition probability distribution function for all individuals, π z (z 0 |z) = Pr(zit+1 ≤ z 0 |zit = z), but realizations are i.i.d. across
individuals. In our quantitative work we will also assume that zit follows an AR(1) process
in logs:
ln zit+1 = ρz ln zit + εzt , εzt ∼ N (0, σ 2z ).
While this is the only source of idiosyncratic shocks in our model, our quantitative work
will interpret this shock more broadly to represent all shocks that affect the relative return
to market work and so influence the incentives to work.
7

In this benchmark model, individuals are restricted to choose hit from the set {0, h̄}
where 0 < h̄ ≤ 1. In this case the value of γ is not separately identified from B and h̄, but
we include this parameter in the current specification since the next subsection will extend
the model to a setting in which hit can take on any values in the interval [0, 1].
Following Bewley (1986), Huggett (1993), and Aiyagari (1994) we assume that markets
are incomplete in the sense that there are no markets for insurance and the only asset is
physical capital. Individuals trade claims to physical capital, and these claims are denoted
by a. Additionally, there is an exogenous borrowing constraint that limits the amount of
debt that an individual can acquire:
at ≥ ā
In each period t there is a market for units of labor services, with price wt , and a rental
market for capital services, with price rt + δ, so that rt is the rate of return to capital.
When a worker of productivity zit devotes hit units of time to market work, the resulting
labor earnings are wt zit hit .

2.2. Extended Model: Extensive and Intensive Margins of Adjustment
In this section we describe an extension to the previous model that does not restrict the
set of values for hit that an individual can choose from and that gives rise to adjustment
along both the intensive and extensive margins. In particular, we assume a non-convexity
associated with such factors as set-up costs, supervisory time and/or the need to coordinate
with other workers. If an individual with idiosyncratic productivity zit devotes hit units
of time to market work, this will generate zit · g(hit ) units of labor services. Following
Prescott et al. (2009) and Rogerson and Wallenius (2009), we assume that g(·) takes the

8

following simple form1 :
n
o
g(ht ) = max 0, ht − ĥ , ht ∈ [0, 1].
where 0 < ĥ < 1. All other aspects of the environment are as in the benchmark model.
It is important to note that extending the pure indivisible labor model in this fashion
in order to endogenously generate adjustment along the intensive and extensive margins
necessarily affects the model’s implications for the relationship between aggregate hours and
aggregate efficiency units of labor input. In particular, holding zit constant, there is a larger
increase in efficiency units, if a given change in hours occurs along the intensive margin
than from having the same increase in hours resulting from adjustment along the extensive
margin. The reason for this is that the former does not involve the “startup” penalty
implicit in the ĥ term. For this reason we will be interested in studying how incorporating
an intensive margin affects not only aggregate hours but also aggregate efficiency units of
labor.

2.3. Equilibrium
We formulate equilibrium recursively. Here we formulate equilibrium for the extended
model. The benchmark model is equivalent to the extended model in which ĥ is set to 0
and the choice of h is restricted. The individual state variables are beginning of period
assets (a) and current idiosyncratic productivity (z), and the aggregate state variables will
be the current aggregate productivity shock (Z) and a measure µ over the individual state
variables (a, z). Prices are functions of the aggregate state: w(Z, µ) and r(Z, µ), and the
equilibrium law of motion for µ is given by µ0 = T (Z, µ).
The value function for a worker, denoted by V , is:
1

French (2005) considers the alternative specification of g(h) = hθ where θ > 1. Two differences
are worth noting. First, this alternative allows for the possibility that individuals might work very few
hours, whereas our specification implies that there will be no one working less than ĥ hours. Second,
this alternative assumes that the nonconvexity is uniform throughout the hours distribution, whereas our
specification assumes that the nonconvexity is most severe at low hours of work.

9

)
1+ 1



h γ
+ βE V a0 , z 0 ; Z 0 , T (Z, µ) | z, Z
V (a, z ; Z, µ) = max
log (c) − B
c,a0 ,h
1 + γ1
n
o
s.t.
c = w(Z, µ) · z · max 0, h − ĥ + (1 + r(Z, µ)) a − a0
(

c ≥ 0, a0 ≥ ā, 0 ≤ h ≤ 1
An equilibrium consists of a value function V (a, z; Z, µ), individual decision rules
c (a, z; Z, µ), a0 (a, z; Z, µ), h (a, z; Z, µ), aggregate inputs {K (Z, µ) , L (Z, µ)}, factor prices
{w (Z, µ) , r (Z, µ)}, and a law of motion T (Z, µ) such that
1. Individuals optimize:
Given factor prices, individual decision rules solve value function.
2. The representative firm maximizes profits: For all (Z, µ)
w (Z, µ) = F1 (L (Z, µ) , K (Z, µ) , Z)
r (Z, µ) = F2 (L (Z, µ) , K (Z, µ) , Z) − δ
3. The goods market clears: For all (Z, µ)
Z
 0
a + c dµ = Y + (1 − δ) K
4. Factor markets clear:
Z
z · g ( h (a, z; Z, µ) ) dµ

L (Z, µ) =
Z
K (Z, µ) =

adµ

5. Individual and aggregate behaviors are consistent :
Z

Z

 0


0
0 0
0
0
µ a ,z =
1 a = a (a, z; Z, µ) dπ z z |z dµ da0 dz 0
a0 ,z 0

Ba ,Bz

for all a0 ⊂ Ba , z 0 ⊂ Bz .
10

3. Calibration
As noted in the introduction, one of our main objectives is to examine whether the benchmark model with only an extensive margin reasonably captures the fluctuations in aggregate labor market variables in the model that also features an operative intensive margin
of adjustment. That is, we want to ask whether a modeler might reasonably choose to
work with the (simpler) benchmark model even though he or she recognizes that there is
indeed some adjustment along the intensive margin in the data.
One would expect that the answer to this question may well depend on the values of
some key parameters. Two special cases suggest features of the economy that will likely
be important. As one extreme case, Prescott et al. (2009) show in their model that if all
workers have identical productivity at each point in time, all adjustment will occur along
the extensive margin even though the model explicitly allows for adjustment along the
intensive margin. In this case there would be no loss in generality in considering the model
that restricts adjustment to the extensive margin. Rogerson and Wallenius (2009) show
that this result does not hold, if individuals have time varying productivity. The second
extreme case corresponds to the limiting case in which γ becomes close to 0. In this case,
holding the marginal utility of wealth constant, changes in an individual’s productivity
will have no effect on his or her hours of work. But as long as γ is positive, variation in
individual productivity will lead to variation in hours worked.
Motivated by the above discussion, we will consider economies that differ in terms of
the extent of heterogeneity and in the value of γ. One simple way to vary the amount
of heterogeneity in the economy is to vary the standard deviation of the innovations to
the idiosyncratic shock process, σ z , and this is the approach that we follow. If there were
definitive estimates for σ z and γ, it would perhaps be sufficient to just carry out our exercise
for these specific values. However, we do not think that this is the case—keeping in mind
that we want to think of z as reflecting all sources of variation in the relative return to
working. Independently of this, examining a range of values is still of interest to get a
clearer understanding of the underlying economics.
11

A reasonable lower bound on the size of the z shocks is provided by the literature that
estimates idiosyncratic shocks to wages.2 A sizable literature has done this for prime age
males, including, for example, Card (1994), Floden and Linde (2001), French (2005), Chang
and Kim (2006), and Heathcote et al. (2008). While there is some variation across studies,
the consensus is that these shocks are large and persistent. Guided by these empirical
studies, for one of our specifications we set ρz = 0.975 and σ z = 0.165.3
As we document later on, this specification will tend to generate too little cross-sectional
variation in hours worked. In view of this we also consider specifications with larger values
of σ z . In particular, we assume that σ z takes on values in the set {0.165, 0.2475, 0.33}.
The largest value in this set tends to generate cross-sectional dispersion in hours worked
that slightly exceeds that found in the data and so seems like a reasonable upper bound.
For our baseline calibration, we will consider the intermediate value of 0.2475.
Motivation for the set of values considered for γ comes from the large literature that has
sought to estimate this parameter. Chetty (2012) argues that an empirically reasonable
value for this elasticity parameter is in the range between 0.4 and 0.5. Using a very different
method, Pistaferri (2003) found an estimate around .75. Rogerson and Wallenius (2013,
2016) provide evidence for values of γ that are 1 or larger, and as discussed in Keane
and Rogerson (2012), there are additional factors that Chetty abstracts from that would
suggest higher values. For this reason, we think values of γ as high as 1 are still quite
plausible, and consider 1.5 to be a very generous upper bound. We therefore assume that
γ takes on values in the set {0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5}.
Given values for σ z and γ, we now describe how we calibrate the remaining parameters.
As is standard in the business cycle literature we assume that each period corresponds to
one quarter. Many of our parameters are standard in the literature and so we set them to
be in line with previous studies. In particular, the Cobb-Douglas technology parameter α
2
This is reasonable as long as other idiosyncratic shocks (e.g., shocks to preferences or home production)
are not perfectly negatively correlated with idiosyncratic wage shocks.
3

Note that all of the papers previously cited estimated shocks based on annual data, so that our benchmark values need to be converted to annualized values when comparing them to the literature. The values
just reported correspond to the estimates in Floden and Linde (2001).

12

is set to 0.64 and the depreciation rate, δ, is set to .025, effectively targeting labor’s share
of income and the investment to output ratio. For the aggregate technology shocks we set
ρZ = 0.95, and σ Z = 0.007. These values are set independently of γ and σ z .
There are four additional parameters to calibrate: β, B, ā, and h̄ (ĥ in the extended
model). We set ā = 0 in all cases. Given values for γ and σ z , we choose the values of
the remaining three parameters to match three moments in the deterministic steady state
equilibrium: a (quarterly) rate of return to capital of 1%, an employment rate of 70%, and
average hours (conditional on working) equal to 1/3.4 In the benchmark model, this last
target directly implies that h̄ = 1/3, while in the extended model the value of ĥ is adjusted
so that optimally chosen hours have this average. In the benchmark model, there is no
dispersion around this mean value, whereas in the extended model there will be dispersion
of hours around this mean.
Note that we are following the standard practice in the business cycle literature of recalibrating the model as we vary the values of γ and σ z so that each specification matches
the same aggregate (steady-state) target moments. This is important given that we want
to consider how predictions would be affected, if the researcher were to start with the
benchmark model that abstracts from choice along the intensive margin rather than the
more general model. In doing so, we want the researcher to continue to match the same
targets.5
Table 1 summarizes the parameter values that are held constant across specifications
as well as those that vary across specifications. As noted earlier, the value of γ is irrelevant
for the benchmark economy, so we have set γ = 1 for each specification in the benchmark
economy.
4
With a quarterly employment rate of 70%, the average annual employment rate in our model (i.e.,
fraction of individuals who work at least one quarter during a year) is 76.7%. This corresponds to the
average annual employment rate in the PSID over the period 1968-1998 for household heads and spouses
with ages between 18 and 65.
5
In some circumstances one might also be interested in a change in one parameter holding all other
parameters constant as a way to develop intuition for how a given parameter affects model predictions. This
distinction will be relevant when we discuss the extent to which some of our findings across specifications
might seem counterintuitive.

13

4. Properties of Steady State
In this section, we consider some of the properties of the steady state equilibrium. There
are two main objectives of this section. The first is to demonstrate that although our
model is highly stylized, it is able to capture many features of the heterogeneity in wealth,
earnings and hours worked found in the data. The second is to examine how different
values for γ and σ z influence the model’s ability to account for these features in the data.

4.1. The Hours Worked Distribution
As noted in the calibration section, all of our model specifications are calibrated so as to
generate the same fraction of people employed and the same average hours for workers
conditional on employment. In this subsection, we examine the extent to which the model
can account for the distribution of hours worked among workers, and how this distribution varies across the various model specifications. We begin with Table 2, which reports
standard deviations of the steady state distribution of annual hours of work, conditional
on working. We compute this measure at the annual level because it is not available at the
quarterly level in the PSID. Our sample is all household heads and spouses between the
ages of 18 and 65 during the period 1968-1997. In the data there are some individuals who
work very few hours during the year. We therefore classify a worker as employed, if he or
she works at least 240 hours per year, and treat those with less than 240 annual hours as
having zero hours.6
In the model, an individual is classified as employed, if he or she has positive hours for
at least one quarter during the year. While for some of the subsequent analysis we will
utilize the panel nature of the PSID, this feature is not essential to this calculation, and so
as a robustness check we also include a measure based on the CPS.7 We normalize annual
6

This adjustment affects relatively few individuals and our results are not very sensitive to variation in
this cutoff.
7

Annual Hours for the CPS data is obtained by multiplying “Average Hours per Week” and “Number
of Weeks Worked”.

14

hours in the CPS and PSID so that average annual hours is the same as in the economy
with γ = 1 and σ z = .165.8
The cross-sectional standard deviations of hours in the PSID and CPS are fairly comparable: 0.42 in the former and 0.45 in the latter. Acknowledging that there is likely to be
some measurement error in hours, the true dispersion in hours will be less than indicated
by these values.9 The standard deviations for the twelve model specifications range from
.294 to .450. Consistent with intuition, the hours dispersion in the model is increasing
in both γ and σ z . When σ z = .165, the model cannot generate sufficient dispersion in
hours even with a relatively large value of γ. However, when σ z = .33 the model is able
to match the dispersion found in the PSID as long as γ is around 1.0 or larger. As noted
earlier, this motivates our choice of σ z = .33 as a reasonable upper bound on the extent of
heterogeneity in our model.
As noted earlier, we interpret the idiosyncratic shock z as a stand-in for all sources of
variation that affect the relative return to market work. While it is possible to measure
the component of this shock that corresponds to market opportunities, it is much less
straightforward to measure other components. The close connection between the standard
deviation of the idiosyncratic shocks and the cross-sectional dispersion in hours worked
suggests that this dispersion can be used as a way to identify the standard deviation of our
single idiosyncratic shock. The above exercise suggests that σ z = 0.33 is an empirically
relevant case to study.
To examine the implications for the distribution of hours worked in somewhat more
detail, we next look at the average hours worked at various percentiles of the hours distribution. Figure 1 plots these values for three model specifications (three σ z ’s with γ = 1)
as well as the corresponding values for the PSID.
Consistent with the message based on looking simply at the standard deviations, we
8
Average annual hours do not vary much across model specifications, so we do not renormalize for
comparison with each specification.
9

The tendency for reported hours to exhibit considerable bunching at certain values (e.g., 35 or 40 for
usual weekly hours) suggests an effect that may go in the opposing direction.

15

see that the specification with γ = 1 and σ z = .33 does a much better job of tracking the
empirical hours distributions than does the specification with the lower value of σ z . In
fact, this specification tracks the distribution in the PSID quite well.

4.2. Employment and Hours Transitions
Having assessed the model’s ability to account for the distribution of individuals between
employment and non-employment as well as the distribution of hours among employed
workers, we next examine the model’s ability to account for the movement of individuals
within the hours worked distribution, including transitions into and out of employment.
Our data on transitions comes from the PSID and so are again based on annual measures. We begin by looking at transitions into and out of employment. Table 3 shows the
distribution of individuals across different combinations of employment states in consecutive years for the PSID and one of our model specifications (γ = 1 and σ z = .2475). We
only report statistics for one of the model specifications because it turns out that these
statistics are very similar across all twelve specifications.
The model does a good job of accounting for transitions into and out of employment,
though employment status is somewhat less persistent in the model than in the data, as
evidenced by the fact that the model has a greater share of workers changing employment
status across consecutive years than does the PSID. However, this difference is relatively
small. For example, in the PSID, the persistence of employment (i.e., the probability of
being employed next year conditional on being employed this year) is .77 whereas this
probability is .73 in the model.
Next we consider the transition matrices for annual hours worked between years t and
t+1. Table 4 reports the transition rates between quartiles of the hours worked distribution
(and non-employment) from the PSID and three model specifications: γ = 1 and the three
values of σ z .
We start by noting three prominent features in the data. First, annual hours of work

16

exhibit a significant degree of persistence, especially for those workers with high hours of
work. All of the diagonal elements for workers with positive hours are greater than 40%,
and for the highest quartile this value exceeds 60%. Second, conditional on working in
both periods and switching quartiles, the transition probabilities are monotone decreasing
in the distance of the destination quartile from the originating quartile. Third, individuals
who adjust along the extensive margin between years t and t + 1 are disproportionately
from the lowest quartile of the hours distribution. Specifically, for those individuals who
work in year t but not in t + 1, roughly two-thirds of them have annual hours of work in
the lowest quartile in year t. Similarly, for those individuals who did not work in year t
but did work in year t + 1, roughly three-quarters of them have annual hours in the lowest
quartile in year t + 1.
Next we consider how the model fares in terms of reproducing these features. As Table
4 shows, all model specifications generate considerable persistence, though somewhat less
as σ z increases. The average of the diagonal elements for those with positive hours in
both periods is 55.6% in the data. For the three model specifications the corresponding
values are 52.1, 49.2 and 43.2 as σ z runs from .165 to .33. While the model specifications
come close to matching the persistence in the highest quartile, the lowest quartile displays
quite a bit more persistence in the data than in the model–55.8% versus values between
36.9% and 38.4%. One possible explanation for this is the existence of a group of workers
in the data who desire part-time work on a more permanent basis than captured by the
idiosyncratic shocks in our model.
For the most part the model also matches the second observation noted above. Specifically, for the specification with σ z = .33 the model has the same monotonicity property
found in the data, whereas for the other specifications there are a couple of values which
violate the pattern. Finally, the model does a good job of matching the nature of adjustment along the extensive margin. For each of the model specifications shown in the table,
more than eighty percent of all transitions along the extensive margin involve workers who
are in the lowest quartile of the hours distribution.

17

Overall, we take the fact that the model can match the salient features of transitions
within the hours distributions to suggest that our parsimonious representation of individual
heterogeneity is empirically reasonable.

4.3. Distributions of Wealth and Earnings
Chang and Kim (2007) and An et al. (2009) have previously shown that a model with
idiosyncratic productivity shocks calibrated to micro data, incomplete markets and indivisible labor captures many quantitative features of the wealth and earnings distribution.
It turns out that adding an intensive margin to the analysis has little impact along this
dimension. In particular, when σ z = .165 our wealth and earnings distributions look very
similar to those in An et al. (2009). When we consider the specification with a much
greater degree of heterogeneity, σ z = .33, we obtain similar patterns qualitatively, but
perhaps not surprisingly, the model generates more dispersion in earnings than is found in
the data. In this section we document these properties.
Given that we calibrate our model using employment data from the PSID, we prefer
to compare our model to data that is also based on the PSID. For this reason our primary
source of information on the cross-sectional wealth and earnings measures are based on
the 1984 PSID. As a robustness check, we also report comparable figures for properties of
the wealth distribution from the work of Diaz-Gimenez et al (1997) that is based on the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). For the measures that we focus on the two data sets
provide very similar answers, so this does not seem to be a major issue.10
Table 5 reports the Gini coefficients for both the wealth and earnings distributions for
our 15 different model specifications, as well as their corresponding values in the PSID and
SCF.
A few patterns are evident. First, given a value for σ z , the Gini coefficients for both the
10
This is not the case, if one focuses on the extreme upper tail of the wealth distribution, as the PSID
under-samples the upper extremes of the wealth distribution. However, given our emphasis on labor supply
this extreme upper tail is probably not of major concern.

18

wealth and earnings distributions are (weakly) increasing in the value of γ. (Note that the
Extensive Only case can be thought of as the limiting case as γ goes to zero.) This effect
is intuitive; a higher value of γ leads to greater intertemporal substitution of labor supply,
so that individuals work more when productivity is high and less when productivity is low,
thereby amplifying the direct effect of productivity on earnings. Given that individuals
accumulate assets to smooth consumption in the face of fluctuations in earnings, greater
fluctuations in earnings leads to greater dispersion in assets. Although the qualitative
effects are intuitive, the main message from Table 5 is that the quantitative importance of
these effects are quite small. While moving from γ = 1 to the extensive margin only case
does generate modest changes in both Gini coefficients, the effect of changes in γ inside
the interval [.25, 1.5] is of second order importance for each measure.
It is also intuitive that higher values of σ z would similarly lead to increases in the
Gini coefficients for both wealth and earnings distributions. However, in contrast to the
previous case, changes in σ z for a given value of γ do generate first order effects on both
measures, with the effect on the earnings Gini being almost twice as large as the effect on
the wealth Gini.
Comparing the values in the various model specifications with their counterparts in the
data, all of the model specifications seem to capture much of dispersion in the wealth and
earnings distributions. To look a bit deeper into the nature of the wealth and earnings
distributions, the bottom part of Table 5 shows the wealth and earnings shares by quintiles
of the wealth distribution. Because variation in γ turns out to be not very important quantitatively in terms of these distributions, we only report results for the model specifications
with γ = 1.
The basic message from these measures is that in addition to doing a reasonable job
of accounting for the absolute amount of dispersion in wealth and earnings as captured by
the Gini coefficient, the model also does a good job of accounting for the shape of these
distributions. The specification with σ z = .165 does a very good job of capturing the
earnings shares, whereas the specification with σ z = .33 generates excessive concentration

19

of earnings in the upper quintile of the wealth distribution. However, the specification with
the higher value of σ z is better able to capture the amount of wealth concentrated in the
upper quintile. Analyzing the wealth shares by quintiles of the wealth distribution hides
the extreme concentration of wealth at the very top of the distribution. It is well known
(see, for example, Diaz-Gimenez et al (1997)) that the model is not able to account for
the concentration found in say the upper 1% of the wealth distribution. However, from
the perspective of labor supply, accounting for the likes of Bill Gates is probably not of
first order importance, and so we do not focus on the extreme upper part of the wealth
distribution.
In summary, this subsection shows that all of the model specifications generate significant dispersion in earnings and wealth. If anything, some of the model specifications
generate too much dispersion. The nature of the dispersion is also empirically reasonable,
in terms of matching earnings and wealth shares by quintiles of the wealth distribution.
We conclude that adding an intensive margin of labor supply to the previous analyses of
Chang and Kim (2006, 2007) does not have first order effects on the earnings and wealth
distributions.

5. Business Cycle Analysis
In this section we study the business cycle properties of our model economies. We solve
the equilibrium of the model using the method proposed by Krusell and Smith (1998). As
is standard, we take logs and then HP filter (with the smoothing parameter of 1,600) the
simulated series before computing summary statistics.
Table 6 reports the properties of output and labor market variables from our models. Aggregate hours worked, employment (extensive margin), hours per worker (intensive
margin) and aggregate efficiency units of labor services are denoted as H, E, h, and L
respectively. By definition, H = E × h. Because the behavior of consumption and investment is basically the same as in standard real business cycle style exercises we do not

20

report statistics for these variables. We emphasize that in all of these model economies
the driving force behind aggregate fluctuations is identical, i.e., the parameters of the technology shock process are held constant across all specifications. Hence, to the extent that
fluctuations are different in the various model economies, it is the result of how the models
lead to different propagation of these shocks.11
While our focus is on labor market variables, we first note that consistent with many
previous exercises, the technology shocks that we feed into our model generate output
fluctuations that are between two-thirds and three-quarters of observed fluctuations in
output. We will say more about the nature of these differences below, when we examine
the nature of labor market fluctuations in more detail.

5.1. Properties of the Extensive Margin Only Economies
It is useful to first summarize the key patterns for the benchmark model that features only
an extensive margin. The main pattern is that as σ z increases from .165 to .33 the volatility
of employment and aggregate hours falls very dramatically, from .93 to .30. The intuition
for this result is simple and well-known. In steady state, the optimal decision rules define
a curve that divides the individual state space into two distinct regions, one with working
as the optimal decision and the other with not working as the optimal decision. A positive
aggregate productivity shock increases the wage rate and encourages workers who were
previously slightly below the work threshold to engage in market work. The size of the
employment response depends on the density of individuals near the boundary, and this
in turn is influenced by the extent of heterogeneity. A larger value of σ z tends to spread
out the distribution of workers across the state space, thereby lowering this density and
decreasing the employment response.
While the qualitative pattern just noted is intuitive, we want to emphasize the magnitude of the effects. Moving from σ z = .165 to σ z = .33 reduces volatility in aggregate hours
11

A distinct issue that we do not pursue here is whether alternative model specifications might lead to
different measurement of the shocks.

21

by a factor of three. Whereas the economy with σ x = .165 accounts for roughly two thirds
of the volatility of aggregate hours relative to output, the σ z = .33 specification accounts
for less than a third of this measure.
It is also of interest to contrast fluctuations in hours with fluctuations in efficiency
units of labor. Two features are relevant. First, although fluctuations in efficiency units
are also decreasing in the value of σ z , the magnitude of the decrease is much smaller.
Second, for the two smaller values of σ z , the volatility in efficiency units is less than the
volatility in hours, but for σ z = 0.33 the reverse is true. To understand these patterns,
it is important to know who the marginal workers are. If the fluctuations in employment
are dominated by individuals with idiosyncratic productivity that is lower than the mean
idiosyncratic productivity of employed individuals, then hours will fluctuate more than
efficiency units. But, it is also possible that shocks induce transitions among “high-wealth
/ high-productivity’’ individuals. As σ z increases more of the marginal individuals are
of this type, thereby flipping the relative volatility of hours and efficiency units. As σ z
increases and the extent of heterogeneity increases, the gap between the volatility in hours
and efficiency units becomes larger.

5.2. Properties of the Intensive and Extensive Margin Economies
Next we look at how business cycle features vary across the twelve specifications that
feature adjustment along both the intensive and extensive margin. We note first that the
property just noted for the benchmark economy–that increases in σ z lead to lower volatility
for aggregate output and aggregate hours–also holds for each value of γ. That is, if we fix
γ and increase σ z , we see that volatility in aggregate output and aggregate hours decreases
in all cases. In particular, allowing for an intensive margin does not overturn this feature
qualitatively.
Next we summarize the patterns as we increase γ holding σ z fixed. Intuitively, one
would expect that as γ increases we would see an increase in the extent of fluctuations

22

along the intensive margin. This intuition is confirmed by the table: for each value of
σ z we observe that higher values of γ lead to greater volatility of hours per worker. The
magnitude of this effect is substantial: moving from γ = 0.5 to γ = 1 can almost double
the magnitude of fluctuations along the intensive margin.
One might also intuitively expect that greater fluctuations along the intensive margin
will lead to a reduction in fluctuations along the extensive margin, as these two margins are
substitutes in terms of ways to adjust overall labor input. While this intuition is confirmed
for the case of σ z = 0.165, we see that it largely fails for the other two values of σ z . To
first approximation, the other two cases reveal little to no change in the magnitude of
fluctuations along the extensive margin as we vary the value of γ.
Similarly, one might also conjecture that an increase in γ holding σ z constant makes it
less costly to vary aggregate hours over the business cycle and so should lead to an increase
in the volatility of aggregate hours. Looking at Table 6 we see that this effect is confirmed
for the two higher values of σ z but that the reverse holds true for the case of σ z = 0.165.
Why does our basic intuition seem to not hold consistently across these specifications?
We think this is an important question, and highlights a key feature of our model. In
particular, we suspect that the most basic intuition comes from a setting in which hours
and employment are perfect substitutes in production (i.e., only total hours matters) and
there is a representative household with preferences over each of employment and hours
per worker that feature curvature. Cho and Cooley (1994) is an example of this setting. In
this setting, less curvature on hours per worker will lead to greater fluctuations along the
intensive margin, less fluctuations along the extensive margin, but greater fluctuations in
terms of aggregate hours. Importantly, this kind of model does not offer a micro foundation
for adjustment along the two margins.
In contrast, our model does provide micro foundations for adjustment along both margins. The two key elements of this micro foundation are heterogeneity among individuals
and a non-linear mapping from hours into efficiency units, both of which destroy the assumption of perfect substitutes for the two margins in production. Specifically, if workers

23

are heterogeneous, then it matters whether an additional hour of total work comes from
existing workers or from bringing in a new worker. And because of the nonlinear mapping
from hours per worker into efficiency units, even if the potential added worker has the same
productivity as existing workers, it is not the same to bring in a new worker to work one
hour as it is to have an existing worker work one more hour.12
This discussion highlights, even more so than in the extensive margin only economy, the
need to distinguish between aggregate hours and aggregate efficiency units of labor. In fact,
when we examine the relationship between the value of γ and the volatility of efficiency
units of labor holding σ z fixed, we see that the relationship is basically increasing.
Our analysis also offers an important message concerning the determinants of fluctuations along the intensive and extensive margins. In particular, we start from the notion,
implicit in much of the recent literature, that fluctuations along the intensive margin are
determined mostly (if not exclusively) by the value of the preference parameter γ, whereas
fluctuations along the extensive margin are determined mostly (if not exclusively) by the
extent of heterogeneity, which in our model is reflected in the value of σ z . Intuitively,
fluctuations along the intensive margin are increasing in the value of γ, while fluctuations
along the extensive margin are decreasing in the value of σ x .
While the results in Table 6 provide partial support for both of these notions, they also
reveal that these notions reflect an oversimplification that is potentially very misleading
from a quantitative perspective. For example, consistent with the first notion above, we see
that for a given value of σ z , increases in γ lead to greater fluctuations along the intensive
margin. However, the notion that γ is the dominant, let alone the exclusive factor that
determines this response is strongly contradicted by the results in Table 6. Specifically,
starting from the specification in which γ = 0.5 and σ z = .165, we see that increasing γ
to 1.5 leads to more than a doubling of the response along the intensive margin. However,
we also get a doubling of the response along the intensive margin if we keep the value of γ
12
Beyond these interactions, recall also that we recalibrate the parameters for each of our model
economies, and in particular, the parameter ĥ, which affects the nature of the nonlinearity in the mapping from hours to efficiency units. As Table 1 shows, this value is strongly affected by changes in γ.

24

fixed at 0.50 but we instead increase the value of σ z to .33. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to point out that the aggregate fluctuations along the intensive margin are
affected in a quantitatively critical way by the amount of heterogeneity in the economy.
Similarly, starting from the specification γ = .5 and σ z = .165, we note that moving
to the specification with σ z = .33 leads to roughly a fifty percent reduction in fluctuations
along the extensive margin. However, if we instead kept the value of σ z unchanged at .165
and instead increased the value of γ to 1.5, we would still have a decrease in fluctuations
along the extensive margin of almost twenty percent. It follows that one should not think
of “intensive margin elasticities” and “extensive margin elasticities” as two independent
and primitive parameters.

5.3. Is the Extensive Margin Only Economy a Good Approximation?
We now ask to what extent the extensive margin only economy accurately captures labor
market fluctuations in the more general models that include an operative intensive margin,
i.e., to what extent does it matter that one abstracts from adjustment along the intensive
margin. Before turning to specific results, it is instructive to return to the extreme special
cases that we mentioned earlier. Specifically, we argued that either little heterogeneity or
a very low value of γ might suggest that it is very innocuous to abstract from adjustment
along the intensive margin.
With this in mind, consider the extended model with σ z = .165 and γ = .25. In the
calibration section we argued that both of these were conservative lower bounds and hence
are a relevant case to consider. Table 6 reveals a striking result: whereas the benchmark
model generates a volatility of aggregate hours equal to 1.04 when σ z = .165, the extended
model with σ z = .165 and γ = .25 only generates a volatility of aggregate hours equal to
.89, a reduction of roughly fifteen percent. In contrast, the volatility of efficiency units of
labor is roughly fifteen percent larger than in the model with an intensive margin. In each
case, it seems that the extensive margin only economy is not a close approximation.

25

It is important to emphasize that there is a striking difference between the volatility of
aggregate hours and aggregate efficiency units in the two economies, despite the fact that in
the extended model with γ = 0.25 and σ z = 0.165, the volatility of hours per worker is only
.03 and is only about one-thirtieth the size of fluctuations in employment. Put somewhat
differently, looking at the business cycle fluctuations in the economy with an operative
intensive margin, it would seem tempting to conclude that it is seemingly harmless to
abstract from fluctuations along the intensive margin given how small they are. The key
message here is that even if there is little volatility along the intensive margin, abstracting
from it has important implications precisely because a model that has an active intensive
margin will necessarily contain features that are important for the nature of labor market
fluctuations.
If we require the model to generate the same amount of cross-sectional dispersion in
hours as found in the data, we are led to focus on the case in which σ z = .33. As noted
before, in the benchmark model there is a dramatic decrease in the volatility of aggregate
hours when we move from σ z = .165 to σ z = .33. When σ z = .165, allowing for an active
intensive margin significantly decreased the extent of hours volatility, and the decrease
became larger as the value of γ was increased. We now observe the opposite pattern when
σ z = .33. That is, allowing for an intensive margin serves to increase the volatility of
aggregate hours relative to the extensive margin only case, and the extent of the increase
is increasing in the value of γ. It follows that the effect of increased heterogeneity on the
volatility of aggregate hours is muted considerably by allowing for an intensive margin.
For example, whereas moving from σ z = .165 to σ z = .33 in the benchmark model lowers
the standard deviation of aggregate hours by .65, the analogous drop when γ = .5 is only
.4. If we abstract from the intensive margin we overstate the decrease in volatility.
Our analysis also allows us to construct a mapping from the values of γ and σ z into the
implied curvature parameter for a representative household that would generate the same
fluctuations in hours worked. In particular, we consider a representative household model

26

in which the household has period utility function given by:
log c − B

h1+1/γ̂
1 + 1/γ̂

We calibrate the value of B so that hours worked in steady state are 1/3 and consider
the same aggregate shock process as before. We then ask what value for γ̂ provides the
same volatility in aggregate hours as the model with heterogeneity and incomplete markets.
Table 7 shows the results for both the general model and the model with only an extensive
margin. The first point to note is that the range of implied values for γ̂ is much smaller once
one includes an intensive margin. Whereas the range is from .75 to 4.46 in the benchmark
model with only an extensive margin, the range is basically from 1 to 3 for the models
that include an intensive margin, even though we consider a wide range of values for the
individual curvature parameter. Moreover, if we were to restrict attention to σ z = .33
on the grounds that it generates an empirically reasonable amount of heterogeneity in
hours, and also consider values of γ that lie between .5 and 1, we see that the implied
representative agent elasticity parameter is quite tightly pinned down and is around 1.
Even with γ as large as 1.5 we see that the representative agent elasticity is still only as
high as 1.5

6. An Alternative Model of the Intensive Margin
One of the findings from model simulations in the previous section is that fluctuations
along the intensive margin tend to be quite small relative to what we see in the data,
even when viewed relative to fluctuations along the extensive margin. In our model, choice
along the intensive margin is continuous and choice along the extensive margin is discrete.
Recent work by Borowczyk-Martins and Lale (2018) has argued that a significant fraction
of volatility along the intensive margin reflects movements between full-time and part-time
work and so might also reflect discrete choice.
These two observations lead us to consider an alternative model of the intensive margin
27

in this section. In particular, we consider an extension to the extensive margin only model
that simply adds a third choice for hours that we will interpret as part-time work and
briefly summarize its properties.13

6.1. Model and Calibration
The model is the same as our previous benchmark model with two notable exceptions.
First, as just noted, we now assume that the choice of ht for an individual is restricted to
the set {0, hp , hf } where hp and hf will represent part-time and full-time hours, respectively.
Second, we assume that efficiency units per unit of labor supply are less for part-time work.
As noted above, this model features only discrete choices and so we will refer to it as the
discrete choice model.
We modify the calibration procedure as follows. We assume that part-time work yields
thirty percent fewer efficiency units per unit of time than does full time work, and hence
that there is a thirty percent wage penalty for part time work. We assume that γ = 1
and choose B as a disutility of working parameter. As before we target the same average
hours conditional on working (0.33) and the aggregate employment rate (70%) in the
steady state. We now add as an additional target that the full-time employment is 80% of
total employment. These three targets allow us to determine the values of B, hp and hf .
Assuming σ z = .2475 the resulting values are hp = .237 and hf = .357. This hours ratio
of

hp
hf

= 0.67 implies 27 hours per week for part-time workers when the average hours of

full-time workers is 43.

6.2. Steady State Results
Here we focus on one particular aspect of the calibrated model: transitions between the
three work choices. We compute transition probabilities from the PSID based on using
13
Chang et al. (2011) study a model of households in which each member must choose between not
working, part-time work and full-time work, but do not study business cycles.

28

35 hours as the cutoff for defining part-time and full-time work. Results are presented in
Table 8 for the case in which σ z = 0.2475. We also report the transition probabilities of
our model with the intensive margin (for the case of γ = 1 and σ z = 0.2475) using the
same cutoffs for full- and part-time work as we used in the PSID.
The two models imply very similar transition probabilities. There are two main issues with respect to matching the transition probabilities in the data, both of which were
noted earlier. First, our model has slightly less persistence in the employment and nonemployment state, implying that we have somewhat too many transitions between employment and non-employment. Second, we do not generate sufficient persistence in the
part-time state.

6.3. Business Cycle Results
The bottom part of Table 6 shows the business cycle results for the discrete choice economy.
Although not shown in the table, the model generates a procyclical series for the fraction
of individuals working full-time and a countercyclical series for the fraction working parttime, consistent with the data. The fraction of individuals working part-time experiences
inflows and outflows: when a positive productivity shock happens it moves some individuals
currently working part-time into full-time employment, but also moves some individuals
from non-employment into part-time employment. But the former effect dominates.
Because we have implicitly set γ = 1 in our calibration of the discrete choice model it
is best to focus on this case when comparing with the previous model results in Table 6. A
few patterns are worth noting. First, whereas the fluctuations along the intensive margin
become larger in the continuous choice model as σ z increases, here we find the opposite.
The logic for this is essentially the same as the logic for the decreasing volatility of overall
employment with respect to σ z in the benchmark model. In the discrete choice model,
fluctuations along the intensive margin result from individuals who cross between regions
as boundaries shift in the individual state space. As cross-sectional heterogeneity increases,

29

there are fewer individuals close to the boundaries and so fewer transitions. In the discrete
choice model the volatility of intensive and extensive margins move in the same direction
as σ z changes, whereas in the continuous choice model they move in opposing directions.
Second, one of our main results in the previous analysis—that allowing for an intensive
margin dampens the effect of increased heterogeneity on fluctuations—continues to hold in
the discrete choice model despite the fact that the intensive and extensive margins move
together. Key to this is the fact that there are multiple boundaries in this model. As some
individuals are pushed further from the boundary for full-time work, they are pushed closer
to the boundary for part-time work.
Third, this same result holds for fluctuations in efficiency units as well: as the extent
of heterogeneity increases, the discrete choice model experiences less of a reduction in
volatility of efficiency units of labor than does the benchmark economy.
To what extent does the benchmark model offer a good approximation to fluctuations in
this economy? Table 6 reveals that for the lowest value of σ z the two models generate quite
similar aggregate fluctuations in terms of output, hours and efficiency units. But for the
two larger values of σ z there are significant discrepancies along all three dimensions. While
this alternative model of the intensive margin differs both qualitatively and quantitatively
along some dimensions, we conclude that the basic message remains intact.

7. Conclusion
Recent advances in modeling aggregate labor supply have emphasized the importance of
accounting for adjustment along the intensive and extensive margins. In this paper we build
a model in which individual labor supply adjusts along both the intensive and extensive
margins in an environment that features heterogeneity and incomplete markets. We believe
that this is the appropriate benchmark model for understanding the joint determination
of adjustment along the two margins. We consider a family of specifications of this model
that differ along two key dimensions: the value of the preference parameter that influences

30

curvature of utility in hours of work, and the nature of idiosyncratic shocks that individuals
face, which in turn influences the extent of cross-sectional heterogeneity in the invariant
distribution for idiosyncratic shocks.
We consider the ability of the various specifications of the model to account for key
features of employment and hours worked in the cross-section. We then use this model to
consider labor supply responses to aggregate technology shocks. Three key findings emerge.
First, abstracting from adjustment along the intensive margin may be misleading about
aggregate responses in both hours and output even if there are relatively small fluctuations
along the intensive margin. Second, extensive and intensive margin elasticities are jointly
determined by both the preference parameter and the extent of heterogeneity. That is, one
cannot speak of intensive and extensive margin elasticities as independent parameters of
the economic environment. Third, the model with both intensive and extensive margins of
adjustment produces much less sensitivity in aggregate volatility in response to changes in
the underlying primitives. We view our aggregation results as suggesting a representative
household with a Frisch elasticity slightly larger than unity.

31

References
[1] Aiyagari, S. Rao (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-684.
[2] Altonji, Joseph G. (1986), “Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply : Evidence
from Micro Data.”, Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), s176-215.
[3] An, Sungbae, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim (2009), “Can a Representative
Agent Model Represent a Heterogeneous Agent Economy?” American Economic Journal - Macroeconomics, 1, 29-54.
[4] Bewley, Truman (1986) “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Independently Fluctuating Consumers,” in Contributions to Mathematical Economics in
Honor of Gerard Debreu.
[5] Borowczyk-Martins, D., and E. Lale (2018): “Employment Adjustment and PartTime Work: Lessons from the United States and the United Kingdom.” Forthcoming,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
[6] Browning, M., A. Deaton and M. Irish (1985), “A Profitable Approach to Labor
Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica 53, 503-44.
[7] Card, D., (1994), “Intertemporal Labor Supply: An Assessment,” in Advances in
Econometrics, edited by Chris Sims, Cambridge University Press, 49-81.
[8] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim (2006), “From Individual to Aggregate Labor
Supply: A Quantitative Analysis Based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,”
International Economic Review, 47(1), 1-27.
[9] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim (2007), “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications for Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 19391956.

32

[10] Chang, Yongsung, Sun-Bin Kim, Kyooho Kwon and Richard Rogerson (2011): “Interpreting Labor Supply Regressions in a Model of Full- and Part-Time Work,” American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings , 101(3), 476-481.
[11] Chetty, R. (2012), “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis
of Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica 80(3): 969-1018.
[12] Cho, J.-O. and Cooley, Thomas F. (1994), “Employment and hours over the business
cycle.”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 18, 411-432.
[13] Diaz-Gimenez, J., V. Quadrini and V. Rios-Rull (1997), “Dimensions of Inequality:
Facts on the US Distributions of Earnings, Income and Wealth,” Quarterly Review of
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Spring, 3-21.
[14] Erosa, A., L. Fuster and G. Kambourov (2016) “Towards a Micro-Founded Theory of
Aggregate Labor Supply,” Review of Economic Studies 83(3), 1001-1039.
[15] Floden, Martin, and Jesper Linde (2001), “Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and
Sweden: Is There a Role for Government Insurance?,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
4 (2), 406-437.
[16] French, Eric (2005), “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply and
Retirement Behavior,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(2), 395-427.
[17] Hansen, G. (1985), “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 16, 309-327.
[18] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2008), “Insurance
and Opportunities: A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 55, 501–525.
[19] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2014), “Consumption and Labor Supply With Partial Insurance: An Analytical Approach,” American
Economic Review, 104(7) , 2075-2126.
33

[20] Heckman, J., (1984), “Comments on the Ashenfelter and Kydland Papers,” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 209-224.
[21] Huggett, M. (1996), “Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economics,” Journal of Monetary Economics 38, 469-94.
[22] Keane, M. and R. Rogerson (2012) “Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: A Reassessment
of Conventional Wisdom,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 464-476.
[23] Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
Macroeconomy”, Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 1059-1085.
[24] Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1982), “Time to build and aggregate
fluctuations,” Econometrica, 50, 1345-79.
[25] Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1991), “Hours and employment variation
in business cycle theory,” Economic Theory, 1, 63-81.
[26] MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1981), “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle
Setting,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867-96.
[27] Pijoan-Mas, J. (2006), “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours,” Review of
Economic Dynamics 9(2), 326-352.
[28] Pistaferri, L. (2003), “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk and
Intertemporal Labor Supply.” Journal of Labor Economics 21, 729-754.
[29] Prescott, Edward, Richard Rogerson, and Johanna Wallenius (2009),“Lifetime aggregate labor supply with endogenous workweek length,” Review of Economic Dynamics
12, 23-36.
[30] Rogerson, Richard, and Wallenius, Johanna (2009),“Micro and Macro Elasticities in
a Life Cycle Model with Taxes,” Journal of Economic Theory 144, 2277-2293.

34

[31] Rogerson, Richard, and Wallenius, Johanna (2014), “Nonconvexities, Retirement and
the Elasticity of Labor Supply.” American Economic Review 103, 1445-1462.
[32] Rogerson, Richard, and Wallenius, Johanna (2016), “Retirement, Home Production
and Labor Supply Elasticities,” Journal of Monetary Economics 78 (2016), 23-34.

35

Table 1: Calibrated Parameter Values
Common Across All Models
σ
1.0

α
0.64

δ
0.025
σz

ρZ
0.95

σZ
0.007

ρz
0.975

β

B

ĥ

Ext

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.97855
0.9726
0.96795

18.4
15.0
11.2

-

γ = 0.25

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.9772
0.9705
0.9654

1248
990
710

0.26
0.252
0.24

γ = 0.5

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.97688
0.97
0.96472

85.0
69.4
53.0

0.211
0.2
0.18

γ = 1.0

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.97656
0.9693
0.96373

18.9
15.8
12.3

0.151
0.136
0.114

γ = 1.5

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.97628
0.9688
0.963

11.0
9.4
7.3

0.115
0.098
0.076

Discrete

0.165
0.2475
0.33

0.97749
0.9711
0.9664

18.3
15.8
12.43

-

Notes: ’Ext’ denotes the model specification with the extensive margin of labor only.

Table 2: Cross-Sectional Standard Deviation of Annual Hours

PSID: 0.42, CPS: 0.45
Models
σz = 0.165
σz = 0.2475
σz = 0.33

γ = 0.25

γ = 0.5

γ=1

γ = 1.5

0.294
0.308
0.317

0.301
0.311
0.338

0.317
0.340
0.397

0.332
0.371
0.450

Notes: Annual hours in the CPS and PSID are normalized so that average annual
hours is the same as that in the economy with γ = 1.0 and σx = .165.

Table 3: Distribution of Employment Transitions

Empt−1

Empt

PSID

Model

1
1
0
0

1
0
1
0

.767
.044
.032
.155

.729
.053
.053
.165

Notes: Employment status at time t (Empt ), is denoted by 1 (working) or 0 (not
working).

Table 4: Annual Hours Transition
PSID

t

t

t

t

t+1
Not Work 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Not Work
81.2 15.3 1.2 1.5 0.9
1st
16.1 55.8 14.8 8.7 4.7
3.0 15.6 53.4 20.7 7.2
2nd
3rd
2.2 8.2 24.9 46.5 19.2
1.8 4.7 7.5 19.4 66.6
4th
Model: γ = 1, σz = 0.2475
t+1
Not Work 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Not Work
75.7 20.2 2.4 1.1 0.5
1st
22.5 36.9 19.7 12.4 8.4
2nd
2.6 16.2 44.2 28.1 21.7
1.2 8.8 13.1 55.0 21.8
3rd
4th
1.2 14.0 6.8 17.4 60.5
Model: γ = 1, σz = 0.165
t+1
Not Work 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Not Work
75.5 20.4 1.8 1.0 1.2
1st
23.2 38.4 14.4 10.0 13.9
2nd
2.4 17.1 27.3 39.8 13.3
3rd
0.7 5.9 6.2 76.5 11.4
2.3 19.9 3.5 7.9 66.3
4th
Model: γ = 1, σz = 0.33
t+1
Not Work 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Not Work
76.3 19.8 2.8 0.8 0.2
1st
22.2 37.3 24.4 10.7 5.3
3.5 20.7 36.8 28.7 10.2
2nd
3rd
1.2 9.9 19.3 40.7 28.7
4th
0.6 8.8 9.9 22.7 57.9

Notes: Transition probability matrix of annual hours worked across 5 groups including zero hours (‘Not Work’).

Table 5: Wealth and Earnings

Gini Coefficients: Earnings
PSID=0.53, SCF=0.63
σz = 0.165
σz = 0.2475
σz = 0.33

Ext

γ = 0.25

γ = 0.5

γ = 1.0

γ = 1.5

0.55
0.66
0.75

0.58
0.69
0.77

0.59
0.70
0.78

0.59
0.71
0.79

0.60
0.72
0.80

Gini Coefficients: Wealth
PSID=0.76, SCF=0.78
σz = 0.165
σz = 0.2475
σz = 0.33

Ext

γ = 0.25

γ = 0.5

γ = 1.0

γ = 1.5

0.68
0.72
0.76

0.71
0.73
0.77

0.71
0.74
0.78

0.71
0.74
0.78

0.72
0.75
0.79

Wealth Share by Quintile
I

II

III

IV

V

PSID
SCF

-0.52
-0.39

0.50
1.74

5.06
5.72

18.74
13.43

76.22
79.49

σz = 0.165
σz = 0.2475
σz = 0.33

0.00
0.04
0.09

0.68
1.05
0.96

6.24
5.24
3.90

20.23
16.46
12.89

72.85
77.21
82.16

Earnings Share by Wealth Quintile
I

II

III

IV

V

PSID
SCF

7.51
7.05

11.31
14.50

18.72
16.48

24.21
20.76

38.23
41.21

σz = 0.165
σz = 0.2475
σz = 0.33

7.65
2.67
1.15

10.22
7.27
4.21

16.36
12.48
8.71

23.34
21.68
18.32

42.43
55.91
67.62

Notes: Wealth and earnings shares by quintile are based on the model with γ = 1.

Table 6: Business Cycle Statistics

σY

σH

σH
σY

σE

σh

σL

σw

Data

BLS

2.01

1.80

.89

1.51

.48

-

.98

Ext

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.63
1.39
1.27

1.04
.62
.39

.63
.44
.31

1.04
.62
.39

-

.96
.60
.59

.89
.98
1.06

γ = 0.25

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.72
1.52
1.47

.89
.49
.39

.51
.32
.26

.86
.44
.39

.03
.05
.07

1.10
.81
.90

.85
.93
1.00

γ = 0.5

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.73
1.57
1.52

.86
.54
.46

.50
.35
.30

.81
.46
.36

.06
.09
.12

1.09
.89
.99

.84
.92
.99

γ = 1.0

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.74
1.62
1.61

.79
.59
.56

.45
.37
.35

.69
.45
.38

.12
.16
.21

1.09
.99
1.14

.83
.90
.98

γ = 1.5

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.76
1.67
1.68

.78
.64
.62

.44
.38
.37

.63
.44
.37

.16
.22
.29

1.12
1.08
1.27

.82
.89
.98

Discrete

σz = .165
σz = .2475
σz = .33

1.69
1.51
1.38

.92
.74
.54

.55
.49
.39

.61
.52
.43

.37
.29
.16

1.03
.78
.72

.85
.94
1.02

Note: Total hours (H) = Employment (E) × Hours per worker (h). The wage rate
is denoted by w. Data moments are based on the Labor Productivity and Costs
(LPC) of the non-farm business sector (1959:I-2017:IV) from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). The aggregate efficiency unit of labor is denoted by L.

Table 7: Implied Frisch elasticity for a Stand-in Household Model

Ext
γ = 0.25
γ = 0.5
γ = 1.0
γ = 1.5
Discrete

σz = .165

σz = .2475

σz = .33

4.46
2.98
2.76
2.30
2.24
3.22

1.48
1.03
1.19
1.37
1.56
2.03

0.75
0.75
0.94
1.26
1.48
1.19

Note: The Frisch elasticity of labor supply from a representative-agent model that
generates the same volatility of total hours (σH ).

Table 8: Transition between Full-Time and Part-Time
PSID
t+1
Not Work Part Full
Not Work
81.2 14.4 4.4
t
Part
18.4 51.0 30.5
2.6
7.7 89.7
Full

Model: Divisible Hours
t+1
Not Work Part Full
Not Work
75.9 20.7 3.4
t
Part
21.9 39.0 39.1
1.6 13.2 85.2
Full
Model: Discrete Choice
t+1
Not Work
Not Work
74.9
22.7
t
Part
Full
2.3

of Hours
Part Full
19.8 5.2
35.1 42.2
19.8 85.6

Notes: The statistics from the models are based on γ = 1.0 and σx = .2475.

Figure 1: Distribution of Annual Hours Worked

1.6

Annual Hours (Model Unit)

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1

PSID
=0.165
x

1

x
x

0.9
20

30

40

50

60

70

=0.2475
=0.33

80

90

Percentile of Hours Distribution
Notes: Annual hours in the PSID are normalized so that average annual hours is the
same as in the economy with σz = .165.

