NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION AND INNOVATION IN THE 20TH CENTURY
Ufuk Akcigit
John Grigsby
Tom Nicholas
Stefanie Stantcheva
Working Paper 24982
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24982

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised October 2018

We thank Julie Cullen, Jim Hines, Henrik Kleven, Jim Poterba, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, Joel
Slemrod, Ugo Troiano, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, Gabriel Zucman, Eric Zwick and seminar
participants at UC San Diego, Duke Fuqua, Michigan, and NYU for comments and suggestions.
We are deeply indebted to Jon Bakija for sharing his state-level personal income tax calculator.
Akcigit acknowledges financial support from the NSF under Grant CAREER 1654719 and Sloan
Foundation G-2018-11071. Nicholas acknowledges support from the Division of Research and
Faculty Development at Harvard Business School. Stantcheva acknowledges support from the
NSF under Grant CAREER 1654517. We thank Helen Ho, Rafael Jimenez, Raphael Raux, and
Simeng Zeng for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ufuk Akcigit, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxation and Innovation in the 20th Century
Ufuk Akcigit, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 24982
September 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. H24,H25,H31,J61,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of corporate and personal taxes on innovation in the United States
over the twentieth century. We use three new datasets: a panel of the universe of inventors who
patent since 1920; a dataset of the employment, location and patents of firms active in R&D since
1921; and a historical state-level corporate tax database since 1900, which we link to an existing
database on state-level personal income taxes. Our analysis focuses on the impact of taxes on
individual inventors and firms (the micro level) and on states over time (the macro level). We
propose several identification strategies, all of which yield consistent results: i) OLS with fixed
effects, including inventor and state-times-year fixed effects, which make use of differences
between tax brackets within a state-year cell and which absorb heterogeneity and
contemporaneous changes in economic conditions; ii) an instrumental variable approach, which
predicts changes in an individual or firm's total tax rate with changes in the federal tax rate only;
iii) event studies, synthetic cohort case studies, and a border county strategy, which exploits tax
variation across neighboring counties in different states. We find that taxes matter for innovation:
higher personal and corporate income taxes negatively affect the quantity and quality of inventive
activity and shift its location at the macro and micro levels. At the macro level, cross-state
spillovers or business-stealing from one state to another are important, but do not account for all
of the effect. Agglomeration effects from local innovation clusters tend to weaken responsiveness
to taxation. Corporate inventors respond more strongly to taxes than their non-corporate
counterparts.
Ufuk Akcigit Department
of Economics University
of Chicago 1126 East 59th
Street Saieh Hall, Office
403 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
John Grigsby
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1160 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
jgrigsby@uchicago.edu

Tom Nicholas
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
tnicholas@hbs.edu
Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232 Harvard
University Cambridge, MA
02138 and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu

“On the one hand, taxation is an essential attribute of commercial society... on the other hand, it
is almost inevitably ... an injury to the productive process.”
Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (1942), p. 198.

1

Introduction

Major reform to the U.S. tax code under the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act has renewed interest in
the long-standing question – do taxes affect innovation? If innovation is the result of intentional
effort and taxes reduce the expected net return from it, the answer to this question should be yes.
Yet, when we think of path-breaking superstar inventors from history such as Wallace Carothers
(DuPont), Edwin Land (Polaroid), or William Shockley (Bell Labs and Shockley Semiconductor)
we often imagine hard-working and driven scientists, who ignore financial incentives and merely
seek intellectual achievement. More generally, if taxes affect the amount of innovation, do they also
affect the quality of the innovations produced? Do they affect where inventors decide to locate and
what firms they work for? Do they affect where companies allocate R&D resources and how many
researchers they employ?
Answers to these questions, while crucial to a clearer understanding of one of the most vexing
current public policy issues, have remained elusive due to a paucity of empirical evidence. In fact, in
the absence of systematic data, ambivalence towards tax policy may stem from a reliance on isolated
cases or anecdotes to confirm or reject particular viewpoints. The gap in our knowledge is especially
large when trying to understand the impact of tax policy on technological development over the
long-run. Although the United States experienced major changes in its tax code throughout the
twentieth century, we currently do not know how these tax changes influenced innovation at either
the individual, corporate or state levels.
In this paper, we bridge the data gap and provide new evidence on the impact of taxation on
innovation. Our goal is to systematically analyze the effects of both personal and corporate income
taxation on inventors as well as on firms that do R&D over the 20th century. Lack of data has
precluded any prior analysis of these important effects.
Our analysis leverages three new datasets. First, we construct a panel dataset on inventors based
on digitized historical patent data since 1920. These panel data allows us to track inventors over
time and observe their innovations, citations, place of residence, technological fields, and the firm (if
any) to which they assigned their patents. Second, we build a dataset on firms’ R&D activities over
the twentieth century, specifically the number of laboratories operated and research employment.
These data were obtained from National Research Council (NRC) Surveys of Industrial Research
Laboratories of the United States (IRLUS) for the period 1921 to 1970. Third, we combine the
new inventor-level panel data and firm-level R&D data with a new dataset on historical state-level
corporate income taxes and a database on personal income tax rates.1 The corporate tax data were
1

Personal income taxes provided by Jon Bakija, who constructs a large scale tax calculator program to model

2

compiled from a range of handbooks and reference-works.
We provide a conceptual framework to help motivate our analysis and interpret the various
effects of taxes on innovation that we identify. This framework has the following intuition. Consider
an innovation production function in which the quantity and quality of innovation result from costly
investments in research expenses and effort. Inventors can work for firms or be self-employed.
Personal and corporate income taxes affect the net return to innovation. Since innovation inputs
are costly, they exhibit elasticities to net returns, the magnitudes of which will depend on the
market environment. If inventors work for firms, for example, their compensation derives from
surplus sharing with the firm.2 As a result, both firms and their inventors could be responsive to
both personal and corporate income taxes. These effects, in turn, may reflect a mix of extensive
margin responses (inventors or firms moving across states, individuals making occupational choices,
and entering or exiting the labor market) and intensive margin responses (inventors choosing how
hard to work on their research, companies choosing how many employees to hire).
Our empirical analysis starts at the macro, state-level, moves to event studies of large reforms
and some salient case studies, and then to the micro-level of individual firms and inventors.3 Using
the long-run historical data we implement several distinct and complementary strategies to identify
the impact of taxes on innovation. First, we control for a detailed set of fixed effects, including state,
year and, at the individual-level, inventor fixed effects, plus individual or state-level time-varying
controls. These help to absorb unobserved heterogeneity. In addition, we exploit within-state-year
tax differentials between individuals in different tax brackets (e.g., the top tax bracket versus the
median one) and thus also include state × year fixed effects. These controls filter out other policy
variations or the effect of contemporaneous economic circumstances in the state. Second, at the
macro and micro levels, we use an instrumental variable approach which predicts the total tax
burden facing a firm or inventor – which is a composite of state and federal taxes – with changes
in the federal tax rate only, holding state taxes fixed at some past level. This provides variation
driven only by federal level changes so is plausibly exogenous to any individual state’s economic
conditions. Third, we use a border county strategy, which exploits tax variation across neighboring
counties that lie in different states. It can be used as a standalone to identify the impact of taxes
on innovation or in combination with our IV approach. Finally, we provide evidence using episodes
of sharp tax changes in an event study design, as well as case studies using a synthetic control
analysis.
We begin by describing patterns in innovation and taxation over the 20th century. We focus
on key facts in relation to inventors, making use of the new panel data to show where inventors
located over time, where firms’ R&D labs were placed, and trends exhibited by the time series of
patents, citations, and research lab employment. We then document central patterns in taxation on
federal and state personal income taxes from 1900 through 2016 (Bakija, 2017).
2
For empirical evidence on the surplus sharing between firms, entrepreneurs, workers and inventors see Aghion
et al. (2018) and Kline et al. (2017).
3
It is worth noting that we are interested in the effects of general taxation, i.e., corporate and personal income
taxation, not specifically in innovation focused policies such as R&D tax credits, although we do control for those.

3

personal and corporate income over the 20th century, focusing specifically on our newly constructed
corporate tax database.
Next we turn to macro state-level results. We use OLS to study the baseline relationship
between taxes and innovation, exploiting within-state tax changes over time, our instrumental
variable approach and the border county design. On the personal income tax side, we consider
average and marginal tax rates, both for the median income level and for top earners. Our corporate
tax measure is the top corporate tax rate. We find that personal and corporate income taxes have
significant effects at the state level on patents, citations (which are a well-established marker of the
quality of patents), inventors in the state, and the share of patents produced by firms as opposed
to individuals. We show that these effects cannot be fully accounted for by inventors moving across
state lines and therefore do not merely reflect “zero-sum” business-stealing of one state from other
states. Our instrumental variable estimation results and the border county strategy confirm the
OLS fixed effects findings.
We then turn to the micro-level, i.e., individual firms and inventors. In addition to many
detailed inventor-level (fixed and time-varying) controls, we are able to include state × year fixed
effects to control for other possible policies that may have occurred simultaneously with tax changes.
Hence, we exploit within state-year variation. We make use of the fact that inventors of different
productivities have different incomes and will therefore be subject to different tax brackets. We
also implement our aforementioned instrumental variable approach at the individual-level. Again,
we find that taxes have significant negative effects on the quantity and quality (as measured by
citations) of patents produced by inventors, including on the likelihood of producing a highly
successful patent (which gathers many citations). At the individual inventor level, the elasticity of
patents to the personal income tax is 0.6-0.7, and the elasticity of citations is 0.8-0.9.
Furthermore, we show that individual inventors are negatively affected by the corporate tax
rate, but less so than by personal income taxes. Corporate inventors are much more elastic to
personal and corporate income taxes than non-corporate inventors (individual “garage” inventors
operating outside the boundaries of firms), and are especially strongly elastic to the corporate tax
rate. We also show that an inventor is less sensitive to taxes when there is more agglomeration – i.e.,
more inventors in the same technological field in the state. At the individual firm-level, we find that
corporate taxes – and to a lesser extent, personal income taxes – have significant negative effects
on the level of patents, citations, and research workers employed in corporate R&D laboratories.
Finally, we estimate a location choice model, in which inventors can choose in which state to
reside, trading off state characteristics against the effective tax rate in each state, conditional on
state × year fixed effects. We find that inventors are significantly less likely to locate in states with
higher taxes. The elasticity to the net-of-tax rate of the number of inventors residing in a state is
0.11 for inventors who are from that state and 1.23 for inventors not from that state. Inventors
who work for companies are particularly elastic to taxes. Agglomeration effects appear to matter
for location as well: inventors are less sensitive to taxation in a potential destination state when
there is already more innovation in that state in their particular field of inventive activity. This
4

is also true if an inventor’s employer already has a record of innovation activity in that state. We
confirm that firms are responsive to corporate taxes when choosing where to locate by estimating
a location choice model at the individual R&D lab level.
Our main findings can therefore be summarized as follows. Taxation – in the form of both
personal income taxes and corporate income taxes – matters for innovation along the intensive and
extensive margins, and both at the micro and macro levels. Taxes affect the amount of innovation,
the quality of innovation, and the location of inventive activity. The effects are economically large
especially at the macro state-level, where cross-state spillovers and extensive margin location and
entry decisions compound the micro, individual-level elasticities. Not all the effects of taxes at the
macro-level are accounted for by cross-state business stealing or spillovers. Corporate inventors are
most sensitive to taxation; and positive agglomeration effects play an important role, perhaps in
offering a type of compensating differential for taxation.
As a final note, while our analysis focuses on the relationship between taxation and innovation,
our data and approach have much broader implications. We find that taxes have important effects
on intensive and extensive margin decisions, on the mobility of people and where inventors and
firms choose to locate. Any rigorous analysis of these kinds of effects – on any type of agents, not
just inventors – has been impossible due to a lack of long-run data.4 Our new inventor panel data,
which stretches back to the early twentieth century allows us to uniquely track individuals each
year. To the extent that innovation is the outcome of investment and effort, just like a range of
other important pursuits such as entrepreneurship, the magnitudes of the elasticities to taxation
we find at the micro and macro levels on the extensive and intensive margins can help us bound
the effects on other types of economic activities and agents.

1.1

Related Literature

A key advantage of our new historical datasets is that they provide an opportunity to analyze a
series of variations in taxes over time and states and to study the effects of taxation systematically.
In that sense, our work is related to the recent public economics literature endeavoring to build
detailed long-run datasets of important economic outcomes, such as Piketty and Zucman (2014)
and Saez and Zucman (2015) on wealth in the United States and other countries, and Smith, Yagan,
Zidar, and Zwick (2017) and Cooper et al. (2016) on who owns wealth and businesses.
Our work contributes to the abundant and growing literature on the empirical effects of personal
taxes – on income or wealth – using data from recent time periods. Often, the focus of this research
is on the taxable income elasticity (Gruber and Saez, 2002; Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz, 2012), but
many specific and varied margins have been shown to be affected by taxation. These include work
contracts set by companies (Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri, 2011), the self-employed’s
4

Butters and Lintner (1945) conducted an influential analysis of the impact of federal individual and corporate
taxes on the growth of small and large firms during the 1930s and early 1940s finding the effects were largely negative,
especially the impact of corporate tax on the growth rate of larger firms. However, their evidence was based on only
five firm-level case histories and they did not explicitly address the relationship between taxation and innovation.

5

reported income (Kleven and Waseem, 2013; Saez, 2010), rent-seeking (Piketty et al., 2014), or
charitable contributions (Fack and Landais, 2010). Cullen and Gordon (2006, 2007) study the
effect of personal income taxes taxes and their progressivity on startup activity and risk-taking by
entrepreneurs. At the macro level, Zidar (2017) studies how tax changes for different income groups
affect aggregate economic activity, finding that employment growth is mostly caused by tax cuts
for lower-income groups, but that the impact of tax cuts for the top 10% on employment growth
is much smaller. Kleven, Jakobsen, Jakobsen, and Zucman (2018) undertake a rare study of the
effects of wealth taxes on wealth accumulation given that such data are difficult to find.
On the corporate tax side, several empirical studies examine the impact (or absence thereof)
of dividend tax cuts (Yagan, 2015; Chetty and Saez, 2005). Attention has focused on the effects of
corporate and personal income taxes on the shifting behavior and evasion (Gordon and Slemrod,
2000; Slemrod, 2007) by firms and individuals. Slemrod and Shobe (1989) consider the elasticity of
capital gains realizations while Poterba (1989) investigates the relationship between capital gains
taxation, U.S. venture capital activity and entrepreneurship. Mahon and Zwick (2017) study the
heterogeneous effects of taxes on investment behavior by firms. Auerbach, Hines, and Slemrod
(2007) provide an analysis of, and recommendations for, corporate taxation in the U.S..
Our work is also related to a number of studies using data from recent time periods to analyze
the effects of state-level business and corporate taxation. Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) study
the incidence of state corporate tax changes on firm owners, workers, and landowners using a
spatial equilibrium model and find that each of these groups bears, respectively, 40, 30-35, and
25-30 percent of the burden. Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suárez Serrato, and Zidar (2016) study the
misallocation costs of state-level taxation and find large welfare gains from eliminating spatial
dispersion in taxes. Giroud and Rauh (2017) use establishment-level data to estimate the effects
of state taxes on business activity (employment and the number of establishments).
Since we study the location choices of inventors and firms across states in response to taxation,
our paper contributes to a recent literature studying migration decisions. Kleven, Landais, Saez,
and Schultz (2014) find very high elasticities of the number of high income foreigners in Denmark
using a preferential tax scheme implemented by Denmark in 1992 that reduced top tax rates for 3
years.5 Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) study the migration of football players across European
clubs. Most closely related, Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva (2016) study the international
mobility of top inventors in response to top tax rates since the 1970s and find significant, but small
elasticities. Bakija and Slemrod (2004) use Federal Estate Tax returns to show that higher state
taxes on wealthy individuals only narrowly impacts migration across U.S. states.6 Moretti and
Wilson (2014) and Moretti and Wilson (2017) study the effects of state taxes on the migration of
star scientists across U.S. states and also find highly significant effects of taxes on migration.
5
By contrast, Young and Varner (2011) study the effects of a change in the millionaire tax rate in New Jersey
on migration and find small elasticities. Young et al. (2016) consider the migration of millionaires in the U.S. using
administrative data.
6
Liebig, Puhani, and Sousa-Poza (2007) study mobility within Switzerland, across cantons and find small sensitivities to tax rates.

6

Turning to the innovation literature, in endogenous growth models (Romer, 1990; Aghion and
Howitt, 1992; Akcigit, 2017; Aghion et al., 2014) innovation is the central engine of growth. How
innovation is affected by taxation is a key question because of the many positive social spillovers
that innovation induces (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 2005). In a new line of work, Jones (2018)
theoretically and quantitatively studies how to tax top incomes in a world of innovation and positive
externalities from ideas. The elasticities derived in our paper can help calibrate the optimal tax
formulas in his paper.
A related strand of this literature studies the effects of policies like R&D tax credits on innovation. Bloom et al. (2002); Bloom and Griffith (2001) find a positive impact of these incentives on
the level of R&D intensity over both short and longer time horizons. On the other hand Goolsbee
(2003) and Goolsbee (1998) argue that R&D tax credits mostly push up workers’ wages. Using
a regression discontinuity design based around firm size cutoffs for R&D tax subsidies in the UK,
Dechezleprêtre et al. (2016) find significant effects of subsidies on both R&D spending and patenting. Some research has been undertaken on the recent issue of patent boxes, whereby intellectual
property is moved to corporate tax havens (Griffith et al., 2014; Alstadsæter et al., 2018).
Finally, our work is related to numerous papers studying the origins of innovation at the microlevel. Recent contributions include Jones (2010) and Jones and Weinberg (2011), which show
the effect of inventor age, Jones et al. (2008), which focuses on collaborations of inventors across
universities, Wuchty, Jones, and Uzzi (2007), which considers the role of team production, and
Jones (2009) on the growing trend towards specialization. Aghion et al. (2017) study the social
origins and IQ of inventors in Finland. Bell et al. (2017) and Akcigit et al. (2017) study the
parental backgrounds of inventors in the U.S. on, respectively, modern data and historical data.
Our data allows us to extend this literature by considering the impact of taxation over a long time
period for a multitude of innovation outcomes (quantity, quality, and location) that arise from both
inventor-level and firm-level behavior.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the source datasets and
our data construction. In Section 3, we document historical patterns of innovation and taxation
over the 20th century. Section 4 presents our conceptual framework underlying the relationship
between taxation and innovation. Section 5 explains our macro state-level estimation strategies
and presents our results. Section 6 explains the identification strategies at the individual firm and
inventor levels and discusses our micro-level findings. Section 7 concludes with some thoughts about
the implications of our results and future research avenues.

2

Data Sources and Construction

In this section, we describe the sources for and the construction of our three new datasets. All the
variables constructed from the raw data and used in the figures and tables are defined sequentially
throughout the text. Appendix A.1 provides the definitions of all the variables used in full.
7

2.1

Historical Patent Data and Inventor Panel Data

The starting point of our inventor panel data are the digitized patent records since 1836 detailed
in Akcigit, Grigsby, and Nicholas (2017) (hereafter, AGN). These data contain information on
almost every patent granted by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) since
1836, including the home address of the first named inventor on each patent, the application
year, and the patent’s technology class. Since 1920, the data additionally contain the name of
every inventor listed on the patent document, and the entity to which the patent was assigned, if
applicable. Furthermore, using information on the inventors’ name and location, AGN match these
patent records to decennial federal censuses, which provide additional demographic information on
inventors, and, crucially, their income levels in 1940. Throughout our analysis, we use a patent’s
application year rather than its year of eventual grant as this is the date closest to the actual
creation of the innovation.
The major contribution of the current paper relative to AGN is to transform these patent data
into an inventor-level panel dataset. To do so, we disambiguate the data using the machine learning
algorithm of Lai et al. (2014). The challenge of disambiguating inventor records – determining if two
inventors named “John Smith” are the same or not, for instance – may be expressed as a clustering
problem. Given a set of patent records, the researcher must ascribe some probability that the two
records originate from the same inventor. To do so, we use information on the inventor’s name and
location, as well as the patent’s technology class, set of coauthors on the patent, and assignee. It is
very likely that two records that share the same inventor name, technology class, and location were
originated by one inventor. However, it is less likely that two inventors, both named John Smith,
were the same individual if one built computer chips for IBM in New York and the other created
new packaging for Kraft foods in Illinois.
The full algorithm is described in Online Appendix OA.1. Table A1 summarizes the results
of our disambiguation algorithm and compares them with those of Lai et al. (2014). Our disambiguation algorithm produces 4.9 million unique inventors, in our dataset of 6.4 million patents.
Considering only patents granted to inventors based in the U.S., we observe 2.7 million inventors on
4.2 million patents. Finally, restricting attention to U.S. inventors in our principal sample period
of 1940 to 2000, we see 1.95 million inventors and 2.8 million patents.
We supplement these patent microdata with the full matrix of patent citations from 1947
through 2010, which we use to construct a measure of patent quality. Due to well-known challenges
in interpreting raw citation counts as patent quality, we adjust patents’ citation counts following
the quasi-structural procedure laid out in Hall et al. (2001). In brief, this approach assumes that
i) the shape of the citation lag function is independent of the patent’s total quality, and ii) this
lag function is stationary over time. Under these assumptions, one may adjust raw citation counts
so that the mean adjusted citation count is constant over time by estimating a simple log-linear
regression. Citations received from patents granted in periods with a lower-than-average citation
propensity will be over-weighted in the adjustment, as will the citation counts of patents granted
8

at the beginning and end of the period, which particularly suffer from the truncation of our sample
at 2010.7

2.2

R&D Lab Data

Our second new dataset consists of information on the R&D activities of firms in the U.S. since
1921 based on National Research Council (NRC) Surveys of Industrial Research Laboratories of the
United States (IRLUS). This is an extensive and well-documented source of R&D data covering
private and publicly-traded firms. For example, Mowery and Rosenberg (1989) wrote about the
rise of U.S. R&D based on the early surveys. Our contribution is to utilize information from all
the surveys. We hand-entered data on all firms included from the 1921, 1927, 1931, 1933, 1938,
1940, 1946, 1950, 1956, 1960, 1965 and 1970 IRLUS volumes.
The NRC was established in 1916 to advise the government on science and technology. Government officials wanted to know where laboratories and scientists were located during the First
World War, and R&D became a topic of policy interest due to the rise of in-house R&D during the
1920s. This momentum to collect data carried on for most of the twentieth century. To collect this
data, the NRC undertook direct correspondence surveys with firms and sent firms questionnaires.
The resulting IRLUS volumes contain the firm-level summary data responses. Figure 1 shows an
example entry about the Polaroid Corp. – the innovative Massachusetts-based instant photography
firm – and the type of information one can read in each record.
Our R&D data contains several research input-based measures: the total number of research
workers employed at each firm and the number and location of R&D labs for each firm. The data are
mostly at the firm-level, with limited breakdowns of aggregates at the establishment-level. There
are no innovation output-based measures per se in the IRLUS surveys. To obtain such outputbased measures, we hand-linked R&D firms listed in the IRLUS volumes to assignees in U.S. patent
records. The resulting dataset is analogous to the link between the NBER patent database and
firms in the Business Register of the Census Bureau for the post-1975 years. It thus provides a
valuable historical, long-run counterpart.

2.3

Historical Tax Data

Personal Income Tax Database. We use personal income taxes at both the state and federal
level provided by Jon Bakija. These data contain the statutory marginal tax rates and brackets
for each state from 1900 through 2014. The data on federal taxes come from the IRS Statistics
of Income Individual Income Tax Returns publication, while state tax data were collected from a
mix of state income tax forms, and state tax laws from the state’s “annotated statutes,” sourced
from the Lexis-Nexis legal research database, and the law libraries at Georgetown and Cornell
7
See Akcigit et al. (2017) Appendix B.1 for a detailed description of the adjustment procedure for our historical
data. Alternative specifications of the citation lag function did not qualitatively change our results.

9

Figure 1: Example entry from the IRLUS publications

Notes: The image shows an example entry from the NRC’s publications “Industrial Research Laboratories of the
United States.” The data was hand-entered based on such entries for all the years available: 1921, 1927, 1931, 1933,
1938, 1940, 1946, 1950, 1956, 1960, 1965 and 1970.

Universities. Bakija (2017) details the full set of tax rate sources, and attempts to verify their
veracity. We also make use of the tax calculator program provided by Bakija (2017), which models
the personal income taxes faced by individuals with income y in state s in year t, after incorporating
federal tax deductibility, and other considerations.
Corporate Income Tax Database. The third new dataset used in this project consists of
a state-level historical corporate income tax database covering approximately the period 19002016. Historically, many states had indirect corporate taxes, such as franchise taxes, imposed on
corporations for the privilege of doing business in a state. In several states, statutes make direct
taxes unconstitutional and franchise taxes get around this problem. Some states have one or the
other, sometimes both, but companies only pay one.
Types of franchise taxes include taxes on net income (which are extremely similar to corporate
income taxes and which we consider as such), Business enterprise tax (in New Hampshire), Gross
receipts tax or commercial activity tax (which is the gross receipts tax in Ohio), Business and
occupation tax (West Virginia, Washington, or Ohio, sometimes different for different industries),
net worth/capital stock/asset value/shareholder equity combination taxes, or a value-added tax
(Michigan’s single business tax which is a franchise tax, not a sales tax). Over time, the share of
states with direct corporate income taxes rather than indirect taxes has increased (see Figure A7
which will be discussed in more detail below).
We collect all corporate income tax rates (brackets and rates, if applicable), net income franchise
taxes when applicable (since they are very similar to corporate income taxes), as well as any
10

temporary surtaxes and surcharges levied on net income. In addition, we have information on
whether a state adopts the same tax base as the federal government for the corporate tax and
whether federal corporate income taxes are state deductible. There are differences in the taxable
base across states which are almost impossible to capture in a tractable way for the empirical
analysis. We instead test that our results are all robust to excluding the set of large states which
have a taxable income base that is too different, namely, Michigan, Texas and Ohio. All our results
excluding these states are available on demand.
The corporate tax data is collected from a multitude of sources, including detailed State Tax
Handbooks and Legal Statutes. For example, we use HeinOnline Session Laws, HeinOnline State
Statutes, ProQuest Congressional, Commerce Clearing House (State Tax Handbooks, State Tax
Review), State Tax reports, Willis Report, Council of State Governments Book of States, and
National Tax Association Proceedings. These sources are described in greater detail in Online
Appendix OA.3.

3

Innovation and Taxation: Measurement and Descriptive Statistics

3.1

Inventors

Table 1 provides some key summary statistics about inventors. The average inventor appears in
the patent data for 3 (not necessarily consecutive) years, but a top 5% inventor remains for 14
years and a top 1% inventor for 31 years. On average, inventors remain in the same state, but the
most mobile inventors appear in 3 states over their careers. The number of patents per inventor is
also highly skewed, ranging from 2.55 patents for the average inventor to 26 patents for a top 1%
inventor. Even more concentrated are citations, an often-used marker of quality of an innovation
(Hall et al., 2001; Trajtenberg, 1990). The total citations of a patent are all the citations ever
received by this patent, subject to the adjustment described in Section 2. The average inventor
receives 83.42 citations for his patents, but a top 1% inventor receives 1189.25 over the course of
his career, and gets up to 329 citations per year. Inventors also frequently work in multiple fields:
the average inventor has patents in close to 2 USPTO technology classes and a top 1% inventor in
14 classes.8
Figure 2 shows the geography of innovation since 1940, by depicting patents per 10,000 residents
at the state level for each decade (Appendix Figure A1 shows inventors per 10,000 residents). In all
our analysis, the year t of a patent will be counted as the application date. This ensures a shorter
time interval between a tax change and an innovation outcome and is most indicative of when an
innovation was actually created, as opposed to granted. The North East Coast, the Chicago area
8

The United States Patent Classification (USPC) system is maintained primarily to facilitate the rapid retrieval
of every patent filed in the United States. The principal approach to classification employed today classifies patents
based on the art’s “proximate function.” Patent classes may be retroactively updated as new technologies arise. We
use the 2006 classification throughout this paper.

11

and California appear as major hubs early on. Patents per capita do not increase monotonically
through time, and the 1970s recession can be observed here. In the 1990s and 2000s there is a large
increase in patents per capita everywhere and an expansion of innovation regions.
Figure 3 shows the share of corporate inventors and patents over time. Corporate patents are
those patents assigned to corporations. Corporate inventors are defined here as inventors who have
at least one corporate patent in their career. Both shares have fluctuated, but increased significantly
over time.

3.2

R&D Labs

Figure 4 shows maps of the location of R&D labs for each of the IRLUS survey years. R&D labs
in 1921 were few and almost exclusively located on the East Coast and in the Midwest. Over
time, labs spread West to populate parts of the Midwest and clusters of labs appear in California,
specifically Los Angeles and San Francisco. As labs became more numerous, several hubs appeared
in places like Pittsburgh, Cleveland and Detroit, and more generally the northeastern part of the
country where the U.S. “manufacturing belt” emerged (Krugman, 1991).
Overall, the 1930s witnessed one of the most innovative decades in American history, despite
the Great Depression (Field, 2003), while innovation in areas like radar detection and aviation was
spurred by the potentially transformative effects of heightened R&D investment during the Second
World War (Gordon, 2016). These changes are consistent with the historical context. Griliches
(1986) notes that corporate R&D activity peaked during the late 1960s, with R&D expenditures
relative to sales falling by about 38% between 1968 and 1979. From late 1969 through much of the
mid-1970s the United States experienced one of the most significant recessions in its history. In
the Appendix, Figure A2 shows some further trends in R&D labs’ operations over time, such as
the number of labs and patents, citations, and researchers per lab.
On the firm side, the share of firms with R&D labs which have at least one patent in a given
year is 22%. The median firm-year has 3 patents, conditional on having any, and the mean is 10.3.
The distribution is right-skewed with 1% of firm-years having more than 20 patents.9

3.3

Personal Income Taxes

We now turn to describing some key facts about personal and corporate income taxes over the 20th
century. Because the corporate income tax database is newly collected and crucial to the analysis,
we devote some extra space to discuss corporate tax patterns. This multitude of tax variations at
the state level is leveraged in our empirical analysis.
The number of states with a personal income tax increases sharply between 1920 and 1940,
stagnates until the 1970s, during which time a number of additional states adopted a personal
income tax, before the number flattens out towards the end of the time period. The first year
9
Figure A3 depicts additional detailed statistics about the innovation behavior of firms; we summarize the main
findings here.

12

of introduction is not necessarily reflective of the relevance of taxation for most, or even many,
individuals in the state.10 State taxes initially mostly applied to top earners. For this reason our
analysis will focus mostly on the post-1940 period.
Many states have progressive tax systems, even though they are typically much less progressive
than the Federal system. States with progressive taxes are California, New York, and New Jersey.
Some states instead have flat taxes, e.g., Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Illinois.
Construction of the Tax Measures. At the state level, there have not only been many personal
tax rate changes, but also many frequent tax bracket changes. Because of these frequent changes
in the tax brackets, for our macro analysis, we compute the total effective tax rates, combining
state plus federal liabilities that apply to a single person who is at i) the median income and ii)
the 90th percentile income of the national income distribution. Our tax measures, which focus on
the tax liability at a given (relative) point in the income distribution, take into account changes in
the tax brackets and thus measure the total impact on individuals at different parts of the income
distribution.11 We use Jon Bakija’s calculator, which takes into account special rules and deductions
and refer the reader to Bakija (2017) for more details. We compute the following marginal and
average tax rates, used throughout:
(i) the 90th percentile income MTR, (denoted by MTR90 for conciseness).
(ii) the 90th percentile income ATR, (denoted by ATR90)
(iii) the median income MTR, (denoted by MTR50)
(iv) the median income ATR, (denoted by ATR50).
We explain how we assign tax rates to each individual inventor in Section 6. Figure 6 shows the
evolution of the marginal tax rate at the median income level decade-by-decade and Figure 7 shows
the evolution of the marginal tax rate at the 90th income percentile. State tax rates have followed
very different trajectories – and have often also evolved differently from the federal tax rate.12
Key Tax Variation. Our empirical analysis makes use of the multitude of personal and corporate
income tax changes that have happened since 1940. Figure 5 depicts the percent of states with
a change in their statutory state-level taxes, the mean size of the change, and the magnitude of
the top 10th largest change for each year. Panel A considers the personal income tax. The share
of states changing their tax rate in any given year (depicted on the left vertical axis) oscillates
between 12-20% in the pre-1970s period and between 15 and 25% or even up to 40% in the post
1970s period. The average tax change size fluctuates around 3-4 percentage points. The top 10%
tax change varies dramatically from year to year, reaching levels as high as 17 percentage points.
10

For the interested reader, we report these trends in personal tax rates in Appendix Figures A4 and A5
The innovation measures are also sensitive to using statutory rates, but the interpretation of the elasticities is
much less clear given the frequent bracket changes.
12
To provide some more detail, Figure A6 illustrates the evolution of the top tax rate and the tax rate at the median
income for a few highly inventive states, namely, California, Illinois, New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania.
11

13

3.4

Corporate Income Taxes

Our measure of state-level firm taxation will be the top corporate marginal tax rate because, unlike
personal income tax schedules, the state-levels corporate tax schedules most often simply have
a (relatively low) threshold of exemption below which the tax rate is zero and above which the
top corporate tax rate applies. Any non-small firm would be subject to the top tax rate and the
majority of innovative activity happens at large firms. Small highly innovative firms may not be
directly subject to the top tax rate; however if they are successful and forward-looking, they will be
subject to the top corporate tax rate given that the thresholds are low enough. If small innovating
firms are not forward looking at all, we would expect this to dampen our estimated elasticities to
the corporate tax. In our regression analysis, we compute the total tax rate, taking into account
the top federal corporate tax rate and state and federal tax deductibility rules.
Figure 8 shows the year in which corporate taxes were first introduced at the state level. Early
adopters were Hawaii (1902), Wisconsin (1913), West Virginia, Virginia, and Connecticut (1915),
as well as Montana and Missouri (1917). The latest adopters were Nevada and Michigan (1968),
Maine and Illinois (1969), New Hampshire (1970) and Ohio and Florida (1972).
Figure 9 shows the evolution of the top corporate tax rates in all states, decade by decade. A
few key facts stand out. The number of states with a corporate tax increases sharply and then
flattens completely after 1972. The mean non-zero state tax increases from around 3.5% in 1920
to close to 8% in the 1990s, and has declined slightly to above 7% since then. The top 10% states
ranked according to corporate tax levels each year saw their corporate tax rise from 2% in 1920 to
around 10% today. The lowest 25% states never had a tax rate above 4%. The median state had
a non-zero corporate tax only since the late 1930s and it hovers around 6% today.13 States have
had very different experiences with corporate taxes, which is an advantage for our analysis. For
instance, California and New York were one of the relatively early adopters of a corporate tax and
have followed similar patterns, with tax rates rising continuously before 1980, and experiencing
stagnating levels thereafter. New Jersey was one of the late adopters but quickly brought its tax
rate up to the same level as California and New York. Illinois also adopted a corporate tax quite
late and kept it at a low and stable rate of close to 5% over time.
Panel B of Figure 5 depicts the percent of states with a change in their top corporate tax rate,
the mean size of the change, and the magnitude of the top 10th largest change for each year. On
average, one out of every 6 or 7 states faces a change in the corporate tax in any given year; that
share was much higher at one out of five in the 1970s and 80s. The mean tax change fluctuates
around 1.5-2 percentage points, and the largest top 10% tax changes reach up to 6 percentage
points.
Apportionment Rules. We briefly discuss apportionment rules for multi-state firms and how
they affect our results. Before the Uniform Division of Income for Tax Purposes Act (UDITPA)
13
The patterns summarized here, as well as the evolution of top corporate tax rates in a few select states, are also
available in detail for the interested reader in Appendix Figure A7.

14

in 1957, different states had different ways of dealing with the taxation of multi-state companies.
Although not all states adopted it, the UDITPA made these apportionment and allocation rules
of the business income of multi-state companies more uniform, with a three-factor formula based
on equal weights to the shares of a corporation’s payroll, property, and sales in the state. In the
past twenty years, the weight on sales has started to increase, which should arguably decrease
the importance for a company of corporate income tax in states in which it has property and
employment (but a low share of its sales).
In our sample only around 6.5% of firms have an R&D lab in more than one state at a given
time; nevertheless firms may have tax nexus in other states even if they do not have R&D labs
there. We do not have information on the three factors entering the apportionment formulas for
the firms in our sample. Thus, we simply use the corporate income tax prevailing in the state
where the firm has its R&D lab, and, for the few firms with R&D labs in multiple states, we use
the average corporate tax weighted by the share of labs in that state.
The estimated effect in our regressions is likely to be a lower bound of the true effect of corporate
taxes because the measure of the corporate tax we use is exactly equal to the true tax rate facing
single-state firms (i.e., firms which have tax nexus only in one state), and positively correlated with,
but not exactly equal to the true tax rate facing multi-state firms. At one end of the spectrum,
if all the apportionment weight was on the sales factor, and no sales happened in the state where
the R&D labs are located, we should estimate a zero effect of corporate income taxes in that state.
At the opposite end, if firms have a nexus only in the state where their R&D lab is located, the
corporate tax of that state is the one that matters.14 In between, the higher the share of the firm’s
sales, property, and employment in the state where its R&D lab is located, the closer the estimated
effect of the corporate income tax should be to the true effect.
Other taxes: Discussion. Although not the focus of our paper, which concentrates on corporate
and personal income taxation, alternative methods of taxation exist as potential confounding factors, which may pollute our estimates if they are not adequately taken into account. Therefore, it
is worth considering how these alternative taxes may impact our proposed identification strategies.
Ordinary, non long-term capital gains are taxed as ordinary income and so are accounted for by our
personal income tax measures. Long-term capital gains are taxed at a reduced form at the Federal
level, which is captured by year fixed effects. In a few instances, states have special treatments
of long-term capital gains, which is captured by our state × year fixed effects.15 Dividends are
typically taxed as ordinary income at the Federal level and in most states; they are thus again
captured by our personal income tax measures. States’ sales taxes are absorbed by our state ×
year fixed effects. In addition, our instrumental variable strategy results are robust to omitted
variables, not only taxes, and, as we will show below, yields very consistent results. We always
control for state-level R&D tax credits.
14
15

Of course, when it comes to location decisions, as we will explore in Section 6, the tax rates of all states matter.
In any case, it is also not evident that the long-term capital gains rate is more relevant than the short-term one.

15

4

Conceptual Framework: Effects of Taxes on Innovation

What are the possible channels through which the taxation of personal and corporate income can
affect innovation by firms and individual inventors? We provide a very simple illustrative toy model.
A Toy Model of Innovation. Suppose that inventor i has decided to live in state s with personal
income tax rate τsyi and corporate tax rate τsc . y indexes personal income taxes; c indexes corporate
taxes.16 The inventor needs to choose how much effort ei to exert and how many resources ri (i.e.,
material innovation inputs, such as R&D expenses, lab space, machinery and equipment, etc.) to
devote to innovation. Effort has a disutility cost hi (ei ) and resources cost m(ri ). Inventors can
patent on their own, or can be employed by companies. If the innovation is developed within a
firm j, the firm also provides innovation inputs, denoted by Rj . In addition, each state has an
innovation infrastructure and economic policy framework, denoted by Xs which can improve the
productivity of the private inputs to innovation and/or shift the profits obtained from them.
The quantity k and quality q of the innovation produced depend positively on effort and resources invested by the inventor, as well as by the firm (if the inventor is employed), and on the
state’s innovation policies and resources, with:
ki = k(ei , ri , Rj , Xs )

qi = qi (ei , ri , Rj , Xs )

(1)

If an inventor is self-employed, his innovation does not depend on the firm inputs Rj .
Inventors receive a private benefit bi from innovating, due to the “warm-glow” of being successful, or from a “love for science.” bi is itself an increasing function of the quality and quantity of
innovation produced, with bi = bi (ki , qi ). Let gi be the weight that inventor i puts on his private
benefit and (1 − gi ) the weight on the financial returns from an innovation.
A self-employed inventor can sell his innovation to a producer (e.g., a firm) or can himself start
producing a new marketable item based on it. His payoff depends on his innovation quality and the
policies and market structure in the state (including the intellectual property protection), which
we denote π(ki , qi , Xs ). The inventor can incorporate as a firm or remain self-employed, which
means that the innovation can possibly be taxed in different tax bases. To allow for all possible
combinations, suppose that, in the case of inventor i, a share βic of that surplus is taxed in the
corporate tax base (if the inventor incorporates) and a share 1 − βic is taxed in the personal tax
base (if the inventor keeps being self-employed). Note that the share of the payoff that accrues to
the personal vs. corporate income base could also be endogenized in response to taxes to capture,
among others, income shifting responses.
The self-employed inventor’s total payoff is then:17
16

The location itself is of course an endogenous choice.
For the exposition, R&D costs are not deductible. We discuss below that the larger the share of costs that is tax
deductible for firms and inventors, the smaller the empirical tax response of innovation will be.
17

16




VisSE = max (1 − gi ) 1 − (1 − βic )τsyi − βic τsc π(ki , qi , Xs ) + gi bi (ki , qi ) − hi (ei ) − m(ri )
ei ,ri

where ki and qi are functions of effort and resources as given by (1).
Inventors can also choose to be employed by firms. In the labor market of each state, firms open
one or several vacancies at a cost γj per vacancy for firm j, and inventors are matched to firms
to fill each of these vacancies. Jointly, inventors and firms produce a gross-of-tax surplus V (q, k)
that depends positively on the innovation quantity and quality produced by the match. Aghion
et al. (2018) and Kline et al. (2017) offer recent evidence on how the surplus from innovation is
shared between inventors, entrepreneurs/firms, and blue and white-collar workers. The surplus
c . The firm pays resource costs M (R ) to invest
thus produced is first taxed at the corporate tax τst
j
j

in innovation. Imagine there is Nash bargaining between the firm and each worker with bargaining
weight α of the worker. Then the wage paid to the worker with outside option (from being a
self-employed inventor) ViSE is:


c
wi (q, k; ViSE ) = ViSE + α (1 − τst
)V (q, k) − Mj (Rj ) − hi (ei ) − m(ri ) − ViSE − γ j
and the firm’s payoff Wij from being matched to inventor i is:


c
Wij = max (1 − α) · (1 − τst
)V (q, k) − Mj (Rj ) − hi (ei ) − m(ri ) − ViSE − γ j
Rj

The value of an employed worker is:

VisE = max (1 − gi )(1 − τsyi )wi (qi , ki ; ViSE ) + gi bi (ki , qi )
ei ,ri

The inventor will choose to be self-employed if and only if VisSE ≥ VisE .
Response Margins to Taxation: Personal and corporate income taxes enter the payoffs of both
firms and inventors. Inventors and firms can respond to these taxes along the following margins:
(1) Innovation input choices: effort ei and resources ri in the case of inventors; material inputs
Rj and research employment for firms. Choices occur on the intensive and extensive margins.
(2) Occupational choices for inventors, i.e., whether to be self-employed or employed, or, more
broadly, whether to engage in innovation at all.
(3) Tax base choices, i.e., whether to incorporate or to sell the innovation, reflected in βic .
(4) Research employment, i.e., the number of vacancies to open.
(5) Location choice of both firms and inventors: the choice of the state s where to locate.
Effects of Taxes: Discussion. We can hypothesize the following effects of taxes:
(i) Personal and corporate income taxes can affect both firms and inventors, due to surplus
sharing and the possibility to shift the payoff from an innovation to either tax base.
17

(ii) Responses of innovation to taxation are shaped by technological parameters, such as the
elasticities of innovation quality and quantity to effort and resource costs by agents and firms.
For instance, it may be that quantity is very sensitive to inputs, but that quality is not. Does
one just “stumble” upon high-quality innovations or do they require consistent, intentional inputs?
Uncertainty in the returns to innovation can also affect the strength of these responses in the case
of risk-averse agents, as it can for other types of investments.
(iii) The elasticity to taxation depends on the extent to which innovation requires intentionally
directed inputs and how sensitive those inputs are to net returns. If ideas happen without any willful
input (such as for Newton sitting under a tree and discovering gravity from an apple falling), or
the inputs required to produce them are completely inelastic to net returns (as the stereotype of
the “mad and passionate scientist” would predict), then the elasticity of innovation to taxes would
be zero. If, to the contrary, innovation requires intentionally directed inputs and those inputs are
sensitive to net returns, we would expect stronger responses of innovation to taxes. The strength
of the response will also depend on how strongly innovators value the private warm-glow effect
relative to financial returns. Firms’ and inventors’ responses will be less pronounced the more
research inputs are tax deductible.18
(iv) Corporate and non-corporate inventors may exhibit different responses given their differential exposures to corporate and personal tax rates, as well as their motives for innovating and
their weight on private benefits vs. financial returns.19
(v) When it comes to location choices, inventors may choose to trade-off a higher tax in favor
of other factors – for instance they may prefer to remain in a place with more inventors in general,
or more inventors in one’s own technology field to benefit from the associated amenities. Such
“agglomeration” effects may enter the production function directly through Xs and improve the
productivity of any given innovation input. We will study how our tax elasticity estimates vary
with “agglomeration.”
Dynamic Effects. Although this simple framework is static, the effects of taxes on innovation
can be dynamic. First, there may be a lag between changes in taxes and changes in innovation
outcomes, depending on how long the process from inputs to a finished innovation takes. Some
new innovation may simply require scaling up already existing inputs, which can happen very
rapidly, e.g., providing existing highly-skilled R&D employees with more funding to test additional
chemicals. Developing other innovations may require a much lengthier process of trial and error
or adjusting scarce inputs sluggishly, e.g., having to find highly-specialized researchers to hire. In
our benchmark analysis, we will thus use lagged tax rates and the application date of the patent to
measure outcomes (not the grant date, which comes later). We also allow for a three year window
18
Effort investments are typically difficult to make fully tax-deductible. They can also be interpreted more broadly
as unobservable R&D inputs (for a discussion of R&D policies when there is asymmetric information and unobservable
R&D investments, see Akcigit et al. (2016)).
19
Furthermore, the sensitivity of an inventor’s wage to his innovation output depends on the bargaining structure
and his bargaining weight. And the outcome of innovation at the firm-level depends on the joint inputs of firms and
inventors, each of which react to taxes in a different way.

18

to measure individual-level innovation outcomes. The event study and several case studies (see
Section 5.5) explicitly look at the dynamic path of responses to taxes.
Innovation can also be forward looking because the initial investment may possibly pay off over
a longer period. The importance of forward-looking effects for tax responses depends on the pattern
of payoffs from the innovation, on whether a given tax change is considered to be short-lived or
more persistent, and on how people form their future expectations about tax rates based on current
tax rates. These are common issues for empirical studies of taxation related to forward-looking
investments. We would expect lower elasticities to current or lagged tax rates if innovation payoffs
are more back-loaded, if agents are more forward-looking, and if future and current tax rates are
less correlated .
Micro and Macro Elasticities. At the individual inventor level, some of the response margins
are directly observable, such as his location choice. Some outcomes of interest, however, will be
the result of several responses. For instance, we will look at the number of patents and the number
of citations at the individual inventor level. The total response measured can be the result of an
inventor changing his work effort (the primitive “labor supply” elasticity) or investment of resources,
or shifting between the corporate and personal tax bases. Thus, our micro-elasticities capture the
reduced-form individual-level responses.20
For macro, state-level outcomes, the total responses measured are the result of both firms’
and inventors’ individual-level responses, and across all the margins, intensive and extensive. In
addition, they also capture movements across states, cross-state spillovers, or business-stealing. We
offer suggestive evidence below that the state-level tax effects are not purely zero-sum.
To sum up, there are several margins through which firms and individual inventors (corporate,
non corporate, or a mix of the two) can be affected by both personal and corporate income taxes.
Their decision margins concern how much innovation inputs to supply, where to locate and whether
to participate in the innovation process at all. These theoretical effects should be observable in the
data with respect to the quantity, quality, and location of innovation. We now turn to testing the
magnitudes of these margins empirically.

5

The Macro Effects of Taxation

We begin with the effects of personal and corporate taxes at the macro, state level over the period
c the corporate tax in state s year t and τ yj the personal income
1940-2000. Let us denote by τst
st

tax at income percentile j in state s in year t. Let the corresponding federal level tax rates be τfct
20

It is worth noting that some caution is needed to extrapolate the individual-level responses in order to understand
what may happen if there is a federal tax change. A nation-wide tax change may create further general equilibrium
ramifications. Nevertheless, given the detailed controls in our regressions, the estimated elasticities are informative
about people’s responses to tax changes or the net returns in general.

19

and τfyjt . We focus on two income percentiles: the 90th percentile and the median.21 Heuristically,
ignoring the many complications of the tax code, the total tax rate on individuals with income at
yj
the j th percentile who live in state s at time t is denoted by Tst
and is equal to:
yj
yj
yj
y
yj yj
Tst
= τfyjt (1 − τst
) + τst
− Dst
· τst
τf t

(2)

y
where Dst
is a dummy equal to 1 if the personal income tax paid at the federal level is deductible

from the state tax base in state s in year t. In practice, several states allow for the deductibility
of federal taxes, and this has changed over time. Some key examples include California and New
York throughout the 1940-2000 period, and Pennsylvania since 1971. Similarly, the total tax rate
of a firm in state s in year t is:
c
c
c
c
c c
Tst
= τfct (1 − τst
) + τst
− Dst
· τst
τf t

(3)

In this section, we estimate the following type of equations:
yj
c
Yst = α + βy Tst−1
+ βc Tst−1
+ γXst + δt + δs + εst

(4)

yj
is the lagged personal
where Yst is some innovation outcome in state s in year t (see below). Tst−1

income tax rate (average or marginal) for income group j (median or 90th percentile) in state s
c
and Tst−1
is the lagged top corporate tax rate. δt and δs are sets of year and state fixed effects. Xst

are time-varying state-level controls, namely, lagged population density, real GDP per capita, and
R&D tax credits, intended to capture the effect of time-varying urbanization, economic activity,
and R&D incentive programs. Throughout, we weight each state by its population.22 βy and βc
are consistent estimates of the reduced-form state-level effects of personal and corporate taxes if,
conditional on the state and year fixed effects and the controls, changes in state-level tax rates
are not correlated with other policies or economic forces that affect innovation. We will relax this
assumption using two other identification strategies below.
Innovation outcomes: The innovation outcomes Yst at the state-year level are as follows: (i) The
quantity of innovation, as measured by the (log) number of patents produced during that year in
the state; (ii) The total quality of innovation, as measured by the (log) number of total forward
citations ever received by the patents produced in the state that year (subject to the adjustment
described in Section 2); (iii) The (log) number of inventors living in the state that year; (iv) The
share of innovation undertaken by companies, as captured by the share of patents assigned i.e.,
inventors transferring patents to their employer through assignment rights.
As explained in Section 4, at the macro level, the effects of taxes on the innovation outcomes
21

Following the reasoning from Section 3.3, we use tax rates at fixed income percentiles, rather than tax rates in
fixed brackets, because tax brackets at the state level have changed extensively over time.
22
In unreported results available on demand, we find a qualitatively similar effects of taxes on innovation per capita
- higher taxes for both individuals and corporates tend to reduce per capita patents, citations, and inventors.

20

are the total effects on firms and inventors and the mix intensive and extensive margin responses.
Thus, we consider marginal tax rates, which matter for intensive margin responses, and average
tax rates, which matter for extensive margin responses.23

5.1

OLS Results

Panel A of Table 2 shows the estimates from the state-level regressions in (4). Each column
represents a different innovation outcome Yst at the state-year level, in the order (i)-(iv) listed
above.
Each row shows the coefficients from separate regressions of the format in (4), where different
tax measures are used for personal tax rates. Rows 2 to 5 use, respectively, the marginal tax rate
at the 90th percentile income (MTR90), the marginal tax rate at the median income (MTR50), the
average tax rate at the 90th percentile income (ATR90), and at the median income (ATR50). All
c
regressions control for the lagged top corporate tax rate Tst−1
but the coefficients on the corporate

tax are almost identical in every regression to the one in the first row, where MTR90 is used as the
personal tax measure. We thus report it only once.
All the tax measures – personal and corporate – are significantly correlated with lower patent
counts at the state level. A one percentage point increase in MTR90 is associated with approximately a 4% decline in patents, citations, and inventors. The effects of the MTR50 are similar,
but larger. The effects of average personal tax rates are larger still. A one percentage increase in
ATR90 is associated with a roughly 6-6.3% decline in patents, citations, and inventors. For ATR50,
the effects fluctuate around 10% for patents, citations, and inventors.24 The macro elasticities to
marginal tax rates implied by these coefficients fluctuate around 2 (for the MTR90) and 3.4 (for
the MTR50) for patents, inventors, and citations.
These elasticities are large because they are state-level, macro elasticities, which incorporate
spillover effects and cross-state shifting responses, as well as the full mix of extensive and intensive
margin responses by firms and inventors. They are consistent with the typically large macro-level
elasticities estimated for other variables such as GDP. Naturally, the elasticities at the individual
micro level below – as well as the location elasticities – are much smaller.
A one percentage point higher top corporate tax rate leads to around 6.3% fewer patents, 5.9%
fewer citations, and 5.1% fewer inventors. The implied macro elasticities are, respectively, 3.5, 3,
and 2.5. It is worth noting that if we look at superstar inventors only, defined as inventors in the
top 5% of the patent count distribution in year t, where patent count at time t is an inventor’s total
patents up to and including t − 1, they are similarly negatively affected by taxes. Thus, higher
taxes have negative effects on the presence of the highest quality inventors as well.
23
In taxation models with spillovers, this distinction is not clear-cut, which further justifies the need to consider
both types of taxes.
24
Given that citations and patents – i.e., patent quality and quantity – seem to react very similarly to taxation at
the macro levels, average quality as measured by citations per patent exhibits a mildly negative, but not systematically
significant response to taxes.

21

The share of patents assigned to companies appears to be very sensitive to the corporate tax
rate, which is to be expected based on the framework in Section 4. A one percentage point increase
in the top corporate tax rate is associated with close to 1.2 percentage points fewer patents assigned
to companies. In fact, higher corporate taxes are associated with fewer non-corporate patents too,
but non-corporate patents are more responsive, so that the share assigned is lower overall. The
share assigned is also negatively related to the personal income tax rate. This is perfectly in line
with our finding at the micro level in Section 6 that corporate inventors are systematically more
sensitive to both corporate and personal taxes.
For robustness, Panel A of Appendix Table A2 replicates these results using only statutory
state-level taxes (not effective taxes); the effects are similar. One potential concern is that the
effects are sensitive to large, highly-innovative states such as California. Panel B, which drops
California from the analysis, shows that this is not the case.

5.2

Instrumental Variable Strategy using Federal Tax Changes

Our OLS estimates may be biased if states set their taxes in response to their economic conditions
or contemporaneously with other economic policies that can also affect innovation. We can address
this concern with an instrumental variable strategy that exploits changes in total personal and
corporate tax burdens that are not driven by changes in state taxes, but rather exclusively driven
by federal tax changes.
Our instrument is similar in spirit to the predicted tax burden in Gruber and Saez (2002) or
the predicted eligibility in Currie and Gruber (1996). Specifically, the instrument used for the
personal or corporate tax in state s at year t is the tax that would apply if the state-level personal
or corporate tax rate did not change since year t − k (where k is allowed to vary for robustness), but
federal taxes were changing as they are in reality. Changes in the predicted tax are therefore driven
purely by federal tax changes, which are likely exogenous to any given state’s economic conditions
and other policies. The impact of federal tax changes varies by state and by income group based on
the level of its state taxes (because of the state tax deductibility from federal taxable income) and
on whether the state allows for federal tax deductibility. The specification always includes state
and year fixed effects as well.
Using the same notation as above, the instrument for the personal income tax of income group
yj
j in state s and year t, denoted by T̂st
, can be written (heuristically) as:
yj
yj
yj
y
yj
T̂st
= τfyjt (1 − τst−k
) + τst−k
− Dst−k
· τst−k
τfyjt

(5)

yj
where the actual state tax in year t is replaced by its lag τst−k
at time t−k, and where we allow k to

vary for robustness (the benchmark has k = 5, results with other values for k are very similar and
available on demand). In practice, this instrument is calculated from the tax simulator, taking into
account many layers of complexity of the state and federal tax code, as is done for the actual tax
yj
rate Tst
. Similarly, we instrument the corporate tax rate using the predicted tax burden holding

22

state taxes fixed at their level in year t − k (again, the benchmark is k = 5),
c
c
c
c
c
= τfct (1 − τst−k
) + τst−k
− Dst−k
· τst−k
τfct
T̂st

(6)

The results are presented in Panel B of Table 2. The IV estimates are highly significant and very
close to the OLS estimates, albeit slightly larger. One potential explanation for this is that states
are adjusting their tax rates in a counter-cyclical fashion, which would bias the OLS estimates
downwards.

5.3

Border Counties Strategy

As already explained, consistency of the OLS estimates requires that changes in state-level taxes
are not correlated with a state’s economic conditions. One way of alleviating this requirement
is to consider border counties, i.e., neighboring counties that lie in different states. Because such
counties are located next to each other, they are presumably subject to similar economic conditions
and shocks, but not to the same tax policies, since those are set at the state-level. Furthermore, we
can also alleviate the concern about state policies being set endogenously by combining the border
county strategy with the instrumental variable strategy, thus comparing innovation outcomes in
neighboring counties and shifting their total tax burdens using only federal-level variations.
We start by matching all inventors and patents to their counties and we restrict the sample to
neighboring counties across state lines. We then run the following modified version of (4):
yj
c
∆Yit = βy ∆Tit−1
+ βc ∆Tit−1
+ γ∆Xit + δi + εit

(7)

where i indexes a pair of border counties in two different states, δi is a pair fixed effect, and the ∆
operator takes the difference of any variable between the two border counties of a pair. Thus, ∆Yit
yj
is the difference in innovation outcomes between the two counties; ∆Tit−1
is the difference in lagged
c
personal tax measures for income group j and ∆Tit−1
is the difference in the lagged corporate tax

rates and Xit contains the same controls as above. We restrict attention to sufficiently large border
county pairs in which both counties have at least 6 patents in a given year, but the results are robust
to including even small counties. We again weight each county pair by its combined population.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the results of the estimation of (7) using OLS. The estimated effects
of personal and corporate income taxes are significantly negative and generally very comparable to
the benchmark macro results from Table 2.
To combine the border county strategy and our IV approach, we instrument the tax rate difyj
c
ferentials between the border counties with the difference in the instruments ∆T̂it−1
and ∆T̂it−1

as defined in (5) and (6). The results are shown in Table A3 and the coefficients gravitate around
their values shown in either the border county OLS (Table 3) or the macro state IV results (Table
2) and are, if anything, even stronger.
Overall, the border county strategy, either using OLS or our instrumental variable specifica23

tion, also confirms that there are significant effects of personal and corporate taxes and that the
magnitudes are consistent with the ones found at the macro state-level.

5.4

Cross-State Spillovers and Business Stealing

The macro effects just discussed can be interpreted as the relevant reduced-form effects states
should take into account when considering whether to lower or raise their personal or corporate
income taxes, without retaliation from other states. Thus, they are of interest per se. These effects
may be partially driven by positive or negative spillovers on other states, due to business stealing
and to the possibility that factors and demand may shift across state lines. Although potentially
valuable to each individual state, these effects do not necessarily represent net extra value creation
in innovation when aggregated up to the federal level. To better understand these net effects, we
adopt two approaches.
First, as we will show in Section 6, inventors and firms do relocate in response to taxation and
this is an important margin of interest when thinking of the impact of taxes. Therefore, in Table
4, we replicate our core macro results (Panel A) and border county results (Panel B), but drop
all inventors who ever moved states. The magnitudes of the effects are only very slightly reduced.
Again, this estimation can be done using the IV strategy and yields very similar results (see Table
A3). Thus, to a first order, it appears that the effects of one state changing its taxes are not purely
driven by inventors moving across states.
Cross-state spillovers can also arise when other factors (not only inventors) or demand moves.
To test for this possibility, we can compare the estimated total border county effect (between the two
border counties of a pair) to the change in the same innovation outcome between the border county
that did not experience the tax change and the average county in its state. To be more precise,
denote the county with the tax change m and n the border county of the same pair, and k the average
county in the same state as n. Under the assumption that the difference in outcomes between the
border county n and the average county k in its state would have remained constant before and
after the tax change, the change in outcomes between these two counties measures the spillover
that occurs in n from the tax change in m. In principle, the double difference in outcomes between
m and n (which is the total border county effect measure above) and the difference between n and
k (the spillover effect) is a measure of the tax effect net of spillovers from, or to, the neighboring
county. Of course, there may also be spillovers to and from other states which we will not capture
and filter out with this method. Nevertheless, one may think that spillovers to the closest state
seem most likely in many cases and could be the largest.
The equation estimated is:
yj
c
+ βc ∆Tit−1
+ γ · [Xmt − Xkt ] + δi + εit
Ymt − Ykt = βy ∆Tit−1

(8)

where i again indexes a pair of border counties in two different states, δi is a border pair fixed
effect. The left hand-side is the difference in innovation outcomes between the border county m
24

yj
and the average county in the neighboring state (excluding the border county of the pair). ∆Tit−1
c
and ∆Tit−1
are, as before the differences in lagged personal and corporate tax rates.25

Results. The results are shown in Panel B of Table 3. Overall, the net effects of taxes, even
filtering out the spillovers, are still consistently and systematically negative. Approximately, 50%
of the effects of the corporate tax on patents, citations, and inventors can be interpreted as a true
effect on net innovation, while the remaining 50% could be interpreted as spillovers across state
lines. There is heterogeneity in the spillovers by innovation outcomes though: the net effect on
inventors becomes insignificant; the effect on corporate patents is barely changed, suggesting there
are few spillovers on that margin. The MTR50 has much stronger spillovers than the MTR90,
perhaps because of lower substitutability or higher moving frictions in the high-skilled inventor
market. Spillovers seem to account for slightly more than 50% of the total effect of the MTR50
on patenting, citations, or inventors. Consistent with spillovers being driven by extensive margin
responses (such as factors relocating), it is the average tax rates that show the strongest spillover
effects. Almost 80% of the effects of the ATR50 disappear when filtering out spillovers to the
neighboring state. Just above 50% of the effects of the ATR90 on patents and inventors and 75%
of the effects on citations seem to be accounted for by spillovers. Citations seem to be particularly
prone to spillovers, perhaps because it is the highest quality research that is relocated.
Overall, this is suggestive evidence that there are significant spillovers across neighboring states
especially, but that they cannot explain the full effect of taxes. This is consistent with the significant
elasticities at the micro inventor and firm level we will describe in Section 6.

5.5

Event Studies: Large Tax Reforms

To study the dynamic effects of taxes and provide some clear-cut visual evidence, we implement an
event study analysis using large reforms that have happened over the course of the 20th Century. A
large tax change is defined to be in the top 10% of tax increases or in the top 10% of tax decreases
over the period 1940-2000. It corresponds to tax increases of at least 7 percentage points for the
personal income tax and 15 percentage points for the corporate tax and to tax decreases of at least
4 percentage points for the personal income tax and 9.3 percentage points for the corporate income
tax. For each such reform, we use the period of 4 years before and after each reform, for a total
time span of 9 years.26 We drop reforms which happen in the same time interval as other large
reforms. All tax changes are relabeled to be “tax increases.”
Figure 10 shows the results. Time t = 0 is the first calendar year during which the new tax
rate applies. We plot the coefficients on the time dummies relative to the year before the new
tax applies, i.e., year t = −1. The left column shows the effects of personal income tax reforms;
25

Again, we can combine this estimation strategy with our instrumental variable approach, where, as in Section
yj
c
c
5.3, the difference in tax rates ∆Tit−1
and ∆Tit−1
can be instrumented by the difference in instruments, ∆T̂it−1
and
yj
∆T̂it−1 . Results are available on demand.
26
The time span length is chosen to be as large as possible, while also avoiding too many overlapping reforms.

25

the right column shows the effects of corporate tax reforms. The upper row shows the effects on
patents, the bottom row on inventors. We include reform fixed effects and calendar year fixed
effects, as well as controls for state GDP per capita, population density, and R&D tax credits, all
lagged by one year.
There is already a small negative effect of the taxes in year 0. Consistent with our benchmark
specification that uses lagged tax rates, there is a lag in the effect of taxes on innovation. The
strongest effects appear one to three years later and only then stabilize. It is worth bearing in
mind that these are large tax reforms suitable for studying dynamic effects, while our full-fledged
analysis exploits all tax changes, which happen very frequently and for which the effects of longer
lags are not as clean to disentangle.
Reflecting back on the conceptual discussion in Section 4, we can see why effects of a tax
decrease can appear with a lag and increase for a few years if it takes time for increased inputs to
generate more innovation output. For the same reason, a tax increase may also have delayed effects
if there are projects already in the pipeline that are less elastic to taxes because part of the cost is
already sunk.
Case Studies: We can also investigate more closely three special episodes of comprehensive tax
reform in New York, Delaware, and Michigan to provide additional sharp visual evidence of the
effects of taxes on innovation. These results are in Appendix Section A.3 and Figures A9-A11. The
progressively larger effects of taxes over time are clearly visible there too, with the gap between
the treated and the control states growing for some years after the large tax changes.

6

The Effects of Taxation at the Micro Level: Inventors and Firms

In this Section, we study the effects of taxes at the micro-level of individual firms and inventors.

6.1

Individual Inventor Level

The general intuition behind our analysis at the individual inventor level, is to use variation in
the tax rate across inventors in the same state and same year. This means we include state
× year fixed effects, which account for other contemporaneous policy variations and economic
circumstances affecting all inventors. To implement this strategy requires assigning inventors to
their tax brackets. We do so based on their innovation productivity, which is strongly linked to
inventor income. We also include inventor fixed effects. Second, we combine this fixed-effects
approach with our instrumental variable strategy, which instruments an inventor’s tax with the
predicted tax rate based on federal-level changes, holding state-level taxes fixed.
Constructing Measures of Inventor Productivity. Previous work has demonstrated that
inventor productivity, as measured by patents or citations, is strongly related to inventors’ incomes.
26

Using modern data, Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva (2016) show this link is strong for the eight
largest patenting countries, as well as for Sweden and Finland. Bell et al. (2014) match IRS tax data
to patent data for U.S. inventors and also highlight the strong link between income and patenting.
Using historical data, Akcigit, Grigsby, and Nicholas (2017) establish the link between patents and
wages in their match between the 1940 Census and patent data.
As our benchmark measure of inventor productivity in year t we use total patents produced
until year t. For robustness, we also consider citation-weighted patents in Appendix Table A7.
Measuring an Inventor’s Tax Rate. Using the productivity measure based on either patents
(our benchmark measure) or citations, we can rank inventors nation-wide in each year t. We
then call “high-productivity” inventors at time t those inventors who fall in the top 10% of the
productivity distribution in year t − 1, and “low-productivity” inventors those who fall below that
threshold. Since the distribution changes every year, this represents a dynamic ranking measure.
However, it is highly persistent. 97.9% of inventors who are classified as being high-productivity
in year t are still high-productivity in year t + 1. Similarly, 98.6% of inventors who are classified as
being low-productivity in year t are still low-productivity in year t + 1.
We then assign effective personal income tax rates to each inventor depending on his rank. For
our benchmark analysis, the effective personal income tax rate of an inventor at time t − 1 is the
state’s tax rate for the 90th percentile individual at t − 1, if he is in the top 10% of the productivity
distribution in t − 1, and the median tax rate otherwise. For left-hand side outcomes measured at
time t, we use this lagged tax measured from time t − 1. The estimated coefficients on this effective
tax rate can be interpreted as intent-to-treat effects. The personal income tax rates at the 90h or
median income are effectively instruments for an inventor’s true tax rate and the regressions shown
are the reduced-form ones from the outcome directly on the instrument. Using just two groups and
focusing on the tax rate at the median makes sense here given that state schedules typically do not
have many tax brackets. Nevertheless, right below, we show that our results are entirely robust to
using finer tax measures and different cutoffs.27
Alternative Measures. We provide robustness checks at each level of our strategy: on the
productivity measurement (using citation-weighted patents), on the ranking method, and on how
we control for an inventor’s tax rate.
Regarding the alternative ranking methods, we can also rank inventors in their state’s productivity distribution, rather than the national one. But this is not our preferred method, as the
income distribution at the state level could be endogenous to state taxation. Second, inventors can
27

Another way to perform this analysis would be as in Akcigit et al. (2016), namely to replace the effective tax
rate measure in the regressions with a full set of interactions of the top state effective tax rate with indicators for the
inventor’s productivity rank (say, top 10%, top 10-25%, top 25-50%, etc). The difference in the interaction terms of
two groups (say the top 10% and the top 10-25%) gives the estimated effect of the top tax rate where the top 10%
is the treated group and the top 10-25% is considered to be the control group. In reality, there are several possible
control groups, ranging from closest (say, top 10-25%), which yields a lower bound of the effect of the top tax, to
farthest (say, below top 50%), which yields an upper bound. The productivity of an inventor captures the propensity
to be treated by the top tax rate.

27

be ranked according to a “lifetime” ranking, such that they will be labeled “high-productivity” if
they ever fall in the top 10% during their career. This lifetime measure may be the most relevant
in a variety of situations. An inventor who has once acquired a good reputation will always tend to
generate higher income (e.g. a company will want to retain him). Or if an employer, or the head
of an R&D lab, has some advance signal about someone who will invent favorably in the future
(before it even shows on the patenting track record) this individual might be paid more ex ante in
order to attract and retain his talent. The results are in Appendix Table A6 and are very similar.
When it comes to assigning the tax rates, we also provide some robustness checks. First, we
use alternative cutoffs for which inventors are assigned the 90th percentile personal income tax
rate, such as the top 5% or the top 25% (see Appendix Table A4). Second, we can assign tax
rates to three (or more) rather than just two groups. For instance, the top 10% of the productivity
distribution is assumed to face the tax rate at the 90th percentile of income, the top 10-25% of the
productivity distribution the tax rate at the 75th percentile, and all inventors below the top 25%
are assumed to face the tax rate at the median income (see Appendix Table A8). Our results are
robust to all of these different variations.
Identification: Fixed effects and Instrumental Variables based on Federal Tax Changes.
All the inventor-level regressions contain the following important controls. First, time-varying
state-level controls, namely lagged state real GDP per capita and population density. Second,
time-varying inventor-level variables, namely the inventor’s experience and its square, and the inventor’s productivity (which, as just described, can be measured in several different ways). Inventor
experience is measured as the number of years since the first patent. The regressions also include
inventor fixed effects which can filter out all non time-varying inventor characteristics.
We also include a measure of the agglomeration of innovation in the state, namely the number
of patents applied for by other state residents in the inventor’s modal technological class in the state
in a year t − 1 (excluding the inventor’s own patents). This agglomeration measure varies by state,
inventor, and year, and it captures the fact that different states may be attractive to varying degrees
in different years to inventors working in different fields. This could be, for instance, because the
state has some specific infrastructure particularly well-suited to innovation in that technology class
or because inventors simply like being around others from the same field to interact and learn.
Our first approach to identification consists of including state × year fixed effects that can
absorb other contemporaneous economic developments or policy changes in the state. They also
control for changes in tax revenue stemming from changes in taxes that can lead to investments in
infrastructure which may create environments that are particularly conducive to innovation. These
fixed effects are possible because even within a state and year cell, different inventors face different
tax rates due to the fact that they are at different points in the income distribution. We also
provide a specification with only inventor, state, and year fixed effects, the advantage of which is
that we can estimate the effect of corporate tax variation as well (which is otherwise absorbed by
the state × year fixed effects).
28

Conditional on state × year fixed effects, our estimated tax effects are consistent as long as
there are no other simultaneous changes that differentially affect high productivity and low productivity inventors and that are systematically correlated with the effective tax rates. To relax
this requirement, we also apply the same IV strategy as for the macro, state-level regressions above
and instrument for the total tax of an inventor who is in income group j (where j is either the
90th percentile or the median, according to our ranking of inventor’s into tax brackets based on
yj
productivity), in state s at time t using T̂st
from (5).28 With this strategy, we only require that

the differential tax rate changes experienced by high and low productivity inventors in a given year
and induced solely by federal-level tax changes, be uncorrelated with unobserved determinants of
individual innovation.29 In our regressions that only include state and year fixed effects (but not
c
their interaction), we can also instrument for the corporate tax using the predicted tax liability T̂st

from (6).
Innovation Outcomes at the Individual Level. At the individual level, we consider the
following outcomes to capture intensive and extensive margin responses on the quantity and quality
of innovation, all measured over a three year window between year t and t+2 including: (i) whether
the inventor has a patent; (ii) whether the inventor has any successful patent receiving a combined
10 or more citations;30 (iii) how many patents the inventor has, conditional on having any (log
patents); (iv) how many citations the inventor has, conditional on having any (log citations); (v)
whether the inventor has a corporate patent (i.e., a patent assigned to a company). In these
individual-level regressions, we allow for a window of time after the tax change during which we
measure responses to a tax change.
6.1.1

Main Results

Our benchmark results are shown in Table 5. The upper panel includes state fixed effects, year
fixed effects, and inventor fixed effects (and all other controls listed above). This specification is
able to show directly the effect of the corporate tax rate. The lower panel shows the specification
with state × year fixed effects and inventor fixed effects, which also absorbs all variation in the
corporate tax rate. Reassuringly, the results are extremely similar for the two specifications.
The outcome variables listed in columns 1 through 5 are as defined in (i)-(v) above. A one
percentage point higher tax rate at the individual level decreases the likelihood of having a patent
in the next 3 years by 0.63 percentage points (relative to a mean of 76%). Similarly, the likelihood
of having high quality patents with more than 10 citations decreases by 0.6 percentage points
28

In this IV specification, we can include state × year fixed effects since the instrument varies within state-year
cells based on the income group.
29
Because our identification relies on high and low productivity inventors facing different tax rates, we check in
Appendix Table A5 that using only “progressive spells,” i.e., periods and states when there was a progressive tax
system leaves our results unaffected.
30
Recall that the year t refers to the application date, which is the date closest to the discovery of the innovation
itself. In the sample, around 41% of patents have 10 citations or more.

29

(relative to a mean of 45%) for every percentage point increase in the personal tax rate. We also
find that a one percentage point increase in the personal tax rate leads to a 1.1 percent decline
in the number of patents and a 1.4-1.7 percent decline in the number of citations, conditional on
having any. The implied elasticity of patents is 0.6-0.7, while the implied elasticity of citations is
0.8-0.9. The likelihood of having a corporate patent also reacts very negatively to the personal tax
rate, and this effect is larger than the effects on patents overall.
In the upper panel, the effects of the corporate tax rate are consistently negative, but they are
only significant for the likelihood of having a patent and are generally much smaller in magnitude
than the coefficients on the personal income tax variable. Thus, inventors are seemingly more
sensitive to personal income tax rates. This makes sense given that they are more directly impacted
by the latter, although, as explained in Section 4, inventors could also be influenced by corporate
tax rates in a more indirect way through rent-sharing with the firm, or if they plan to incorporate
in the case of a successful innovation. We thus turn to an analysis that distinguishes between
corporate and non corporate inventors below.
Table 6 presents the IV results at the individual inventor level. They are very similar to, but
predict somewhat stronger effects than the OLS estimates. There may be measurement error in
the OLS estimates given that we need to impute an inventor’s tax rate. Even though we do not
know whether the measurement error is classical, this could bias the OLS coefficients downwards.
Nevertheless, the upshot is that the magnitudes of the coefficients are very close to those of the
OLS estimates, which provides further confidence in the robustness of our results.

6.1.2

Corporate Inventors and Agglomeration Forces

In Table 7, we study the interaction of the personal tax rate with a dummy for whether the inventor
is a corporate inventor, using the IV specification.31 An inventor is defined as a corporate inventor
if at least one of his patents over his career is assigned to a company.32 Corporate inventors are
systematically much more sensitive to taxes on personal and corporate income. Recall from the
conceptual framework presented in Section 4 that a stronger response to taxes could arise for
several reasons: corporate inventors’ efforts and investments may simply be more elastic; corporate
inventors may place a higher weight on financial returns; corporate inventors’ payoffs (i.e., wages)
may be highly performance-based, or corporate inventors’ inputs may be more complementary to
firm inputs R, which are in turn also tax elastic. This finding is consistent with our results at the
macro state-level in Section 5, namely that the share of patents assigned is negatively affected by
corporate and personal taxes, because corporate patents are more elastic to taxes in general.
The heterogeneous effects of corporate tax in the upper panel are particularly striking. Cor31

OLS, not shown here, yields very similar results.
Our definition of corporate inventor is destined to flag those inventors who are most likely to fall under the realm
of the corporate tax, i.e., those who are either employees, or tightly involved with the corporate sector, e.g., by having
a patent done jointly with a company. Corporate inventors are not necessarily employees of companies at all times,
although they are very likely to be employees for at least some of the time.
32

30

porate tax has a strong and significant negative effect on corporate inventors. But it has a mildly
positive, although mostly insignificant effect on non-corporate inventors. These diverging results
explain why, on average, the effects of the corporate tax in Table 5 were insignificantly negative.
The lack of response of non-corporate inventors to corporate taxes accords with the model in Section 4. If self-employed inventors do not select their innovation inputs based on a short-run plan to
incorporate or shift profits to the corporate sector immediately (although they may still plan to do
this in the future), they should be entirely insensitive to the corporate tax rate. In fact, a mildly
positive effect may arise if corporate and non-corporate inventors compete for innovations. Then,
a higher corporate tax rate disadvantages the corporate sector relative to the non-corporate sector.
Conversely, as shown in the model, corporate inventors are engaged in rent-sharing with firms and
are selecting innovation inputs to jointly optimize the surplus from the firm-inventor match. Their
payoffs should thus depend at least partially on corporate taxes. The strength of this dependence
will be a function of bargaining rules, payoffs, and production technologies. Thus, our finding that
corporate inventors are very elastic to corporate taxes, in addition to personal income taxes, is
completely in line with the conceptual framework.
Table 8 shows the effects of agglomeration at the micro level. Recall that the agglomeration
force is defined as the number of patents applied for by other state residents in the inventor’s modal
technological class in the state in a given year, divided by 1,000. A consistent finding emerges.
Whenever an inventor lives in a state where there is more innovation in his own technological field,
he is less sensitive to taxation. To give a sense of the magnitudes, in a state in which there are 1,000
more patents produced in an inventor’s technology class, a one percentage point increase in taxes
would only lead to a 0.7-0.8 percent decline in patents depending on the specification (respectively,
between 0.6 and 0.9 percent decline in citations) instead of a 1.1-1.2 percent decline (respectively,
1.4-1.7 percent decline for citations) in the baseline case.

6.2

Location Choice Model

We next estimate a location choice model at the individual inventor-level. Denote by j[i] the tax
bracket of inventor i (e.g., 90th income percentile bracket or median income bracket). Suppose that
the value to inventor i of living (and inventing) in state s in year t is:


yj[i]
Uist = α log τst
+ βs Xist + νist
where νist is an inventor-specific idiosyncratic value of being in state s at time t, Xist are a set of
yj[i]

detailed controls described below, and τst

is the average income tax rate that would apply to

inventor i in state s at time t were he to live there. If νist is i.i.d with Type 1 extreme value, we
can estimate the model using a multinomial logit.
For the sake of computational feasibility and for this estimation only, we restrict ourselves to
the fifteen most inventive states, as measured by total patents over the period 1940-2000, and limit
our attention to periods when these states have a progressive tax spell. This sample restriction
31

yields possible choice states of California, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, New
York, Ohio, and Wisconsin. We define the home state of an inventor to be the state in which he
first patents. The regression contains the following controls: “Home State Flag” is a dummy equal
to 1 if the state under consideration is the home state of the inventor. “Agglomeration Forces”
is again defined to be total patents granted in state s in year t in inventor’s i’s modal technology
class, excluding those granted to inventor i. We also include an interaction of the home state
dummy with the high productivity indicator, an interaction of the agglomeration force with the
high productivity indicator, as well as a quadratic of the experience of the inventor. The effect of
experience is allowed to differ by state, i.e., is interacted with state fixed effects. “Assignee has
Patent in Destination” is a dummy equal to one if the employer of the inventor already has had
one patent in the state under consideration.
Column 1 of Table 9, which shows the specification with state plus year fixed effects also contains
controls for the corporate tax rate, R&D tax credits, real GDP per capita, population density, all
lagged by one year. The rest of the columns include state × year fixed effects, making use of the
same logic for identification as explained above. Columns 3 to 5 add interactions of the personal
average tax rate with additional characteristics of the inventor or the inventor-state pair, namely,
an indicator for whether the inventor is a non-corporate inventor, the agglomeration measure, and
an indicator variable for whether the assignee that the inventor works for already has a patent in
that state.
The main finding from these regressions is that the average tax rate is a strong negative predictor
of inventors’ location choices. Notice also that it appears particularly important in these estimates
to control for state times year fixed effects, since the coefficient in column 2 is much reduced in size
relative to column 1. This suggests that there are other attractive forces or policies in a state that
may be correlated with tax rates, and which are filtered out by state × year fixed effects. The effect
of taxes in column 2 remains significantly negative and strong even after absorbing state-by-year
varying factors. The elasticities of the number of inventors residing in a state which are implied
by these coefficients can be obtained according to the method in Kleven et al. (2013) and Akcigit
et al. (2016). They can be calculated separately for inventors residing in their home state and for
inventors residing in another state. With state × year fixed effects, the elasticity to the net-of-tax
rate of the number of inventors residing in a state is 0.11 (standard error 0.058) for inventors who
are from that state and 1.23 (standard error 0.655) for inventors not from that state.
As expected, there are two strong pull factors – other than taxes – which strongly influence
the location decisions of inventors. These are, first, the home state. Inventors are, to a first-order,
much more likely to remain in their home state than to move. Second, agglomeration forces are
very important as well and increase the appeal of a potential destination state. One can imagine
that these agglomeration forces – which are technology field-specific – capture amenities which
matter to inventors. They may also be valued per se if there are complementarities with other
researchers, thanks to interactions or learning (Akcigit et al., 2018).33 Furthermore, agglomeration
33

The agglomeration measure can also capture congestion effects, which we would expect to play a negative role.

32

influences not only the value an inventor derives from being in a state, but it also dampens the
elasticity to taxes, as shown by the interaction term. This means that a state with higher levels of
agglomeration in one’s technology field will be able to attract more inventors even at the same tax
burden than a state with lower levels of agglomeration.
Column 3 of Table 9 also shows that non-corporate inventors have lower sensitivity to taxes,
exactly in line with what we showed in relation to the innovation outcomes above. The same
explanations could apply here.
Finally, if an assignee already has a patent in a given state, the inventor is also less sensitive
to taxes in that state when making a determination of whether or not to locate there. This could
signal either that it is easier to surmount the frictions of moving to another state if one’s employer
already has a presence there, or that the employer prefers moving inventors to lower tax locations
in order to pay them lower compensating differentials as a result – and that this is easy to do when
there is already some established presence in that state.

6.3

Individual Firm Level

We now turn to the individual firm-level where the unit of observation is a firm-year. In Table
10, columns 1 through 5 show the coefficients from regressions of the dependent variable in each
column on the top corporate tax rate as well as the personal income tax rates at the median and
the 90th income percentile. Controls include state fixed effects, for every state in which the firm
has a lab, year fixed effects, real GDP per capita, and population density in the state. Panel A
shows the OLS results. Panel B shows the IV results, where the total personal and corporate tax
liabilities are instrumented with their federal-driven components, as defined in (5) and (6). The
motivation for using this strategy is the same as for individual inventors.
The corporate tax rate has a significant effect on the number and log of patents produced
by the firm each year, the number and log of citations, and the number of research workers. A
one percentage point decrease in the corporate tax rate increases patents by 4% and citations by
around 3.5%. The IV results are of similar magnitudes, but again even stronger. According to the
IV specification, a one percentage point decrease in the corporate tax rate increases patents by 6%
and citations by 5%.
The personal income tax rate also influences firm-level innovation outcomes, but in an interesting
non-linear way, and less strongly so than does the corporate tax variable. The marginal tax rate
at the median income level is negatively related to innovation outcomes at the firm level, and the
magnitudes of the coefficients are smaller and less significant than the estimated coefficients with
respect to the corporate tax rate. However, the marginal tax rate at the 90th percentile of income
has insignificant effects and the coefficients are sometimes positive but also insignificant.
This pattern in the coefficients makes sense if the bulk of firms’ employees are not in the top
Thus, the coefficient should be interpreted as a net effect of agglomeration, which appears positive. In addition, the
state × year fixed effects would capture general price or wage effects arising from higher or lower skill supply.

33

10% tax bracket, so the marginal tax rate of the median earner is the main driver. Note that
this pattern is different for the number of research workers employed where the effect of personal
income tax at the median income level on the number of research workers is as strong as the effect
of the corporate tax. Personal taxes would be expected to be an important determinant of research
workers employed in R&D labs if firms are moderating the impact of at least part of its incidence.
Finally, Panel A, column 6 estimates a location choice model for new lab openings, in the
spirit of the multinomial logit of inventor location from Section 6.2. This specification allows us
to examine, conditional on opening a new lab, where the firm decides to locate it. We restrict the
choice set to the 15 top innovative states, as ranked by total patents between 1920 and 2000, due
to computational feasibility. The top corporate tax rate has a significantly negative effect on the
decision of a firm to locate its lab in a given state. This finding supports the results from Section
6.1 at the individual inventor level. Overall, taxes seem to be an important predictor of the location
of innovation.

7

Conclusion

We have studied the effects of personal and corporate income taxes on innovation in the United
States during the 20th century using a series of newly constructed datasets. Our data is sufficiently
wide-ranging that we can consider both inventors and firms engaged in inventive activity over a
long time period, and we can exploit the numerous changes to the U.S. tax code taking place over
the 20th century. We document the effect of taxes at the macro (state) and micro (inventors and
firm) levels and attempt to identify the estimates empirically. We find that both personal and
corporate taxes matter for innovation. The quantity, quality, and the location of innovation are all
affected by the tax system and the effects are quantitatively important.
In addition to being able to document and identify these important responses to taxation, our
estimates can help calibrate the tax elasticities needed in optimal tax formulas for labor or capital
income (see Saez (2001) and Saez and Stantcheva (2018)), as well as quantify the efficiency costs
of taxation, which are traded off against the revenue gains. Furthermore, our empirical evidence
provides a sense of how firms and inventors respond to the net return to innovation, and not only
to tax rates, which are merely a component of that economic calculation.
In future work, it would be fruitful to compare the U.S. experience to other countries, historically
and contemporaneously. That would require a major data collection effort, as we have undertaken
for the U.S., but our analysis highlights the benefits of such investments. Currently we know
very little about the impact of taxation on innovation over long time horizons, and our analysis
is therefore an important first-step in building a better understanding of a relationship that is
critical in policy discussions. While our estimates show that the state-level effects of taxes are
not purely due to zero-sum business-stealing, it is still an open question as to how the federal
tax rate affects national-level innovation in the U.S., when taking into account the international
mobility of inventors, firms and intellectual property. An answer to that question is central to a
34

fuller understanding of a tax regime’s real impact.

References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative
Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 105 (490), 493–505.
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt (2014). What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian Growth
Theory? In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Volume 2,
pp. 515–563.
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen (2017). The Social Origins and IQ of
Inventors. NBER Working Paper (24110).
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen (2018). On the Returns to Invention within
Firms: Evidence from Finland. American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 108,
208–212.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992). A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction. Econometrica 60 (2), 323–351.
Akcigit, U. (2017). Economic Growth: The Past, the Present, and the Future. Journal of Political
Economy 125 (6), 1736–47.
Akcigit, U., S. Baslandze, and S. Stantcheva (2016). Taxation and the International Mobility of
Inventors. American Economic Review 106 (10), 2930–2981.
Akcigit, U., S. Caicedo, E. Miguelez, S. Stantcheva, and V. Sterzi (2018). Dancing with the Stars:
Innovation Through Interactions. Working Paper 24466, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, and T. Nicholas (2017). The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation and
Inventors of the Golden Age. Working Paper 23047, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Akcigit, U., D. Hanley, and S. Stantcheva (2016). Optimal Taxation and R&D Policies. Working
Paper 22908, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alstadsæter, A., S. Barrios, G. Nicodeme, A. M. Skoniezcna, and A. Vezzani (2018). Patent boxes
design, patents location, and local R&D. Economic Policy 33 (93), 131–177.
Auerbach, A., J. R. Hines, and J. Slemrod (2007). Taxing Corporate Income in the 21st Century.
Cambridge University Press.
Bakija, J. (2017). Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S Federal and State Income
Tax Calculator Program. Working paper, Williams College.
Bakija, J. and J. Slemrod (2004, July). Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes? Evidence from
Federal Estate Tax Returns. Working Paper 10645, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bell, A., R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova, and J. V. Reenen (2017). Who Becomes an Inventor
in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation. NBER Working Paper 24062.
35

Bell, A., R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova, and J. Van Reenen (2014). The Lifecycle of Inventors.
Working Paper in progress, Harvard University.
Bloom, N. and R. Griffith (2001). The Internationalisation of UK R&D. Fiscal Studies 22 (3),
337–355.
Bloom, N., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen (2002, July). Do R&D Tax Credits Work? Evidence
from a Panel of Countries 1979-1997. Journal of Public Economics 85 (1), 1–31.
Butters, J. K. and J. V. Lintner (1945). Effect of Federal Taxes on Growing Enterprises. Boston,
Massachusetts: Harvard Business School.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011). Adjustment Costs, Firm Responses,
and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126 (2), 749–804.
Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2005). Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the 2003
Dividend Tax Cut. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 791–833.
Cooper, M., J. McClelland, J. Pearce, R. Prisinzano, J. Sullivan, D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick
(2016). Business in the United States: Who Owns It and How Much Tax Do They Pay? Tax
Policy and the Economy 30 (1), 91–128.
Cullen, J. and R. Gordon (2006). Tax Reform and Entrepreneurial Activity. Tax Policy and the
Economy 20, 41–72.
Cullen, J. and R. Gordon (2007). Taxes and Entrepreneurial Risk Taking: Theory and Evidence
for the U.S. Journal of Public Economics 91 (7-8), 1479–1505.
Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 431–466.
Dechezleprêtre, A., E. Einı̈o, R. Martin, K.-T. Nguyen, and J. Van Reenen (2016). Do Tax Incentives for Research Increase Firm Innovation? An RD Design for R&D. CEP Discussion
Paper 1413.
Fack, G. and C. Landais (2010). Are Tax Incentives For Charitable Giving Efficient? Evidence
from France. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (2), 117–141.
Fajgelbaum, P., E. Morales, J. C. Suárez Serrato, and O. Zidar (2016). State Taxes and Spatial
Misallocation. University of Chicago Booth Working Paper .
Field, A. (2003). The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Twentieth Century. American
Economic Review 93 (4), 1399–1413.
Giroud, X. and J. Rauh (2017). State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence
from Establishment-Level Data. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Goolsbee, A. (1998). Does R&D Policy Primarily Benefit Scientists and Engineers?
Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 88 (2), 298–302.

American

Goolsbee, A. (2003). Investment Tax Subsidies and the Wages of Capital Goods Workers: To the
Workers Go the Spoils? National Tax Journal LVI (1), 153–166.
36

Gordon, R. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth The U.S. Standard of Living since the
Civil War. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Gordon, R. H. and J. Slemrod (2000). Are ’Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply Income Shifting
Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases? In J. Slemrod (Ed.), Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, pp. 240–280. Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard
University Press.
Griffith, R., H. Miller, and M. O’Connell (2014). Ownership of intellectual property and corporate
taxation. Journal of Public Economics 112, 12 – 23.
Griliches, Z. (1986). Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s.
American Economic Review 76 (1), 141–154.
Gruber, J. and E. Saez (2002). The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implications. Journal
of Public Economics, Elsevier 84 (1), 1–32.
Hall, B., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001). The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
Insights and Methodological Tools. Working Paper 8498, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jones, B. F. (2009). The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance Man: Is Innovation
Getting Harder? Review of Economic Studies 76 (1).
Jones, B. F. (2010). Age and Great Invention. Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (1), 1–14.
Jones, B. F. and B. Weinberg (2011). Age Dynamics in Scientific Creativity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 108 (47), 18855–19096.
Jones, B. F., S. Wuchty, and B. Uzzi (2008). Multi-university Research Teams: Shifting Impact,
Geography, and Stratification in Science. Science 322 (5905), 1259–1262.
Jones, C. I. (2018). Taxing Top Incomes in a World of Ideas. Stanford GSB Working Paper .
Klenow, P. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2005). Externalities and Growth. In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf
(Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 817–861. Elsevier.
Kleven, H., K. Jakobsen, K. Jakobsen, and G. Zucman (2018). Wealth Taxation and Wealth Accumulation: Theory and Evidence from Denmark. National Bureau of Economic Research 24371.
Kleven, H. and M. Waseem (2013). Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and Structural
Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2),
669–723.
Kleven, H. J., C. Landais, and E. Saez (2013). Taxation and International Migration of Superstars:
Evidence from the European Football Market. American Economic Review 103 (5), 1892–1924.
Kleven, H. J., C. Landais, E. Saez, and E. Schultz (2014). Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing
Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in Denmark. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129 (1), 333–378.
Kline, P., N. Petkova, H. Williams, and O. Zidar (2017). Who Profits from Patents? Rent-Sharing
at Innovative Firms. MIT Working Paper .
37

Krugman, P. (1991). History and Industry Location: The Case of the Manufacturing Belt. American
Economic Review 81 (2), 80–83.
Lai, R., A. D’Amour, D. M. Doolin, G.-C. Li, Y. Sun, V. Torvik, A. Yu, and L. Fleming (2014).
Disambiguation and Co-authorship Networks of the U.S. Patent Inventor Database. Research
Policy 43 (6), 941–955.
Liebig, T., P. A. Puhani, and A. Sousa-Poza (2007). Taxation and Internal Migration : Evidence
from the Swiss Census Using Community-Level Variation in Income Tax Rates. Journal of
Regional Science 47 (4), 807–836.
Mahon, J. and E. Zwick (2017). Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior. American
Economic Review 107 (1), 217–248.
Moretti, E. and D. Wilson (2014). State Incentives for Innovation, Star Scientists and Jobs: Evidence from Biotech. The Journal of Urban Economics 79(C), 20–38.
Moretti, E. and D. Wilson (2017). The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location of Top
Earners: Evidence from Star Scientists. American Economic Review 107 (7), 1858?1903.
Mowery, D. and N. Rosenberg (1989). Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2014). Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale
of Three Elasticities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (1), 230–71.
Piketty, T. and G. Zucman (2014). Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries,
1700-2010. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1255–1310.
Poterba, J. (1989). Venture Capital and Capital Gains Taxation. In L. H. Summers (Ed.), Tax
Policy and the Economy, Vol. 3, pp. 47–67. MIT Press.
Romer, P. (1990). Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5), 71–102.
Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. The review of economic
studies 68 (1), 205–229.
Saez, E. (2010). Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points? American Economic Journal : Economic
Policy 2 (3), 180–212.
Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. Giertz (2012). The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to
Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1), 3–50.
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2018). A Simpler Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation. Journal of
Public Economics 162, 120–142.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2015). Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
Capitalized Income Tax Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Slemrod, J. (2007). Does the United States Tax Capital Income? In H. J. Aaron, L. E. Burman,
and C. E. Steuerle (Eds.), Taxing Capital Income, pp. 3–38. The Urban Institute Press.
38

Slemrod, J. and W. Shobe (1989). The Tax Elasticity of Capital Gains Realizations: Evidence from
a Panel of Taxpayers. National Tax Journal 42 (4), 503–508.
Smith, M., D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2017). Capitalists in the Twenty-First Century.
University of Chicago Booth Working Paper .
Suárez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016). Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A
Local Labor Market Approach with Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic Review 106 (9),
2582–2624.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Innovations.
The RAND Journal of Economics 21 (1), 172–187.
Wuchty, S., B. F. Jones, and B. Uzzi (2007). The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production
of Knowledge. Science 316 (5827), 1036–1039.
Yagan, D. (2015). Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend
Tax Cut. American Economic Review 105 (12), 3531–3563.
Young, C. and C. Varner (2011). Millionaire Migration and State Taxation of Top Incomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. National Tax Journal 64 (2), 255–283.
Young, C., C. Varner, I. Lurie, and R. Prisinzano (2016). Millionaire Migration and the Taxation
of the Elite: Evidence from Administrative Data. American Sociological Review forthcoming.
Zidar, O. (2017). Tax Cuts for Whom? Heterogeneous Effects of Tax Changes on Growth and
Employment. University of Chicago Booth Working Paper .

39

Table 1: Summary Statistics on Inventor Careers
Years Active
Number of States
Number of Patents
Patents Per Year
Total Citations Received
Citations Per Year
Number of Classes

Mean
3.08
1.06
2.55
1.02
83.42
27.12
1.83

SD
6.10
0.35
6.47
0.48
736.46
133.45
2.84

90th
7.00
1.00
5.00
1.00
119.03
48.38
3.00

95th
14.00
1.00
8.00
2.00
265.18
91.93
5.00

99th
31.00
3.00
26.00
3.00
1189.25
329.10
14.00

Notes: Table reports summary statistics of our sample of disambiguated inventors. The categories “Number of
States,” “Number of Patents,” “Total Citations Received,” and “Number of Classes” refer to statistics over an
inventor’s entire career, while “Patents Per Year” and “Citations Per Year” refer to average numbers per year of an
inventor’s career.

40

Table 2: Macro Effects of Taxation
Panel A: OLS
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations
(1)
(2)
∗∗∗
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.063
-0.059∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.008)

Log
Inventors
(3)
-0.051∗∗∗
(0.006)

Share
Assigned
(4)
-1.090∗∗∗
(0.159)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.040∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.040∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.334∗∗∗
(0.077)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.065
(0.087)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.062∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.135
(0.100)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.100∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.108∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.091∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.672∗∗∗
(0.146)

Panel B: Instrumental Variables
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)

-0.068∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.056∗∗∗
(0.007)

-1.008∗∗∗
(0.188)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.048∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.349∗∗∗
(0.086)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.032∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.029∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.034∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.252∗∗∗
(0.088)

90th Pctile Income ATR

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.038
(0.120)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.101∗∗∗
(0.012)
2867
7.18
1.31

-0.108∗∗∗
(0.016)
2867
9.87
1.59

-0.091∗∗∗
(0.010)
2867
7.31
1.33

-0.370∗∗
(0.180)
2867
71.74
14.01

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Notes: Each row shows estimates from a separate regression following the format described in equation (4) using
different personal tax measures. All regressions include the top corporate tax rate as a control; the estimated
coefficient on corporate taxes is almost identical to that reported in the top row of each panel (which uses MTR90
as the personal tax measure) and is thus reported only once. Robust standard errors clustered at year level in
parentheses. All regressions control for lagged population density, real GDP per capita, R&D tax credits, state &
year fixed effects and are weighted by state population. Tax rates measured in percentage points and lagged by 1
year. Panel A shows OLS estimates. Panel B shows IV estimates, where personal tax rates and corporate tax rates
are instrumented for by the predicted tax rates from (5) and (6) respectively. Mainland states included for the period
1940-2000. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

41

Table 3: Border County Estimations
Panel A: Border Counties Total Effects
Log
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations Inventors
(1)
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.028
-0.054
-0.022∗∗
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.010)

Log Corp.
Patents
(4)
-0.023∗∗
(0.010)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.005)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.068∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.074∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.054∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.007)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.078∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.086∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.067∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.072∗∗∗
(0.008)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.104∗∗∗
(0.014)

-0.122∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.102∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.098∗∗∗
(0.016)

8289
0.04
1.45

8289
0.05
1.64

8289
0.05
1.49

8217
0.05
1.57

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Panel B: Border Counties Net Effects
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)

-0.021∗∗
(0.008)

-0.030∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.008)

-0.029∗∗∗
(0.010)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.016∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.009∗∗
(0.004)

-0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.016∗∗∗
(0.003)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.035∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.034∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.030∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.025∗∗∗
(0.007)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.043∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.032∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.038∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.035∗∗∗
(0.008)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.025∗∗
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.011)

-0.027∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.011)

8737
0.04
1.51

8736
-0.06
1.71

8737
0.01
1.52

8658
-0.02
1.60

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Notes: Estimates from the border-county pair strategy from Section 5.3. Panel A reports the total estimated effects
of taxation from (7). Panel B reports the net effect of taxation estimated from (8). Row definitions, tax rate
variable definitions, estimation period, standard errors, weighting, and controls all identical to those specified in
the footnote of Table 2. Only county pairs where both counties have at least 6 patents in year t are included.
∗
p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

42

Table 4: Macro Effects of Taxes: Excluding Movers
Panel A: State-Year Level Regressions
Log
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations Inventors
(1)
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.061
-0.063
-0.050∗∗∗
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.006)

Share
Assigned
(4)
-1.091∗∗∗
(0.148)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.042∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.043∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.433∗∗∗
(0.074)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.044∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.195∗∗
(0.083)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.064∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.062∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.321∗∗∗
(0.094)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.095∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.103∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.088∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.905∗∗∗
(0.141)

2867
6.90
1.30

2867
9.56
1.57

2867
7.11
1.32

2867
68.40
14.66

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Panel B: Border Counties, Total Effects
Log
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations Inventors
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.006
-0.026∗
-0.007
(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.010)

Log Corp
Patents
-0.001
(0.011)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.016∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.014∗∗
(0.007)

-0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.051∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.056∗∗∗
(0.008)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.071∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.066∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.061∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.069∗∗∗
(0.008)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.105∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.111∗∗∗
(0.020)

-0.106∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.107∗∗∗
(0.018)

8279
1.52

8273
1.77

8282
1.55

8105
1.66

Observations
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Notes: Regressions at the state year level, dropping all inventors who ever move across state lines during their career.
Panel A reports coefficients estimated from (4). Panel B reports coefficients from the border counties estimation
in (7). Row definitions, tax rate variable definitions, estimation period, standard errors, weighting, and controls all
identical to those specified in the footnote of Table 2. In Panel B, only county pairs where both counties have at
least 6 patents in year t are included. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

43

Table 5: Effects of Taxes at the Individual Inventor Level (OLS)
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.629∗∗∗
(0.101)
-0.201∗
(0.104)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.602∗∗∗
(0.109)
-0.100
(0.102)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.016∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.667∗∗∗
(0.082)
-0.091
(0.093)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.626∗∗∗
(0.103)

-0.569∗∗∗
(0.109)

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.642∗∗∗
(0.084)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5956315
76.312
42.517

5956315
45.079
49.757

4545384
0.442
0.664

4392312
2.758
1.453

5956315
61.421
48.678

Notes: Standard errors clustered at year level reported in parentheses. Mainland states included for the period 19402000. All tax rates on percentage point scale, and lagged by one year. Effective taxes defined as the marginal tax
rate faced by the 90th percentile earner in state s in year t for high productivity inventors, and the marginal tax rate
rate faced by the median earner for low productivity inventors. Regressions with state and year fixed effects include
controls for lagged real state GDP per capita, population density, and a quadratic in inventor tenure. All regressions
include controls for inventor productivity, and a local agglomeration force, measured as the number of patents applied
for in the inventor’s modal class in state s in year t−1 by other residents of the state. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

44

Table 6: Effects of Taxes at the Individual Inventor Level (IV)
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.647∗∗∗
(0.025)
-0.172∗∗
(0.072)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.622∗∗∗
(0.026)
-0.063
(0.071)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.013∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.017∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.004∗
(0.002)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.695∗∗∗
(0.025)
0.047
(0.070)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.119∗∗∗
(0.025)

-0.184∗∗∗
(0.029)

-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.136∗∗∗
(0.021)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5956315
76.312
42.517

5956315
45.079
49.757

4545384
0.442
0.664

4392312
2.758
1.453

5956315
61.421
48.678

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. Personal tax rates and corporate tax rates are instrumented for by the predicted
tax rates given by equations (5) and (6) respectively. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

45

Table 7: Effects of Taxes on Corporate vs. Non Corporate Inventors (IV)
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
MTR × Corp. Inv.
Top Corporate MTR
Corp. MTR × Corp. Inv.

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR
MTR × Corp. Inv.

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.083∗∗
(0.037)
-0.610∗∗∗
(0.029)
-0.057
(0.116)
-0.200∗∗∗
(0.024)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.550∗∗∗
(0.035)
-0.092∗∗∗
(0.025)
0.240∗∗
(0.114)
-0.354∗∗∗
(0.021)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.007∗∗∗
(0.000)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.026∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.009∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.020∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗∗∗
(0.001)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

0.166∗∗∗
(0.044)
-0.286∗∗∗
(0.039)

-0.048
(0.038)
-0.131∗∗∗
(0.028)

-0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.002∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.002∗∗
(0.001)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5956315
76.312
42.517

5956315
45.079
49.757

4545384
0.442
0.664

4392312
2.758
1.453

Notes: See the notes to Table 6. Corporate inventors (“Corp. Inv.”) defined as inventors who have a patent with a
firm at least once in their career. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

46

Table 8: The Micro Effects of Agglomeration
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Effective MTR × Agglom.
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR
Effective MTR × Agglom.

State × Year FE
Inventor FE

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.635∗∗∗
(0.102)
0.082
(0.061)
-0.200∗
(0.104)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.620∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.277∗∗∗
(0.080)
-0.098
(0.102)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.017∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.006∗
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.669∗∗∗
(0.083)
0.022
(0.057)
-0.091
(0.093)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.634∗∗∗
(0.104)
0.114∗
(0.064)

-0.591∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.325∗∗∗
(0.085)

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.004∗
(0.002)

-0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.008∗∗
(0.003)

-0.646∗∗∗
(0.084)
0.058
(0.057)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5960366
76.306
42.521

5960366
45.078
49.757

4548116
0.442
0.664

4394959
2.758
1.454

5960366
61.408
48.681

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. The agglomeration force “Agglom.” is measured as the number of patents applied for
in the inventor’s modal class in state s in year t − 1 by other residents of the state. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

47

Table 9: Inventors’ Location Choices: Multinomial Logit Estimations
Effective ATR
Agglomeration Forces
Home State Flag

(1)
-0.093∗∗∗
(0.009)
1.217∗∗∗
(0.029)
3.866∗∗∗
(0.016)

(2)
-0.025∗∗
(0.012)
1.216∗∗∗
(0.030)
3.868∗∗∗
(0.016)

Interaction coefficients:
Non-Corporate Inventor

(3)
-0.026∗∗
(0.012)
1.216∗∗∗
(0.030)
3.869∗∗∗
(0.016)

(4)
-0.026∗∗
(0.012)
0.994∗∗∗
(0.072)
3.868∗∗∗
(0.016)

0.071∗∗∗
(0.017)
0.016∗∗∗
(0.004)

Agglomeration

0.130∗∗∗
(0.001)

Assignee Has Patent

Fixed Effects
Observations

(5)
-0.121∗∗∗
(0.013)
1.112∗∗∗
(0.030)
3.690∗∗∗
(0.016)

State
+ Year
1951513

State
× Year
1951513

State
× Year
1951513

State
× Year
1951513

State
× Year
1951513

Notes: Table reports coefficients estimated from the multinomial logistic regression specified in Section 6.2. Local
agglomeration forces are proxied by the number of patents applied for in the inventor’s modal class in state s in
year t by other residents in the state. White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at inventor level
reported in parentheses. All tax rates on percentage point scale, and lagged by one year. Includes home state × high
productivity FEs. For the sake of computational feasibility, we restrict ourselves to the fifteen most inventive states,
as measured by total patents over the period 1940-2000, and limit our attention to periods when these states have
a progressive tax spell. This sample restriction yields possible choice states of California, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and Wisconsin. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

48

Table 10: Effects of Taxes at the Individual Firm Level
Dependent Variable:
Top Corporate MTR
90th Percentile MTR
50th Percentile MTR

Observations

# of
Patents
(1)
-0.392∗∗
(0.171)
0.076
(0.105)
-0.331∗∗
(0.162)
147777

Panel A: OLS
Log
# of
Patents
Citations
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
-0.042
-23.524∗∗∗
(0.012)
(4.282)
0.018
-1.318
(0.011)
(3.691)
-0.028
-9.097∗
(0.018)
(5.310)
34572

147777

Log
Citations
(4)
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.015)
0.013
(0.014)
-0.025
(0.022)

# of Research
Workers
(5)
-9.829
(7.948)
-9.655∗∗
(3.826)
-9.749
(7.062)

Location
Choice
(6)
-0.026∗∗
(0.013)
-0.049∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.035)

33679

28918

11901

Panel B: Instrumental Variables
Top Corporate MTR
90th Percentile MTR
50th Percentile MTR

State FE
Year FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

-0.639∗∗
(0.299)
0.089
(0.118)
-0.375
(0.229)

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.017)
0.024∗
(0.013)
-0.025
(0.022)

-31.352∗∗∗
(6.325)
2.059
(4.035)
-16.512∗∗∗
(6.384)

-0.053∗∗
(0.021)
0.021
(0.016)
-0.022
(0.028)

-42.246∗∗
(18.718)
-5.977∗
(3.506)
-40.111∗∗
(16.158)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

147777
2.924
21.872

34572
1.310
1.300

147777
103.764
365.764

33679
3.253
1.591

28918
71.162
643.434

Notes: Columns 1 through 4 present estimates from linear regressions at the firm level. Column 5 reports estimated
coefficients from a multinomial logistic regression on location choice for new lab entry. For computational simplicity,
we consider labs in the top 15 states, ranked by total patents between 1920 and 2000. Mainland states included
for the period 1940-2000. Tax rates measured in percentage points and lagged by one year. In Panel B, personal
tax rates and corporate tax rates are instrumented for by the predicted tax rates given by equations (5) and (6)
respectively. All regressions include controls for average GDP per capita and population density in the states in
which the firm operates labs, weighted by the number of labs in each state. For the linear regressions, state fixed
effects refer to a set of dummy variables equal to 1 if the firm has at least one R&D lab in the state. For column
6, state fixed effects control for the baseline probability that a firm locates a lab in state s. Number of observations
in column 6 refers to the number of new lab openings in our data. White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. Multinomial logistic regression only includes state tax rates, rather than combined federal
and state tax rates, in the explanatory variable set. Location choice also contains state-specific trends as a control.
∗
p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

49

Figure 2: Patents per 10,000 State Residents Over Time

Panel A: 1940

Panel B: 1950

Panel C: 1960

Panel D: 1970

Panel E: 1980

Panel F: 1990

Panel G: 2000
50

20

Share Corporate (%)
40
60

80

Figure 3: Share of Corporate Patents and Corporate Inventors

1920

1940

1960
Year

Share of Inventors

1980

2000

Share of Patents

Notes: The graph shows the share of patents assigned to corporations (dashed line) and the share of inventors who
patent for corporations (solid line).

51

Figure 4: Locations of Firm R&D Labs

Panel A: 1921

Panel B: 1927

Panel C: 1933

Panel D: 1940

Panel E: 1950

Panel F: 1960

Panel E: 1965

Panel F: 1970

Notes: Map plots locations of firm R&D labs for a sample of eight National Research Council Surveys of Industrial
52
Research Laboratories of the United States (IRLUS) directory years.

1940

1960
Percent w/ Reform (LHS)
90th Pctile Change Size

1980

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Size of Non-Zero Corporate Tax Change (%)

Percent of States Changing Corporate Tax
5
10
15
20
25
30
0

0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18
Size of Non-Zero Personal Tax Change (%)

0

Percent of States Changing Personal Tax
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

Figure 5: Trends in State Statutory Tax Policy Changes

2000

1940

Mean Change Size

1960
Percent w/ Reform (LHS)
90th Pctile Change Size

Panel A: Personal Income Tax

1980

2000
Mean Change Size

Panel B: Corporate Income Tax

Notes: Figure plots the time series of the share of states experiencing a statutory personal income (panel A) and
corporate income (panel B) tax rate change. The gray bars, plotted against the left axis, show the share of all states
that experience a statutory top tax rate change. The black solid line plots the mean size (positive or negative) of
non-zero tax changes, while the blue dashed line represents the size of a 90th percentile non-zero tax rate change in
that year. Both lines are plotted against the right axis.

53

Figure 6: Marginal State Tax Rates at the Median Income over Time (Percentage Points)

Panel A: 1940

Panel B: 1950

Panel C: 1960

Panel D: 1970

Panel E: 1980

Panel F: 1990

Panel G: 2000
54

Figure 7: Marginal State Tax Rates at 90th Income Percentile over Time
(Percentage Points)

Panel A: 1940

Panel B: 1950

Panel C: 1960

Panel D: 1970

Panel E: 1980

Panel F: 1990

Panel G: 2000
55

5

2
197

NE ME

HI WI CT MO ND MA MS SC TN AR CA ID UT AL IA LA KY CO DC RI AK DE IN

OH

0

195

197

193

9
194
7
194
9

NJ

193

6
193

4

2

193

193

MD

8
196
9

PA

8

AZ

196

GA OK

1
2
192
3
192
8

192

192

0

NC

3

SD

196

KS

192

191
2
191
3

VA MT NM

190

OR VT

7

NY

7

WV

193

9
193
1

192

9
191

191

5

MN

MI

IL NH FL

0

Number of States Introducing Corporate Taxes
1
2
3

4

193

3

Figure 8: Introduction of State Corporate Taxes

Notes: Figure plots the first year in which each state has a statutory corporate income tax rate.

56

Figure 9: Top State Corporate Marginal Tax Rates over Time (Percentage
Points)

Panel A: 1940

Panel B: 1950

Panel C: 1960

Panel D: 1970

Panel E: 1980

Panel F: 1990

Panel G: 2000
57

Figure 10: Event Studies around Large State Tax Changes

Effect of Large Tax Increase
on Patents per 10,000
−.2
0
−.4
−.6

−.6

−.4

Effect of Large Tax Increase
on Patents per 10,000
−.2
0

.2

Panel B: Change in Top
Corporate Tax Rate

.2

Panel A: Change in Median
Personal Income Tax Rate

−2

−1
0
1
Years Since Tax Reform

2

3

4

−4

−3

−2

−1
0
1
Years Since Tax Reform

2

3

4

−4

−3

−2

−1
0
1
Years Since Tax Reform

2

3

4

−4

−3

−2

−1
0
1
Years Since Tax Reform

2

3

4

−.8

−.6

−.6

Effect of Large Tax Increase
on Inventors per 10,000
−.4
−.2
0

Effect of Large Tax Increase
on Inventors per 10,000
−.4
−.2
0

.2

−3

.2

−4

Notes: Figure plots the coefficients on event time dummies relative to the reform event time. Year 0 is the first fiscal
year during which the new (higher) tax is applicable. The left panel (A) considers state-level changes in patenting
and inventor counts per 10,000 state residents around large changes (all redefined as tax increases) in the personal
income marginal tax rate at the median earnings. The right panel (B) considers changes in innovation around large
changes (relabeled as increases) in the top corporate tax rate. A “large” tax change is defined to be in the top 10%
of non-zero year-over-year tax increases (at least 6.85 percentage points for personal income taxes, and 14.8pp for
corporate taxes) or decreases (at least 3.6pp for personal income taxes, and 9.3pp for corporate taxes). Large reforms
with a second reform within 4 years, either before or after, are excluded. All regressions include calendar year fixed
effects and reform fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals in gray.

58

APPENDIX
A.1

Variable Definitions

In this section, we detail the construction of relevant variables for our analysis. All state-level
variables have analogous definitions at the county-level for our border-county analysis.
• Top Corporate Marginal Tax Rate (MTR) - The additional tax burden accruing to a firm in
the top tax bracket in state s for an additional one dollar of revenue if all of its operations
were in s. In firm-level regressions (Table 10), we assign firms the average corporate tax in
states in which the firm operates an R&D lab, weighted by the share of labs in that state.
• 90th Percentile Income Marginal Tax Rate (MTR) - The additional tax burden accruing to
an individual at the 90th percentile of the national income distribution for an additional one
dollar of earnings. Calculated using the tax calculator by Bakija (2017).
• 90th Percentile Income Average Tax Rate (ATR) - The total tax burden for an individual
at the 90th percentile of the national income distribution divided by that individual’s total
income. Calculated using the tax calculator by Bakija (2017).
• Median Income Marginal Tax Rate (MTR) - The additional tax burden accruing to an individual at the 50th percentile of the national income distribution for an additional one dollar
of earnings. Calculated using the tax calculator by Bakija (2017).
• Median Income Average Tax Rate (ATR) - The total tax burden for an individual at the
50th percentile of the national income distribution divided by that individual’s total income.
Calculated using the tax calculator by Bakija (2017).
• Inventor productivity - An inventor’s productivity in year t is defined to be the number of
eventually-granted patents that the inventor has applied for as of year t − 1. In robustness
table A7, inventor i’s productivity in year t is defined to be the total number of citations
ever received by patents applied for by i through year t. An inventor is said to be “high
productivity” in year t if he/she is in the top 10% of the national inventor productivity
distribution in year t. In robustness table A4, an inventor is said to be high productivity
if he/she is in the top 5% of the national productivity distribution in year t. In robustness
table A6, an inventor is said to be high productivity if he/she is ever in the top 10% of the
national productivity distribution in a single year. Finally, robustness table A8 allows an
inventor to be high productivity if he/she is in the top 10% of the productivity distribution,
of middle productivity if he/she is between the 75th and 90th percentile of the productivity
distribution, and low productivity otherwise.
59

• Effective Tax Rates - An inventor’s effective marginal (average) tax rate is defined to be
the marginal (average) tax rate faced by the 90th percentile earner in the national income
distribution if the inventor is high productivity, and the marginal (average) tax rate faced by
a median earner if the inventor is low productivity. In appendix table A8, middle productivity
inventors have an effective tax rate equal to the tax rate faced by an individual earning at the
75th percentile of the national income distribution. In all regressions, we use lagged effective
tax rates as independent variables. Thus an inventor living in state s will face an effective tax
rate for innovation output in year t which is the effective tax rate the inventor would have
faced in year t − 1 given his/her t − 1 productivity level and the tax laws in place in year
t − 1.
• Log Patents - The natural logarithm of the number of eventually-granted patents applied for
in state s in year t. Similarly, in firm regressions (Table 10), Log Patents refers to the natural
logarithm of the number of successful patent applications for firm j in year t.
• Log Citations - The natural logarithm of the number of citations ever received by eventuallygranted patents which were applied for in state s in year t. Similarly, in firm regressions (Table
10), Log Citations refers to the natural logarithm of the number of citations ever received
by eventually-granted patents which were applied for by firm j in year t. Citation counts
adjusted according to the algorithm of Hall et al. (2001), detailed for our data in Akcigit
et al. (2017) Appendix B.1.
• Log Inventors - The natural logarithm of number of inventors in state s in year t as implied by
the Lai et al. (2014) algorithm applied to our dataset. A detailed description of this algorithm
is provided in Appendix OA.1.
• Log Superstars - The natural logarithm of the number of inventors in state s in year t who
are in the top 5% of the national inventor productivity distribution.
• Corporate Patent - A corporate patent is one which is assigned to a corporation after being
granted.
• Share Assigned - The share of patents in state s in year t which are assigned to a corporation.
• Log Patents (3-year) - The log of the number of eventually-granted patents applied for by
inventor i in years t through t + 2.
• Log Citations (3-year) - The log of the number of citations ever received by eventually-granted
patents which were applied for by inventor i in years t through t + 2. Citation counts adjusted
according to the algorithm of Hall et al. (2001), detailed for our data in Akcigit et al. (2017)
Appendix B.1.
60

• Has Patent (3-year) - An indicator variable, equal to 100 (for legibility) if the inventor has
at least one successful patent application between years t and t + 2. Inventors are included
in the regression sample for the period between their first ever successful patent application,
and their last ever successful patent application.
• Has 10+ Cites (3-year) - An indicator variable, equal to 100 (for legibility) if the inventor’s
patents, applied for between years t and t+2, ever receive at least 10 citations in total between
them. Inventors are included in the regression sample for the period between their first ever
successful patent application, and their last ever successful patent application. Patent citation
counts adjusted according to the algorithm of Hall et al. (2001), detailed for our data in Akcigit
et al. (2017) Appendix B.1.
• Has Corporate Patent (3-yr) - An indicator variable, equal to 100 (for legibility) if the inventor
successfully applies for at least one patent, which is assigned to a corporation, between years
t and t + 2. Inventors are included in the regression sample for the period between their first
ever successful patent application, and their last ever successful patent application.
• Corporate Inventor - An inventor is said to be a corporate inventor if he/she is granted at
least one corporate patent in his/her career.
• # of Research Workers - The number of research workers employed by the firm as stated
on the National Research Council (NRC) Surveys of Industrial Research Laboratories of the
United States (IRLUS).
• Agglomeration - The number of patents, in thousands, applied for by inventors j 6= i who
share inventor i’s modal patent class in year t in state s.
• Mover - An inventor is said to be a mover if he/she applies for patents in at least two states
over the sample period. Analagously, non-movers are those inventors who only apply for
patents in one state over the entire course of their career.
• Home State - The state in which an inventor first applies for a patent.
• Assignee Has Patent in Destination - An indicator variable equal to one if an inventor i’s
firm has at least one patent applied for in year t by an inventor j 6= i in destination state s.
• Inventor Tenure/Experience - an inventor’s tenure is the number of years that have passed
since the inventor’s first successful patent application.

61

A.2

Additional Tables and Figures
Table A1: Disambiguation Performance
Sample
1920-2004, All Countries
1920-2004, US only
1940-2000, US only

# Inventors
4,890,574
2,734,229
1,953,066

# Patents
6,443,227
4,208,876
2,775,209

Lai et al. Patents, New Disambig.
Lai et al. Disambiguation

3,342,989
2,998,661

3,984,771
3,984,771

Lai et al. US Patents, New Disambig.
Lai et al. Disambig (US)

1,572,011
1,462,207

2,179,741
2,179,741

Notes: Table shows performance of the Lai et al. disambiguation algorithm as applied to our historical patent
data. Each row contains performance information for a different subsample. The category “Lai et al. Patents, New
Disambig.” reports the performance of our algorithm on the patent records included in the original Lai et al. sample.
Likewise, “Lai et al. Disambiguation” reports the number of unique inventors that Lai et al. find when applying their
algorithm solely to their sample. The first column shows the number of unique inventors found by the disambiguation
algorithm, while the second shows the unique number of patents in each subsample.

62

Table A2: Robustness of Macro Effects of Taxes: State Level Regressions,
excluding Federal Taxes or California
Panel A: State Taxes Only
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations
(1)
(2)
∗∗∗
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.053
-0.056∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.009)

Log
Inventors
(3)
-0.045∗∗∗
(0.007)

Share
Assigned
(4)
-0.799∗∗∗
(0.142)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.026∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.027∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.018
(0.065)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.042∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.042∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.085
(0.090)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.047∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.040∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.011
(0.093)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.095∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.102∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.086∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.691∗∗∗
(0.143)

Panel B: Excluding CA, Including Federal Taxes
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)

-0.056∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.050∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.006)

-1.007∗∗∗
(0.146)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.055∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.052∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.053∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.390∗∗∗
(0.072)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.076∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.083∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.073∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.337∗∗∗
(0.086)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.107∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.111∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.102∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.453∗∗∗
(0.105)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.099∗∗∗
(0.007)
2806
6.99
1.24

-0.105∗∗∗
(0.010)
2806
9.64
1.48

-0.090∗∗∗
(0.007)
2806
7.12
1.25

-0.585∗∗∗
(0.144)
2806
71.97
14.32

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Notes: Panel A reports estimates in which only state tax rates are included in tax measures. Panel B reports
estimates where federal tax rates are included in the tax measures (as in the baseline table), but we drop California
from our analysis. Row definitions, tax rate variable definitions, estimation period, standard errors, weighting, and
controls all identical to those specified in the footnote of Table 2. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

63

Table A3: Robustness Checks: IV Strategy
Panel A: State-Level Non-Movers (IV)
Log
Log
Log
Dependent Variable:
Patents Citations Inventors
(1)
(2)
(3)
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)
-0.068∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.055∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.007)

Share
Assigned
(4)
-1.055∗∗∗
(0.182)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.048∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.048∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.046∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.427∗∗∗
(0.083)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.033∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.025∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.034∗∗∗
(0.003)

0.169∗
(0.087)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.062∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.055∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.060∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.088
(0.118)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.096∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.102∗∗∗
(0.014)

-0.088∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.525∗∗∗
(0.176)

2867
6.90
1.30

2867
9.56
1.57

2867
7.11
1.32

2867
68.40
14.66

Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Panel B: Border County Pairs, Total Effects (IV)
Log
Patents
-0.065∗∗∗
(0.015)

Log
Citations
-0.110∗∗∗
(0.022)

Log
Inventors
-0.051∗∗∗
(0.019)

Log Corp.
Patents
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.017)

90th Pctile Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.023∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.025∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.006)

Median Income MTR (%, lag)

-0.074∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.080∗∗∗
(0.011)

-0.048∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.062∗∗∗
(0.008)

90th Pctile Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.089∗∗∗
(0.008)

-0.099∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.075∗∗∗
(0.009)

Median Income ATR (%, lag)

-0.162∗∗∗
(0.019)

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.025)

-0.134∗∗∗
(0.017)

-0.143∗∗∗
(0.021)

8289
1.45

8289
1.64

8289
1.49

8217
1.57

Dependent Variable:
Top Corporate MTR (%, lag)

Observations
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Notes: Table reports estimates from instrumental variables regressions similar to those in Panel B of Table 2. Panel
A reports state-year level IV regressions in which we only include inventors who never cross state lines. Panel B
reports border-county pair regressions similar to those in Panel A of Table 3, except we instrument the difference in
tax rates with the predicted difference in tax rates given by our Federal tax instrument defined in equations 5 and
6. Row definitions, tax rate and instrumental variable definitions, estimation period, standard errors, weighting, and
controls all identical to those specified in the footnote of 64
Table 2. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

Table A4: Individual Inventor Level: High Productivity Cutoff at Top 5%
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.625∗∗∗
(0.092)
-0.064
(0.050)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.624∗∗∗
(0.103)
-0.076
(0.058)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.001)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.017∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.002)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.674∗∗∗
(0.081)
-0.047
(0.047)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.618∗∗∗
(0.104)

-0.600∗∗∗
(0.117)

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.656∗∗∗
(0.092)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5964243
76.291
42.530

5964243
45.069
49.756

4550168
0.442
0.664

4396954
2.758
1.453

5964243
61.399
48.683

Notes: High productivity inventors are defined here as being in the top 5% of dynamic patent counts and assigned
the effective tax rate at the 90th percentile of income (all others are assigned the tax rate at the median income).
See the notes to Table 5. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

65

Table A5: Individual Inventor Level: Only Including States with Progressive Tax Spells
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.390∗∗∗
(0.086)
-0.023
(0.117)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.453∗∗∗
(0.100)
0.064
(0.114)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.004)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.501∗∗∗
(0.068)
0.020
(0.120)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.425∗∗∗
(0.090)

-0.449∗∗∗
(0.102)

-0.008∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.509∗∗∗
(0.069)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

2759975
75.913
42.761

2759975
45.713
49.816

2095175
0.447
0.672

2027602
2.814
1.484

2759975
59.769
49.036

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. Only state-years undergoing progressive spells included between 1940 and 2000 are
included here. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

66

Table A6: Individual Inventor Level: Using Lifetime Measure of Inventor
productivity
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.835∗∗∗
(0.153)
-0.131
(0.114)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.532∗∗∗
(0.101)
-0.109
(0.102)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.003)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.559∗∗∗
(0.098)
-0.095
(0.096)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.856∗∗∗
(0.172)

-0.473∗∗∗
(0.127)

-0.010∗∗
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.006)

-0.512∗∗∗
(0.116)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5960430
76.306
42.521

5960430
45.078
49.757

4548136
0.442
0.664

4394979
2.758
1.454

5960430
61.407
48.681

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. High productivity inventors are defined here as ever being in the top 10% of dynamic
patent counts. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

67

Table A7: Individual Inventor Level: Using Dynamic Citation Counts
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.467∗∗∗
(0.097)
-0.243∗∗
(0.101)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.458∗∗∗
(0.121)
-0.144
(0.100)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.003∗
(0.002)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.515∗∗∗
(0.076)
-0.131
(0.091)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.425∗∗∗
(0.101)

-0.394∗∗∗
(0.131)

-0.007∗∗
(0.003)

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.456∗∗∗
(0.079)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5960430
76.306
42.521

5960430
45.078
49.757

4548136
0.442
0.664

4394979
2.758
1.454

5960430
61.407
48.681

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. High productivity inventors defined here as being in the top 10% of the dynamic
citation counts. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

68

Table A8: Individual Inventor Level: Three Productivity Cutoffs
Dependent Variable:
Effective MTR
Top Corporate MTR

State FE
Year FE
Inventor FE
Effective MTR

State × Year FE
Inventor FE
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.
S.D. of Dep. Var.

Has Patent
(3-year)
(1)
-0.629∗∗∗
(0.102)
-0.202∗∗
(0.090)

Has 10+ Cites
(3-year)
(2)
-0.563∗∗∗
(0.072)
-0.104
(0.074)

Log Patents
(3-year)
(3)
-0.011∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.002∗
(0.001)

Log Citations
(3-year)
(4)
-0.016∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)

Has Corporate
Patent (3-yr)
(5)
-0.587∗∗∗
(0.072)
-0.059
(0.078)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

-0.791∗∗∗
(0.130)

-0.661∗∗∗
(0.090)

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.682∗∗∗
(0.089)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

3940182
64.644
47.807

3940182
41.771
49.318

2541638
0.614
0.742

2465129
2.972
1.505

3940182
54.645
49.784

Notes: See the notes to Table 5. Effective taxes defined as the marginal tax rate faced by the 90th percentile earner
in state s in year t for high productivity inventors, the rate faced by the 75th percentile earner for mid-productivity
inventors, and the marginal tax rate rate faced by the median earner for low productivity inventors. Inventors are
said to be high, or middle productivity if they are above the 10th , or 25th percentiles of dynamic patent counts, and
low productivity otherwise. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

69

Figure A1: Inventors per 10,000 State Residents Over Time

Panel A: 1940

Panel B: 1950

Panel C: 1960

Panel D: 1970

Panel E: 1980

Panel F: 1990

Panel G: 2000
70

0

# Research Labs
2000
4000

6000

Figure A2: Trends in R&D Lab Operations

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Year

# Citations from Patents of Research Labs
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000

5000

# Patents from Research Labs
10000
15000
20000

25000

Panel A: Total Number of Labs

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1920

1930

1940

Year

1950

1960

1970

Year

Panel C: Citations Received by Labs

0

20

100000

Research Workers per Research Lab
40
60
80

# Research Workers
200000 300000 400000

100

500000

Panel B: Total Patents from Labs

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1920

Year

Panel D: Total Research Workers

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Year

Panel E: Mean Research Workers per Lab

Notes: Figure plots trends in R&D labs from the National Research Council Surveys of Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States (IRLUS).

71

0

Percent of firms with at least one patent
10
20
30
40

Figure A3: Firm Patent Distributions

21 927 931 933 938 940 946 950 956 960 965 970
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
19

0

10

Percent
20

30

40

Panel A: % of Firms with Patents

0

10
20
30
40
Number of Patents Granted To Firm in Year

50+

Pr{Patents > 0} = 21.58, Cond. Median = 3, Cond. Mean = 10.28

2

10

Number of Patents
4
6
8

25
50
100
Number of Patents
(Log Scale, Productive Firms)

10

200

Panel B: Patents per Firm per Year 1920-1970

1920

1930
Median
95th (RHS)

1940

Year

1950

75th
99th (RHS)

1960

1970

90th (RHS)

Panel C: Patents per firm over time
Notes: Figure plots distributions of patenting amongst firms with an R&D labs in the National Research Council
Surveys of Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States (IRLUS). The top panel plots the share of firms in
each survey year which have at least one patent in that year. Panel B plots the distribution of firm patenting per
year over the R&D lab sample of 1920-1970, conditional on the firm having at least one patent. Panel C plots the
time series of the firm-year level patenting distribution, conditional on having at least one patent.

72

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

20
0

Top Tax Rate (%, including zeros)
5
10
15

10
20
30
40
50
Number of States with Personal Income Tax

2

Top Tax Rate (%, conditional non-zero)
4
6
8
10

Figure A4: The Evolution of Personal Income Taxes

2020

1920

1940

1960

Mean non-zero tax (L Axis)
Number of States with Tax (R Axis)

25th pctile
Mean

Panel A: Intensive and Extensive Margin

1980

2000

Panel B: Distribution of Statutory Tax Rates

Notes: Figure plots the share of states with a personal income tax, as well as the distribution of those taxes over
time.

193

SD

NM

MT

196
9

MN

MI

197
5

9

CA KY CO DC AK

197
1
197
2

IA

7
196
8

AL

IL

196

ID

MD

194
9

OK WI MS DE ND NH AR GA

LA WV

193
7

AZ

193

OR UT

ME

193

IN

193
6

192
8

192
3

2

191

8
191
1

MA NY

190

HI

VT

9
191

190
0
190
2

VA NC

SC

TN

RI

4
193
5

192

191
7

9
193
1

KS

NE CT PA OH NJ

0

Number of States Introducing Personal Income Taxes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

3

Figure A5: Introduction Year of State Personal Income Taxes

MO

Notes: Figure plots the first year in which each state has a statutory personal income tax rate.

73

2020

Median
90th pctile

0

State Top Marginal Tax Rate
5
10

15

State Marginal Tax Rate for 50th Percentile
0
2
4
6
8
10

Figure A6: The Evolution of Personal Income Taxes in Select States

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960 1970
Year

CA
NY

IL
PA

1980

1990

2000

2010

1920

NJ

Panel A: Time Series of Key States’
Top Statutory MTR

1930

1940

1950

1960 1970
Year

CA
NY

IL
PA

1980

1990

2000

2010

NJ

Panel B: Time Series of Key States’
MTR for Median Earner

Notes: Figure plots the time series of marginal personal income tax rates for the five most innovative states in our
sample.

74

3

10

20
30
40
Number of States with Corporate Tax

Top Tax Rate (%, conditional non-zero)
4
5
6
7
8

50

Figure A7: The Evolution of Corporate Taxes

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

Mean non-zero tax (L Axis)
Number of States with Tax (R Axis)

0

Top Tax Rate (%, including zeros)
2
4
6
8
10

Panel A: Intensive and Extensive Margin

1920

1940

1960

1980

10th pctile
Mean

2000

2020

Median
90th pctile

0

Top Corporate Marginal Tax Rate (%)
5
10
15

Panel B: Distribution of Statutory Tax Rates

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960 1970
Year

CA
NY

IL
PA

1980

1990

2000

2010

NJ

Panel C: Time Series of Select States
Notes: Figure plots the time series of the distribution and proliferation of state corporate tax rates. Panel A shows
the number of states with a corporate income tax and the mean non-zero tax rate. Panel B plots the distribution
of top state corporate tax rates over time. Panel C shows the evolution of top state corporate tax rates for the five
most innovative states in our sample.

75

.2

.2

Residualized Log Patents
-.1
0
.1

-.3

-.2

-.4

-.2

Residualized Log Patents
-.2
0
.2

Residualized Log Patents
-.1
0
.1

.4

Figure A8: Binned Scatter Plots: State Regressions

-4

-2
0
2
Residualized Median Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

4

-4

-2
0
2
Residualized Median Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

4

-4

-2
0
2
Residualized 90th Percentile Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

4

-4

-2
0
2
Residualized 90th Percentile Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

4

-4

-2
0
2
Residualized 90th Percentile Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

4

-.3

Residualized Log Citations Received (1947 on)
-.4
-.2
0
.2

-1
0
1
Residualized Top Corporate MTR (%)

2

-2

-1
0
1
Residualized Top Corporate MTR (%)

2

-2

-1
0
1
Residualized Top Corporate MTR (%)

2

.2
Residualized Log Inventors
-.1
0
.1

-.3

-.2

Residualized Log Inventors
-.2
-.1
0

Residualized Log Inventors
-.2
0
.2

.1

.4

-.6

-2

Residualized Log Citations Received (1947 on)
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

4

Residualized Log Citations Received (1947 on)
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

-2
0
2
Residualized Median Earner Personal Income MTR (%)

-.4

76

-4

Notes: Figure plots binned scatter plots of effect of taxes at state level. The top row shows the effect on log patents, the middle row present scatters for log
citations, while the bottom row shows log inventors. The leftmost column shows the effect of median income marginal tax rates, the middle column shows the
effect of MTRs for the 90th percentile earners, and the rightmost column show effect of top corporate MTRs. All tax rates include both federal and state taxes.
Both the horizontal and vertical axes are residualized against state and year fixed effects, as well as lagged population density, GDP per capita, and R&D tax
credits.

A.3

Case Studies

We present here three special episodes of tax reform in New York, Delaware, and Michigan to
provide some sharp visual evidence of the effects of taxes on innovation. Figures A9-A10 show the
results from each of these episodes. In each case, the black solid line represents the time series in
the state under consideration, while the dashed line represents a control state. The control state
is constructed according to the synthetic control method of Abadie et al. (2010). That is, it is a
weighted average of other states in the sample, where the weights are chosen to best match the
average innovation outcome of interest (patents, inventors, or citations), as well as real GDP per
capita and population density for the period before the tax change in the state of interest.
For the case of New York, the control state turns out to be California. For Michigan and
Delaware, it is a combination of other states. For the post-tax change period, the synthetic state
represents a plausible counterfactual of what may have happened in the state of interest absent the
tax change. The first panel shows log patents, the second shows log inventors and the third shows
log citations. The dashed vertical lines (or, for Michigan the gray area) represents the timing of
the tax change.
New York 1968 vs. California
The first case study is shown in Figure A9 and concerns New York’s 1968 tax reform bill, in which
the top marginal personal income tax rate increased from 10% to 14% and its state top corporate
tax rate increased from 5.5% to 7%. The control state here is California, where the top tax rate
increased as well from 7% to 10%, but remained lower while the corporate tax rate remained the
same at 5.5%. All variables are normalized at their 1965 levels. Before the tax bill, New York and
California follow remarkably similar trends for all three innovation outcomes. However, after the
reform, they diverge and New York performs much worse in terms of innovation relative to the
synthetic control.
Michigan 1967-1968
Figure A10 shows the case study of Michigan. Michigan introduced its personal state tax rate in
1967 at 2.6%. One year later, in 1968, it introduced its corporate state tax at 5.6%. The synthetic
control for Michigan is composed of several variations on California, Ohio/Pennsylvania, and, for
some of the outcome variables, a bit of Texas. While the control state and Michigan evolve very
similarly before 1967, Michigan starts performing significantly worse for the innovation outcome
measures after the introduction of its tax regime.
Delaware 1969-1970
The third case study concerns Delaware. In July 1969, the corporate tax rate increased from 5%
to 6%, and in August 1971 a temporary surcharge of 20% was added on top of the 6% corporate
77

tax rate. In 1970, the personal tax rate increased from 11% to 18%. In this case, the best-fitting
synthetic control is comprised of Nevada, California, and Connecticut. Figure A11 shows that the
effects on patents, citations, and inventors were noticeably large with the negative trend setting in
at the time of the tax reform.
These case studies provide particularly clear visual evidence of a strong negative relationship
between taxes and innovation. When combined with the macro state-level regressions, the instrumental variable approach and the border county analysis, the results overall bolster the conclusion
that taxes were significantly negatively related to innovation outcomes at the state level.

78

.6

Log Patents Relative to 1965
.7
.8
.9

1

Figure A9: Synthetic Control Analysis: New York 1968

1960

1965

1970
Year

Innovation: NY

1975

1980

Innovation: Synthetic NY

.7

Log Inventors Relative to 1965
.8
.9

1

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (1.000), OK (0.000), ND (0.000)

1960

1965

1970
Year

Innovation: NY

1975

1980

Innovation: Synthetic NY

.6

Log Citations Relative to 1965
.8
1
1.2
1.4

1.6

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (1.000), TX (0.000), UT (0.000)

1960

1965

1970
Year

Innovation: NY

1975

1980

Innovation: Synthetic NY

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (1.000), ME (0.000), OK (0.000)

Notes: Figure plots synthetic control analyses for New York’s 1968 tax reform bill, in which the top marginal personal
income tax rate increased from 10% to 14%, and its state corporate tax rate increased from 5.5% to 7%. The first
row shows the patterns for log patents, the middle row for log inventors, and the bottom row for log citations. We
normalize the patent counts for synthetic and actual New York to be the same in 1965.

79

7.4

7.6

Log Patents
7.8

8

8.2

Figure A10: Synthetic Control Analysis: Michigan 1967-68

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: MI

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic MI

7.2

7.4

Log Inventors
7.6
7.8

8

8.2

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (0.514), PA (0.239), TX (0.116)

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: MI

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic MI

9.5

Log Citations
10
10.5

11

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (0.503), PA (0.185), TX (0.103)

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: MI

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic MI

Top 3 synthetic control states: CA (0.468), OH (0.219), TX (0.077)

Notes: Figure plots synthetic control analyses Michigan around its major reforms in 1967 and 1968. In 1967, Michigan
introduced its personal income tax, at a rate of 2.6%. In 1968, it then introduced its corporate income tax, at a rate
of 5.6%. The first row shows the patterns for log patents, the middle row for log inventors, and the bottom row for
log citations.

80

5.6

5.8

Log Patents
6
6.2

6.4

6.6

Figure A11: Synthetic Control Analysis: Delaware 1969-71

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: DE

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic DE

5.6

5.8

Log Inventors
6
6.2

6.4

6.6

Top 3 synthetic control states: CT (0.375), NV (0.371), CA (0.232)

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: DE

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic DE

8

Log Citations
8.5
9

9.5

Top 3 synthetic control states: NV (0.396), CT (0.378), CA (0.200)

1950

1960

1970
Year

Innovation: DE

1980

1990

Innovation: Synthetic DE

Top 3 synthetic control states: CT (0.362), NV (0.354), CA (0.254)

Notes: Figure plots synthetic control analyses around Delaware’s tax reforms. In July 1969, the corporate tax rate
increased from 5% to 6%, and in August 1971 a temporary surcharge of 20% was added on top of the 6% corporate
tax rate. In 1970, the personal tax rate increased from 11% to 18%. The first row shows the patterns for log patents,
the middle row for log inventors, and the bottom row for log citations.

81

ONLINE APPENDIX – NOT FOR PUBLICATION
for “The Effects of Taxes on Innovation: Evidence from Historical
U.S. Patent Data”
by Ufuk Akcigit, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva
OA.1

Disambiguation Algorithm

We employ the algorithm of Lai et al. (2014) to disambiguate inventors in our historical patent
data.34 The goal of disambiguation is to determine if two patent-inventor level records were produced by the same inventor. A problem of this sort may be distilled into a clustering problem
well-suited to standard machine learning algorithms: given a training dataset and a set of features
– such as inventor name, location, technology class, assignee, and coauthor networks – we wish
to group records together into profiles which indicate that the two records were produced by the
same inventor. The goal is to assign probabilities of an inventor match based on the characteristics
of every pair of observations. The central idea is that two records coming from two very similar
names (not necessarily identical: “John A Smith” vs “John Adam Smith” for instance) working in
similar subject areas, working for the same company in roughly the same geographic location, are
likely to be the same person.
Such a machine learning approach has three central benefits relative to other more rudimentary approaches, such as treating each individual name as a separate inventor, or hand-matching
innovators’ records to one another. First, the Lai et al. approach permits minor name typos or
data entry errors, without incorrectly decoupling these inventors. Second, it provides probabilistic
matches based on more information than name and location, which helps disambiguate between
common names – a John Smith working in software is likely different to a John Smith with patents
in bootmaking. Finally, the algorithm does not impose any functional forms on the relationship
between a pair’s set of attributes and the probability that those pairs belong to the same inventor.
Of course, this machine learning approach is imperfect and will struggle to correctly match
inventors who drastically change their names or have exceptional careers. For instance, if an
inventor named Jane Smith changes her name after marrying a man with surname Robertson, the
algorithm will struggle to adapt, as names are the most distinguishing piece of information amongst
records. Similarly, if a software engineer living in California and working for Apple decides to change
his career and move to Montana to open a new shoe factory, the algorithm is likely to suggest that
these are two separate inventors, rather than one inventor with such an uncommon career trajectory.
The clustering exercise is subject to two principal challenges. First, one must produce a suitable
34
The code and associated files for the original disambiguation may be downloaded from https://github.com/
funginstitute/downloads; accessed October 13, 2016.

82

training dataset from which to glean the probability that two patent records with a similarity profile
of x belong to the same inventor. Here, one may follow two approaches. One could submit a handcurated dataset of known matches to the disambiguation algorithm to determine the likelihood of
a match. However, the construction of these datasets are often subject to bias if, for example,
researchers are more likely to include better-known inventors. An alternative approach, and the
one followed by Lai et al., is to allow the algorithm to produce its own training dataset based on
features in the data. For example, a training dataset of known matches could be constructed by
examining individuals with matching rare names.
Our baseline approach lies somewhere in between these two strategies. We use the matches
of Lai et al. to form the basis of our training dataset. We draw twenty million pairs of records
belonging to different inventors according to Lai et al. to complete our training dataset. Using
this as a training dataset relies on two principal assumptions: first, we assume that the Lai et al.
disambiguation correctly identifies inventors, and second we assume that the sets of features that
were predictive of inventor clustering are stable over time, so that the same rules for determining
matches in the modern sample of Lai et al. will apply to our historical sample. We choose this
approach in order to best match the state-of-the-art disambiguation of inventors in the modern
data.35
The second major challenge to the disambiguation exercise is computational. Ideally, one would
compare every pair of records in our data, and build a similarity profile for each. However, with over
12 million unique patent-inventor records in our dataset, one would have to compare over 144 trillion
record pairs in order to compare each record to each other, which is computationally infeasible. To
circumvent this challenge, we follow Lai et al. in disambiguating successively larger blocks. We
first group records into blocks of possible matches, based on the first characters of an inventor’s
name. Then we compare all records within a block to one another, but never compare across
blocks. After disambiguating a set of narrow blocks, we expand the size of the block, for example
by considering all record pairs that match the first three letters of an inventor’s name, rather than
the first five letters. By iteratively allowing progressively larger blocks, and assuming clusters
within prior blocking rounds were successfully disambiguated, we greatly reduce the computational
burden of the disambiguation.
Our starting point is the historical inventor data digitized by Akcigit et al. (2017), combined
with the patent data of Lai et al. (2014) available on the Harvard Dataverse Network (HDN).36 We
first manually clean inventor names and location to correct for obvious typos. The most common
correction is to remove prefixes and suffixes, such as “DR,” “JR,” and “SR.” In addition, we
standardize names to be all capital letters, and consider a person’s first name to be the first word
of their name. Finally, we consider only the first patent class listed on a patent document to be
35

In early versions of the paper, we experimented with allowing the algorithm to find its own training sets, and
found qualitatively similar headline results.
36
Accessed from https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=hdl:1902.1/15705 on February 13, 2017.

83

that patent’s primary classification.
To compare records, we construct a similarity profile for every pair of records to be compared.
A similarity profile x is a vector of similarity scores for the active attributes in the disambiguation.
Specifically, a similarity profile is encoded as follows:
• First and Last names
1. If one of the two records is missing the name
2. If there is no clear misspelling or abbreviation employed, and the strings do not exactly
match
3. If there is a misspelling (defined as either missing 1 or 2 characters somewhere, or
switching the place of a few characters)
4. If exact match or, in the case of first names, if one string appears to be an abbreviation
of the other in that it has the first 3 characters the same (e.g. “ROB” and “ROBERT”)
• Middle Names
0. If have different middle names
1. If one of the two records have missing middle name
2. If both records have missing middle name
3. If one record has a full middle name (e.g. “WILLIAM”) and the other has just the
middle initial which matches the full middle name (e.g. “W”).
4. If exactly the same name
• Location
1. If over 50 miles apart
2. If under 50 miles apart
3. If under 25 miles apart
4. If under 10 miles apart
5. If under 1 mile apart
• Patent Classes
0. If different strings
1. If exactly the same string
• Assignees
5. If the Jaro-Winkler string distance between assignee names is at least 0.9
84

4. If JW distance > 0.8
3. If JW distance > 0.7
2. If one of the two records has a missing assignee
1. Otherwise
• Coauthors
1. If coauthors exactly the same (coauthors entered as <First Initial> . <Last Name> and
separated by comma in the variable)
0. Otherwise
• Country
0. If different country
1. If the same non-US country
2. If the same US country
Next, one may construct, for every observed similarity profile, the probability that this profile
belongs to the same inventor or not, by comparing the frequency with which it occurs in the training
dataset. Specifically, defining M to be the set of matched inventor pairs in the training dataset,
and N to be the set of non-matched inventor pairs in the training dataset, one may use Bayes’ rule
to write the probability of a match as

P (M|x) =

P (x|M)P (M)
P (x|M)P (M) + P (x|N ) (1 − P (M))

where P (M) is the prior probability of a match, which we follow Lai et al. in setting as proportional
to the ratio of the number of within-cluster pairs (i.e. disambiguated inventors from prior blocking
rounds) in a block to the total number of pairs in that block.37 For numerical reasons, it is more
convenient to work with the posterior odds of a match, defined as
P (M|x)
1 − P (M|x)

=

P (x|M)

·

P (M)

P (x|N ) 1 − P (M)

In particular, we calculate the likelihood ratio, r(x), for every observed similarity profile x. This
likelihood ratio is defined as
r(x) =

P (x|M)
P (x|N )

(OA1)

This can be determined directly from the training dataset by comparing the number of records
with similarity profile x that belong in the matched training dataset (i.e. come from the same
37
The discrete nature of the similarity profile space described above makes the computation of this match probability
much simpler.

85

inventor), to the number of records with similarity profile x that belong in the unmatched training
dataset (i.e. come from different inventors).38 Once we have the likelihood ratios calculated, we
invert them to calculate the probability that two records originated from the same inventor:
1

P (M|x) =
1+

1−P (M) 1
P (M) r(x)

(OA2)

We say that two records originated from the same inventor if this posterior probability of a match
is at least 0.99.39
Our blocking routine proceeds as follows:40
Round 1. Block based on exact first and last name. Compare records based on middle name and patent
location.
Round 2. Block based on exact first and last name. Compare records based on middle name, coauthor
network, patent class, and assignee name.
Round 3. Block based on first five characters of first name, and exact last name. Compare records
based on middle name, coauthor network, patent class, and assignee name.
Round 4. Block based on first three characters of first name, and exact last name. Compare records
based on middle name, coauthor network, patent class, and assignee name.
Finally, we subset our data to only consider US inventors. As was indeed the case in our time
period, the most productive inventors are Kia Silverbrook, Shunpei Yamazaki, George Lyon, Donald
Weder, and Melvin De Groote. We refer the reader to Lai et al. (2014) for additional statistics on
the performance of the algorithm on modern data.

OA.2

Assigning Inventors to States

Our patent data provides information on the residence address of the patent’s inventors. However,
we do not observe the residence of all inventors on a patent in the historical period. Specifically,
we observe an inventor’s state if either 1) they are the first inventor on the patent, or 2) the patent
is contained in the Harvard Dataverse Network (HDN) data. In order to run our inventor-level
38
To account for small sample bias in rare similarity profiles, we follow Lai et al. in applying a Laplace correction
to these likelihood ratio values.
39
In the early stages of our analysis, we experimented with match thresholds of 0.98 and 0.95 to determine whether
records originated from the same inventor. After examining the data by hand, we determined that this was too low,
as common names such as Robert Smith were often spuriously considered the most prolific inventors in the data.
This problem largely vanished with the threshold of 0.99.
40
We experimented with additional rounds of blocking, as well as with allowing for inexact surname matches in the
blocking routine. Manual checks of the data revealed that this routine minimized errors with common names, and
correctly matched the most productive inventors as listed by outside data sources.

86

regressions, we must assign each inventor to a particular home state. In this section, we detail our
approach to doing so.
For all non-primary authors on historical patents, we impute a location using the following
algorithm:
1. We assign all HDN and first author inventors to the state listed in the data
2. If an inventor is an HDN or first author inventor on one patent in a given year, but not
on another patent, we assign that inventor to his first-author state. If he is first author in
multiple states in that year, we assign him to the state listed on the patent if that state
matches one of his first author states; otherwise we proceed to step 3 below (using alternative
years)
3. We replace the inventor’s state with the preceding years state if state information is still
missing.
4. We replace the inventor’s state with the following years state if state information is still
missing.
5. If the inventor-patent record is still missing state information, but the inventor has multiple
first-author states listed in that year, then we pick a random first-author state for that
inventor-patent.
6. If all else fails, we assign the state of the first-author on the patent.
An additional challenge arises from the fact that a number of inventors have patents granted
in multiple states in the same year. There may be many causes for multiple unique states within
a given year for an inventor. The most common causes of these multi-state inventors are:
• An inventor may live in state A until midway through a particular year, and then move to
state B. They file a patent application both in state A before moving and in state B after
moving. They never file a patent in state B before moving, and never file a patent in state A
after moving.
• Inventors may have multiple home addresses. As a result, they consistently file in both state A
and state B in multiple years. For example, inventors may spend half of the year in Chicago,
IL, and half of the year in Milwaukee, WI, and thus frequently have patents in both of these
states in a given year.
• Inventors have multiple coauthors, who live in different states and who alternate in terms of
who is the first listed author. For instance, Harvey Clayton Rentschler lives in Pittsburgh, PA,
but frequently coauthors with J. Marden, who lives in Orange, NJ. Every time they coauthor
a patent, the location is listed as Orange, NJ, but every time Harvey Rentschler sole authors
a patent, his location appears to be Pittsburgh. These situations are particularly common
87

among assigned patents, and seem to account for all individuals living in an exceptionally
high number of states. Indeed, everyone who shows up in 7 or more states has a coauthor
on their patents, while the share of those with a coauthor is 92.8% for those with multiple
states, compared with just 66.3% for those in one state41
• Possible disambiguation errors: two individuals may have very similar names, work in similar
classes, and live just across a state border from one another (so are close in latitude-longitude).
As a result these two separate inventors may be classified as the same person by the disambiguator. This would inflate the number of states an individual lives in.
To address this concern, we assign multi-state inventors a home state using the following algorithm:
1. Each year, assign an inventor to the modal state in which we observe him/her operating as a
sole author.
2. If the inventor does not have any sole authorships in that particular year, check if he/she has
sole authorships in the preceding or subsequent year. If the preceding and subsequent year
both have sole authorships in the same modal location, then assign the inventor to that state.
This smoothes over off years for inventors and removes spurious migration.
3. If we still do not have a location for the inventor, then we assign them to the modal location
we observe them in in the given year, regardless of whether the patent was sole authored or
coauthored.
4. If the inventor has two modal states (e.g. has 2 patents in both Illinois and Wisconsin in the
given year), then choose a random choice of those states and assign the inventor to that state.

OA.3

Historical Corporate Tax Data

We collected the corporate tax rates from a large variety of sources. We have built a documentation available at https://scholar.harvard.edu/stantcheva/publications that shows all the
sources for each year and state. We only collected direct taxes and net income franchise taxes. We
also collect surtaxes or surcharges, as well as additional temporary taxes imposed on top of the
main rates. They are sometimes imposed as a percentage of regular tax liabilities and sometimes
as a rate to add to the main rate. We record them as rates to add to the main rate with applicable
thresholds. We have not collected minimum taxes (they are very low and probably not applicable
to the companies in our sample) and alternative minimum taxes.

41
This is partially mechanical as these inventors are also more productive so have more chances to appear in
multiple states.

88

