                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO YOU KNOW THAT I KNOW THAT YOU KNOW...? HIGHER-ORDER BELIEFS
                           IN SURVEY DATA

                                       Olivier Coibion
                                     Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                         Saten Kumar
                                        Jane Ryngaert

                                      Working Paper 24987
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24987


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2018




We are grateful to Jennifer La’O for thoughtful discussions at the 2018 ASSA Conference and
2018 NBER Summer Institute, seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
and the Ridge August 2018 Workshop on Inflation Expectations as well as Hassan Afrouzi,
George-Marios Angeletos, John Leahy, Ricardo Reis, Dmitriy Sergeyev, and Michael Woodford
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do You Know That I Know That You Know...? Higher-Order Beliefs in Survey Data
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert
NBER Working Paper No. 24987
September 2018
JEL No. C83,D84,E31

                                          ABSTRACT

We implement a new survey of firms, focusing on their higher-order macroeconomic
expectations. The survey provides a novel set of stylized facts regarding the relationship between
first-order and higher-order expectations of economic agents, including how they adjust their
beliefs in response to a variety of information treatments and how these adjustments affect their
economic decisions. We show how these facts can be used to calibrate key parameters of noisy-
information models with infinite regress as well as to test predictions made by this class of
models. The survey also quantifies cognitive limits of agents in the form of level-k thinking. We
find little evidence that this departure from infinite regress helps reconcile the data and theory.


Olivier Coibion                                  Saten Kumar
Department of Economics                          Auckland University of Technology
University of Texas at Austin                    School of Economics
2225 Speedway                                    55 Wellesley St
Austin, TX 78712                                 Auckland, 1010, New Zealand
and NBER                                         saten.kumar@aut.ac.nz
ocoibion@gmail.com
                                                 Jane Ryngaert
Yuriy Gorodnichenko                              Kirby Hall
Department of Economics                          Wake Forest University
530 Evans Hall #3880                             Winston-Salem, NC 27109 USA
University of California, Berkeley               jane.ryngaert@gmail.com
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
I.      Introduction

Economists have long understood the importance of higher-order expectations. Keynes (1936) emphasized
the beauty contest nature of financial markets, Harsanyi (1967) formalized the role of higher-order beliefs
in decision-making, and Morris and Shin (2002) demonstrate how strategic complementarity in the actions
of agents can make the public provision of information suboptimal when agents also have private sources
of information, as public information disproportionately affects higher-order beliefs. The role of higher-
order beliefs has also become increasingly recognized and studied in the macroeconomic context. For
example, Woodford (2003) shows how noisy private information can lead firms to change their prices
gradually because of slow-moving higher-order beliefs about the actions of other firms. More recent work
has considered how different assumptions about higher-order beliefs can alleviate the “forward guidance”
puzzle1 (e.g. Angeletos and Lian 2018, Gabaix 2016, Fahri and Werning 2017).
        One stumbling block to this literature has been the absence of empirical evidence, other than that
of the experimental literature, on the higher-order beliefs of economic agents, especially when it comes to
their expectations of macroeconomic variables.2 This paper takes a first step at filling this gap by studying
the higher-order macroeconomic expectations of firm managers using a novel survey of firms in New
Zealand. This survey asks managers not only about their expectations over macroeconomic variables, but
also about what they think other managers expect for these same variables. We also provide new evidence
on the learning process through a variety of randomized information treatments that characterize how
agents’ first-order and higher-order beliefs respond to different kinds of information about the economy.
Using a follow-up wave, we can also measure the persistence of changes in beliefs and how changes in
beliefs translate into firms’ economic decisions. Jointly, these data provide a novel set of empirical facts
that can be used to discipline and test models of higher-order thinking. We document a number of
dimensions along which noisy-information models with higher-order expectations are (and are not)
consistent with the stylized facts from the survey.
        The survey builds on earlier surveys of firms in New Zealand described in Coibion, Gorodnichenko
and Kumar (2018; henceforth CGK) and Kumar et al. (2015). Relative to this earlier work, we rely on two
new waves of the survey run in 2017Q4-2018Q1 using a fresh draw of firms. These firms were asked to
report not just what they expect inflation to be over the next twelve months (their “first-order” expectations)
but also what they believe other firms expect future inflation to be (their “higher-order” expectations). We

1
  Standard New Keynesian models that abstract from information frictions imply that announcements about monetary
policy in the distant future can have unrealistically larger contemporaneous economic effects.
2
  The experimental literature has documented a number of striking features about higher-order expectations, and we
explicitly build on this previous work. The main differences are that we study actual macroeconomic expectations of
actual firm managers, rather than much more narrowly-defined expectations of undergraduates in typical experiments.

                                                                                                                 1
highlight several features of this unique data set. First, the average higher-order forecast of inflation across
firms is close to the average first-order forecast of inflation: 3.5% vs 3.4% respectively. Second, the cross-
sectional standard deviation of higher-order beliefs (disagreement) is smaller (by about 20%) than the
dispersion in first-order beliefs about inflation. Similarly, the average uncertainty around firms’ higher-
order beliefs inflation is significantly lower than their uncertainty around their own forecasts. Fourth, we
find in the cross-section that firms with larger forecasts of inflation also tend to have larger higher-order
inflation forecasts, with a slope coefficient of less than one.
        These stylized facts provide a unique way to calibrate and test noisy-information models with
infinite regress (i.e. when agents can correctly infer what others think about what they think about what
others think…). For example, we show that this type of model is consistent with both the lower
disagreement and uncertainty around higher-order forecasts than first-order forecasts. In addition, the
relative levels of each are determined by the same underlying parameter in the model, providing an
overidentification test that is not rejected by the data. Similarly, the model is consistent with the slope
coefficient when we regress higher-order forecasts on first-order forecasts of firms. From this combination
of empirical moments, we show how one can identify the underlying parameters of the model, including
the level of the fundamental, the level of the public signal, and the precision of signals.3
        More challenging for noisy-information models to explain is a separate set of empirical facts that
we document in the survey. Specifically, we characterize how managers update both their first- and higher-
order beliefs in the face of new information. This is done by providing random subsets of managers with
different types of information at the end of the initial wave of the survey, after which we immediately
present them with new questions about their expectations. We consider a number of different information
treatments (as well as a control group that receives no information), including telling some firms what other
firms expect about inflation (average first-order expectation), telling another set of firms about the average
higher-order expectations of firms in the survey, and telling yet another set of firms about the most recent
rate of inflation. A noisy-information model would imply that, if agents treated the measurement error in
different signals as equal, they should adjust their expectations more strongly to information about the
average forecast of other firms than to information about the average higher-order belief of other firms.
This is because higher-order beliefs load more strongly on public than private signals, but it is the latter
which a firm does not know about other firms. Our empirical evidence goes precisely in the opposite
direction: there is a much stronger response of both the first-order and higher-order beliefs of firms to
information about the higher-order beliefs of other firms than to information about their first-order beliefs.
Explaining this through measurement error in the treatments would require measurement error to be almost

3
 The only exception is the degree of strategic complementarity in the model. This can be quantified using a separate
set of questions in the survey, as in Afrouzi (2018).

                                                                                                                   2
ten times larger for first-order beliefs than higher-order beliefs, an unlikely possibility.
            Another challenge for noisy information models stems from how firms’ decisions respond to changes
in their inflation expectations.4 Using the follow-up wave, we can characterize how exogenously-generated
changes in firms’ inflation expectations (via information treatments) affect firms’ economic decisions.
Consistent with CGK, we find that firms with higher inflation expectations increased their employment and
investment relative to the control group but not their prices or wages, regardless of which information
treatment was the source of the change in inflation expectations. Thus, changes in inflation expectations have
a causal effect on firms’ decisions. But the way in which they respond is not through prices, which is the
margin that noisy-information models typically focus on, but rather employment and investment.
           While reconciling all of the differences between our empirical facts and noisy-information models
with infinite regress is beyond the scope of the paper, we consider one departure from the baseline model
which has been the topic of recent work. For example, Fahri and Werning (2017) show that limits to higher-
order reasoning in the form of level-k thinking can help resolve the “forward guidance” puzzle and Garcia-
Schmidt and Woodford (2015) use level-k reasoning to show that monetary policy commitments to keep
the nominal interest rate very low need not be deflationary. While infinite regress of higher-order
expectations requires that agents solve a problem in which they iterate over how their actions affect others
then how the actions of others affect them etc., models of level-k thinking assume that this reasoning process
is computationally expensive and difficult, leading agents to stop at some finite “k” level of iteration. The
experimental literature has documented in laboratory settings that agents generally display very limited
“degrees of reasoning”, often stopping at 2 or 3 iterations of a problem (Nagel and Duffy 1997, Nagel 1995,
Camerer, Ho, and Chong 2004, Stahl and Wilson 1995, Costa-Gomes and Crawford 2006).
           We provide novel evidence on this dimension of higher-order thinking as well by asking
respondents questions aimed to measure their degree of               -level thinking. Specifically, we follow the
experimental literature and ask them to pick a number between 0 and 100, with the winning number being
the one that is two-thirds of the average guess across all respondents. While some respondents answer
seemingly random numbers, answers for respondents who spent more than 20 seconds answering the
question line up squarely on traditional values assigned with different level k (33 for k=1, 22 for k=2, etc…)
yielding clear metrics of the degree of level-k thinking done by these respondents. The resulting distribution
is much more heavily tilted toward higher levels of reasoning than is commonly found in the experimental
literature, with over twenty-five percent of respondents displaying levels of thinking of           =3 or more,
compared to 9% in Nagel (1995) and 13% in Camerer et al. (2004).
           Unlike the experimental literature, we also asked respondents to guess about the distribution of


4
    Armantier et al. (2015) provide some evidence of this type for households.

                                                                                                               3
other managers’ answers (by assigning corresponding weights to ranges of possible answers). This novel
question allows us to ascertain what each manager believes the mean answer to be (and whether they
therefore pick a number that is two-thirds of that) and whether they think other managers are dispersed in
their level of thinking. We document several departures from standard modeling approaches of level-k
thinking. First, most managers believe other managers will report an answer in the same range as theirs, so
they are not picking a value equal to two-thirds of their expected mean. Second, managers generally believe
that some of the other managers are higher-level thinkers than they are, whereas standard models assume
that an agent acts as if all other players are lower-level thinkers relative to them. Third, managers
dramatically underestimate the actual dispersion of answers, so they seem largely unaware of the actual
distribution of level-k thinking, even among their peers. Finally, we find no systematic relationship between
an agent’s degree of level-k thinking and either how they revise their beliefs in light of new information or
how changes in their information affect their actions. These facts present a challenge relative to the typical
assumptions used when applying level-k thinking to macroeconomic models.
        Our results speak directly to a growing body of work in macroeconomics on the expectations
formation of economic agents and implications thereof for macroeconomic dynamics. Angeletos and La’O
(2009), for example, highlight the importance of considering higher-order beliefs separately from an agent’s
own beliefs. Bacchetta and Wincoop (2008) show that the difference between higher-order and own
expectations is important for determining the pricing volatility of assets as well as the link between asset
pricing and expectations of future asset payoffs. These findings are also informative for the design of
policymakers’ communication (e.g., Coibion et al. 2018).
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first describe in section 2 how the survey was
implemented. Section 3 presents the key empirical findings from the survey and information treatments.
Section 4 considers how well a model of higher-order expectations under strategic complementarities in prices
and infinite regress in expectations can account for the empirical patterns as well as how the data can be used
to calibrate parameters of the model. Section 5 then presents additional empirical results focusing on cognitive
constraints of agents as represented by -level thinking as well as whether these constraints help explain
features of the data. Section 6 concludes.

II.     Survey
This paper utilizes two additional waves of the survey of firm managers in New Zealand described in CGK.
The first wave was implemented between 2017Q4 and 2018Q1. The follow-up ran from 2018Q1 to
2018Q2, such that each firm manager from the first wave was invited to participate in the second wave
three months after his or her initial interview. The first wave included 1,025 firms, with 515 of these
participating in the second wave.


                                                                                                              4
2.1     Sampling Frame and Protocol
We obtained information on the population firms in New Zealand from two sources: Kompass New
Zealand (KNZ) and Equifax (EQ).         Following the Australia and New Zealand Standard Industrial
Classification 2006 (ANZSIC06), firms are classified into one of four broad industries: manufacturing,
trade, construction and transportation, and professional and financial services. Following CGK, we focus
on firms with six or more employees. We targeted for two thirds of the sample to come from professional
and financial services and manufacturing as these industries account for relatively large shares of New
Zealand’s GDP (New Zealand Treasury, 2016).5 The remainder of the sample comes from firms in other
industries, i.e. trade, construction, communication and transportation. We excluded industries related to the
government, community service, agriculture, fishing and mining, and energy, gas and water from the
sample. These sectors are often dominated by a few extensively regulated firms or by very small firms.
Within each industry, firms are classified as small (6-19 workers), medium (20-49 workers) and large (50
or more workers). To make the survey population more representative, we oversampled firms with 50-99
workers and 100+ workers in each industry. To this end, we contacted all firms that fall into these two
employment size groups. We then computed the relative shares of firms in the remaining employment size
groups and include enough firms to match the relative share of their size and industry.
        To achieve the target of 1,000 firms in the sample, we invited 10,100 firms to participate in the
survey. Each firm’s general manager received an email containing an information sheet and survey
questionnaire about ten days before receiving a phone call to collect responses. Note that the initial
questionnaire sent to managers did not include the treatment information and the subsequent related
questions. We called each firm three times to elicit responses. After the third round of calls, we examined
the response rates for sectors, subsectors and employment size groups. We then targeted groups in which
responses rates were low. We continued contacting firms until we hit the target sample size. Appendix C
reports response rates by industry and size.
        Responses were collected over the phone. A research assistant (RA) called the general manager
and recorded answers by hand while also recording the phone call. An independent RA then listened to the
recording and confirmed the accuracy of the handwritten responses. For the confidentiality of the
participants, the recordings were deleted following data collection. The handwritten questionnaires were
then entered into a spreadsheet, with two independent RAs verifying that the handwritten and spreadsheet
responses matched. As discussed in CGK, responses of managers are consistent with information available




5
 New Zealand Treasury (2016), New Zealand: Economic and Financial Overview 2016, Wellington. See
https://treasury.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2010-04/nzefo-16.pdf.

                                                                                                           5
from other sources and the quality of the survey is reasonably high.6 Descriptive statistics are provided in
Appendix Table 1.
         The second wave (follow-up) of the survey was implemented three months after the initial wave.
For the follow-up, we contacted all firms that participated in the main wave of the survey. The response
rate was approximately 50 percent. We achieved a high response rate because we provided respondents
with a monetary incentive of $50 gift voucher and dinner and entertainment ticket worth $50. Further,
respondents enter into a pool draw to win a cash prize of $5,000. The main reason for non-participation was
that the general manager was too busy to respond in a reasonable time frame. Appendix Table 2 examines
whether participation in the second wave is correlated with firm/manager characteristics. We find that firms
non-participating in the second round are missing at random.

2.2      Survey instrument
After collecting basic demographic information about firms, the survey asks respondents to report their
beliefs about future aggregate variables (inflation, unemployment rate, and wages) and about firm-specific
outcomes (employment, fixed assets, prices, and wages). The horizon for aggregate variables is one-year
ahead. The horizon for firm-specific variables is three-month ahead (which was determined by the timing
of the follow-up) and six-month ahead. Firms were also asked to report their perceptions and nowcasts (e.g.,
their perception of inflation over the previous twelve months). The survey asks a few hypothetical questions
to provide us with estimates of parameters that would be difficult to identify otherwise.
         Consistent with recommendations in Coibion et al. (2018), expectations were elicited in two ways.
First, firms were asked to assign probabilities for possible outcomes (see Appendix Table 3 for specific
formulation of questions). These distributional questions are similar to the questions asked in the Survey of
Consumer Expectations (SCE) run by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Second, firms were asked



6
  We verified our survey data against the publicly available online information in four ways. First, we verified
managers’ responses about the age of the firm using the information from the Companies Office or their website. We
find that the reported age in the survey match exactly with the information available in the Companies Office or their
website for 1012 firms. Information about age of 20 firms is not available in any other source. Second, we verified
whether the firm exports or not. Firms that indicated in the survey that they export overseas, this information is
available in their websites. Third, we asked in the survey about the number of Directors, number of shareholders and
the number of shares issued in the business. There are 862 firms classified as Companies in this survey, i.e. public or
private companies. We find that more than 98 percent of these firms’ responses match with the information available
in the Companies Office. Last, we verified survey responses on firms’ products and prices. To do this, we randomly
selected around 20 percent of the firms (206 firms) and asked them about their main product and price of the main
product. For 203 firms, details about their main products are available in their websites. 43 out of 203 firms list their
prices online in their websites. The reported prices of main products do not match the online information for only 4
firms; this is equivalent to 1 percent. For firms whose prices are not listed online, we made phone enquiries about the
price of their main products. These were general customer enquiries about their prices. To this end, we made 163
phone enquiries and 94 percent of the firms’ reported price matched with the quotes provided.


                                                                                                                       6
to provide point predictions for future inflation and other variables. We do not restrict responses for this
type of questions in any way (e.g., we do not censor responses or prompt respondents to reconsider if
responses are outside some range). In contrast to previous surveys, we collect information not only about
managers’ own expectations about future inflation but also about what managers think about other
managers’ inflation expectations.
        The survey has two additional novel parts. First, after the core part of the survey is complete,
respondents are invited to participate in a strategic game to infer their level of thinking. This game is similar
to Nagel (1995) and we provide more details in section 5.1. Second, after the game, firms are randomly
assigned into control and treatment groups. Firms in treatment groups are provided with different pieces of
information, while firms in the control group are told nothing. The treatments are described in section 3.2,
but some include information about the higher-order expectations of other firms. We use these treatments
to study how firms form their expectations and how they use these expectations to set prices, wages,
employment, and fixed assets.

III.    Survey Results
In this section, we describe results of the survey. We first focus on unconditional moments of firms’ first-
order and higher-order inflation expectations. Second, we present novel experimental findings on how
managers respond to different types of information, including information about higher-order beliefs, and
how each type of information affects their economic decisions.

3.1     Unconditional Moments of Higher-Order Expectations
To gauge firms’ expectations of inflation as well as their expectations of what other managers expect about
inflation, we rely primarily on probability distribution questions. Firms were first asked to assign
probabilities to a wide range of different possible outcomes for overall price changes over the next 12
months, following CGK. From the probabilities that they assign, we construct implied forecasts of each
manager using mid-point values of each bin. We also measure the uncertainty in their forecast (standard
deviation of probabilities across bins). To measure their higher-order expectations, firms were asked an
equivalent distributional question (Appendix Table 3) with respect to what they believe “other managers
(drawn from all sectors of the New Zealand economy in a representative way) think will happen to overall
prices in the economy.” Using this question, we construct the implied forecast and uncertainty of each
manager for their higher-order expectation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time anyone has
surveyed firm managers about their higher-order expectations of macroeconomic variables.
        Summary results are presented in Table 1. In terms of inflation expectations, the results closely
follow CGK. The average forecast of inflation across managers is 3.4%, significantly above actual inflation


                                                                                                               7
at the time. Managers are quite uncertain about their forecasts, with an average standard deviation in their
forecasts of 1.1 percentage point. They also display significant disagreement: the cross-sectional standard
deviation in forecasts is 3%. These results are also similar to the moments of households’ inflation
expectations in the SCE (Kumar et al. 2015).
           More novel are the results for the higher-order inflation expectations of managers. First, we find
that the mean higher-order inflation expectation is almost identical to the mean first-order inflation
expectation (3.5% vs 3.4%), and we cannot reject the null of equality for the two. At the individual level,
there is a strong positive correlation (0.68) between a manager’s inflation forecast and their higher-order
expectation. This is illustrated graphically in Figure 1. Managers who expect higher inflation also tend to
believe that other managers expect higher inflation as well. The slope coefficient between the two is
strongly positive at 0.66 and statistically significant at all standard levels. As we document in subsequent
sections, a strongly positive correlation between first- and higher-order expectations is consistent with
simple noisy-information models.
           Table 1 reveals two other striking facts about higher-order inflation beliefs of managers in New
Zealand. First, we find significantly lower cross-sectional disagreement about higher-order beliefs than we
do for first-order beliefs: the cross-sectional standard deviation of higher-order beliefs is 2.4%, well below
the 3.1% found for first-order beliefs. We can strongly reject the null of equality for these two values.
Second, we find that managers are generally less uncertain about their higher-order inflation forecasts than
they are about their first-order forecasts: the average uncertainty in higher-order forecasts is 0.9% whereas
it is 1.1% for first-order forecasts. We can again strongly reject the null of equality for these two levels of
uncertainty. As discussed in subsequent sections, both of these results are also consistent with simple
models of noisy information.

3.2        Effect of Information Treatments on Expectations
During the initial survey following questions asking firms about their inflation expectations and higher-
order expectations, we performed the following experiment. We divided managers into five groups. Group
A is a control group and did not receive any information. Group B received information about the average
beliefs of survey participants about inflation. Group C received information about the average higher-order
inflation expectations of survey participants. Group D’s signal consisted of both information about average
expectations and average higher-order expectations. We utilize Group E to compare the impact of
information about other managers’ beliefs to information about lagged inflation, as in CGK.
           Immediately after providing firms with information,7 we asked them to report their point
predictions for inflation (one-year ahead) and for their beliefs about what other managers predict for

7
    For the control group we simply continue with the questions.

                                                                                                             8
inflation (one-year head). Measuring revisions in expectations immediately after the treatment allows us to
obtain the instantaneous effect of the treatment on firms’ beliefs. Note that priors are measured as mean
expected inflation implied by the reported distribution of future inflation while the posteriors are measured
as point predictions. In the follow-up wave (three months after the initial wave), we asked firms to report
distributions of their beliefs about future inflation. Using responses from the follow-up survey, we construct
another measure of posteriors as the mean expected inflation implied by the reported distribution. This set
of posteriors provides a sense of the persistence of the treatment effects of information on expectations.
        To assess the influence of various information treatments on managers’ beliefs, we use the
following econometric specification:
                     =            +    ×           +                                                  (1)
where slope    captures the strength of the prior relative to the treatment, and the value associated with the
treatment is absorbed into the constant term (since it is common across firms within that group). More
informative priors should be associated with high values of . If the estimated slope      is equal to zero, the
treatment is treated as a completely informative signal which causes managers to discard their priors in
favor of the signal. If 0 <    < 1, the treatment is treated as a partially informative signal and managers
will update their posterior somewhat, but will still rely partially on the prior. If    is approximately one,
managers see the information provided as uninformative and do not update their prior beliefs at all. Note
that because we use point predictions for posteriors and implied means for priors, the estimated slope may
be biased up or down depending on how well firms respond to probability distribution questions (see e.g.
Kleinjans and van Soest 2010, Fischhoff and Bruine de Bruin 1999, Bruine de Bruin et al. 2000). We can
capture these effects by examining “revisions” in the control group. Because we are interested in how
managers respond not only to new information but also to different kinds of information, we estimate
specification (1) for each treatment separately.
        Table 2 reports the estimated coefficients on the prior expectation for both own inflation
expectations and higher-order inflation expectations in specification (1). We find that when no information
is provided, the point estimate of the slope is approximately 0.7 (row 1). This estimate does not mean that
firms revise their beliefs in the absence of information treatment by large amounts. Instead, this estimate
likely highlights differences between expectations elicited as point predictions and expectations elicited as
probability distributions. Indeed, when we use point predictions for future inflation that were elicited before
the informational treatment was provided, we find that the slope is close to one for the control group
(Appendix Table 4).
         With this benchmark in mind, we turn to Treatment B (provide firms with [ ], row 2 in Table
2). When we elicit expectations immediately after the treatment, firms assign 0.50 weight on the prior when
they update their first-order inflation expectations (column 1) and 0.43 weight when they update their high-

                                                                                                             9
order inflation expectations (column 2).8 These weights are statistically different from the weights assigned
by the control group. If we normalize these weights by the weights in the control group, the adjusted weights
are approximately 0.7 and 0.6 for first-order and high-order beliefs respectively. Thus, Treatment B has
useful information content that leads firms for revise their beliefs.

         For firms in treatment group C (provide firms with          [ ], row 3 in Table 2), the estimated weights
on priors are considerably smaller: 0.09 and 0.12 for low- and high-order beliefs. These estimates suggest
that firms perceive the information about firms’ higher-order expectations as a very informative signal that
leads them to place little weight on their prior beliefs. The weights on the prior are similar in Treatment D

(provide firms with      [ ] and [ ], row 4 in Table 2). We interpret this result as indicating that information

in [ ] has relatively little incremental content relative to information in          [ ].
         For firms receiving information about the past realization of inflation (Treatment E, row 5 in Table
2), the weight on the prior is 0.059 for low-order expectations and 0.062 for high-order expectations. This
confirms an earlier result in CGK. Strikingly, firms seem to view information about other firms’ higher-
order beliefs as being almost as informative as information about recent inflation.
         Conducting the same analysis using the posterior belief reported in the follow-up wave (three
months after the treatment) produces similar results (see columns (4) and (5) of Table 2). We see mean
reversion in the reported responses of the control group. Treatments C, D and E result in low weights on
priors while Treatment B yields weights approximately half-way between the control group and the other
treatment groups. These results indicate that the effect of information is persistent after three months and
that the size of treatment effects continue to depend on the type of signal that the firm received. 9

3.3      Effect of Information on Actions
CGK and Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018) document that information treatments lead not only
to revisions of inflation expectations but also to changes in firms’ behavior. Treatments in these earlier
studies provide firms with information about the inflation target of the central bank, professional forecasts,
or past inflation. Little is known about how firms react to treatments that involve information about high-
order beliefs. While the previous section finds that revisions of beliefs are similar for low- and high-order
inflation expectations, a priori one may observe considerable heterogeneity in employment/investment/etc.
responses across these information treatments. Indeed, it is critical to establish that firms act upon their self-



8
  Appendix Figures 1 through 4 shows scatter plots of posteriors against priors.
9
  CGK and Cavallo et al. (2017) find that the difference in beliefs for treatment and control groups largely disappears
six months after the treatment. We reconcile these results by using the findings in Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele
(2018) who study a long panel of firms to document that informational treatments have significant effects on
expectations after three months but vanish after six months.

                                                                                                                    10
reported expectations because the formation of expectations is relevant to policymakers only if expectations
influence the choices of firms (prices, employment, investment).
         To estimate the effect of changes in inflation expectations on the choices of firms, our approach
follows CGK. Specifically, before firms were treated in the first wave, they were asked about their three-
month-ahead plans for future employment, investment, wages, and prices. Three months after the initial wave,
we surveyed firms again and asked them to report changes in these four variables over the preceding three
months. Using this information, we compute forecast error for each variable. The key advantage of using
forecast errors is that they effectively difference out firm-fixed effects and thus reduce the size of idiosyncratic
variation in the data.
         In the next step, we regress forecast errors on changes in inflation expectations:

             ( )=                + ×                  ( )−           ( ) +                                     (2)

where       ( ) is the forecast error for variable         ,         ( ) is the pre-treatment expected inflation,

           ( ) is the post-treatment expected inflation. For                  ( ), we use beliefs of firms measured
immediately after the treatment. The revision in expectations following an information treatment

             ( )−           ( ) should be proportional to the difference between the signal and the expected

value of the signal, that is, the surprise induced by a treatment (see section 4.3 for a formal derivation).
Because we know pre-treatment values of           ( ),         ( ) and    (      ), we calculate the surprise and use

it as an instrument for                ( )−           ( ) . Note that for the control group the surprise is zero

because firms in this group are not provided with any information. For Group D, which receives both the
first- and higher-order expectations, we construct the average surprise in expectations. When we estimate
specification (2), we do it on data combining the control group and a given treatment group.
         Table 3 reports estimates of        for various treatments using the revisions in first-order inflation
expectations on the right-hand side of equation (2). While treatments vary in their ability to move inflation
expectations, the results in Table 3 suggest that conditional on moving inflation expectations a given
amount, the reaction of firms to a given change in expectations is largely similar across treatments.
Consistent with CGK, we find that raising inflation expectations by one percentage point generates an
approximately 0.4 percentage point increase in employment (column 1), an approximately 0.2 percentage
point increase in fixed assets (column 2), and no effect on firms’ prices (column 3) or wages (column 4)
over the three months following the treatment.10 The IV estimates of the effects are approximately double


10
  The survey also collects information about 6-month-ahead plans for firm-specific outcomes in the initial survey and
3-month-ahead plans for the same outcomes in the follow-up survey. This design allows us to also study the response
of revisions in plans to information treatments (that is, the outcome variable in specification (2) is 3-month-ahead plan
in the follow-up wave minus the 6-month-ahead plan in the initial wave). We find that while information treatments

                                                                                                                      11
the OLS estimates (Appendix Table 6). We also find similar results when we replace first-order inflation
expectations as the regressor in equation (2) with higher-order inflation expectations (Appendix Table 7).
         Note that these causal estimates measure the “total” effects of the information treatment, that is,
the combined influence of a treatment on both first- and higher-order inflation expectations. Since
Treatments B, C, and E have only one signal, we cannot separately identify the contribution of first- and
higher-order beliefs on firms’ actions. Treatment D contains two signals (two instruments) and thus offers
us an opportunity to run a horserace regression with first- and higher-order expectations included in
specification (2). We find (Table 4) that none of the expectations systematically dominates the other and,
more generally, few estimates are statistically significantly different from zero. These inconclusive results
likely reflect the strong correlation in revisions of first- and higher-order expectations, which limits our
ability to identify the independent effects of various orders of expectations.

3.4      Summary
Using a novel survey of the higher-order expectations of firm managers in New Zealand, we document
several stylized facts. First, the mean higher-order inflation expectations of managers are very close to the
mean first-order inflation expectations, and the two are highly correlated at the individual level. Second,
higher-order inflation expectations are less dispersed across agents and are associated with less uncertainty
on average than first-order inflation expectations. Third, when provided with information about the higher-
order inflation expectations of other firms, managers change both their first- and higher-order inflation
expectations by much more than they do when presented with information about the first-order inflation
expectations of other firms. Finally, the responses of firms’ actions to different information treatments are
broadly similar regardless of the source of the information treatment, after conditioning on the magnitude
of the change in inflation expectations associated with each treatment. In the next section, we consider to
what extent these facts are consistent with simple noisy-information models as well as how these stylized
facts can potentially be used to shed new light on underlying parameters of these models.

IV.      Interpreting Survey Results through a Noisy-Information Model
Our results demonstrate that not only can one measure the higher-order expectations of economic agents but
also that these can play an important role in shaping beliefs. This is illustrated for example by the large
revisions in firms’ first-order inflation expectations when presented with information about other firms’
higher-order expectations. How should we think about these results on the higher-order beliefs of firms?
Strategic complementarities in pricing behavior require that firms think not only of their own expectations of



tend to increase planned investment, these treatments have no statistically significant effect on plans for employment,
prices, and wages (see Appendix Table 5).

                                                                                                                    12
a fundamental, but also of other firms’ expectations and actions. Firm A must think about the fundamental
and what Firm B thinks of the fundamental. Firm B then anticipates the fundamental, what firm A thinks of
the fundamental, and what Firm A thinks that Firm B thinks. Firm A’s expectations must respond accordingly,
etc. As firms anticipate each other’s actions, they must form higher-order beliefs that involve iterating a
problem to progressively higher levels of reasoning. A similar logic applies to households when they consider
how changes in their consumption affects other households’ incomes, which in turn affect those households’
consumption and therefore the initial households’ income. Angeletos and Lian (2017) focus on a similar logic
with intertemporal effects. In this section, we use the static model of Morris and Shin (2002) to demonstrate
how the expectations and higher-order expectations of the firms in our survey compare to the predictions of a
model of strategic complementarities where firms perform infinite regress in their expectations.

4.1      A Simple Model of Expectations Formation and Price-Setting
Firm     ∈ [0,1] chooses to set its optimal price,      , as a linear combination of its expectations of a
fundamental,     , and its expectation of the aggregate price level in the economy, :
            = (1 − ) [ ] +          [ ]                                                                   (3)

Parameter      ∈ (0,1) describes the degree of complementarity in pricing. Because           ≡∫          , manager
 can iterate the optimal price equation forward by substituting the average optimal price equation for the
aggregate price level to obtain:
            = (1 − ) [ ] +          ∫                                                                     (3’)

         Define the average expectation in the economy for variable             as   [ ]≡ ∫        ( )      and let

       [ ] be the expectation of manager about the average expectation in the economy. In a similar spirit,

  [ ̅ ] is the first-order (“own”) expectation about the price level,           [ ̅ ] is a higher-order expectation

about the price level in the sense that this is an expectation of manager about what other managers think

about the price level. We can iterate these expectations to             th
                                                                             higher orders recursively:     [ ]≡

∫             [ ]     .

         Using the definition of the price level and repeated substitutions in equation (3’), we find that the
aggregate price level becomes an average of progressively higher-order expectations of the fundamental,
weighted by the complementarities present at each step:

            = (1 − ) [ ] + (1 − )            [ ]+     (1 − )     [ ]+⋯.                                   (4)
It follows that the optimal choice of     depends on the manager’s expectation of each event in equation (4).

            = (1 − ) [ ] + (1 − )               [ ] +      (1 − )             [ ] + ⋯.                    (5)


                                                                                                                 13
        Firms operate under imperfect information. This means that, rather than observing                                                     completely,
they see noisy public and private signals that include the true value of                                              and some noise.11 Specifically,
allow a public signal about the fundamental to take the following form:                                               =         + where       ∼     0,         .
Firm    also receives a private signal about                             :         =       +          with        ∼       (0,       ) where       and       are
uncorrelated. Firms weigh their signals according to the relative noise in each to obtain an individual
expectation of       :
           [ ]=                +           = (1 − ) +                    ,                                                                          (6)

where    =       +         and, for ease of notation, we denote                                 and          as       and 1 − , respectively, for the

remainder of the paper. Aggregating equation (6) across managers gives the average expectation about the
fundamental in the economy:
           [ ] = (1 − ) +                       .                                                                                                   (7)
        Manager ’s expectation about the average expectation of other managers in the economy is

                 [ ] = (1 − ) +                           [ ] = (1 −                ) +           .                                                 (8)

One can obtain progressively higher-order expectations of                                      by continuing to substitute             [ ] for          to find:

                 [ ] = 1−                            +                               [ ] = (1 −              ) +                .                   (9)

Equation (9) shows that higher-orders of reasoning will depend more heavily on the public signal as they
rely more on average, rather than idiosyncratic, beliefs.
        Using the firm’s optimal price-setting in equation (5), we can substitute for manager ’s
expectations of          at various orders to obtain the optimal price as a function of received signals:

             = (1 − ) ∑                        [1 −                ] +                 .                                                            (10)

It follows that every agent sets the optimal price at:
             =            +            ,                                                                                                            (11)
                                                           (        )
where      =(        )
                                       and          =(         )
                                                                                 . The realization of the aggregate price is the integral of
                           (       )                                (        )

equation (11) across the support of all managers:

             ≡∫                =           +          .                                                                                             (12)
Using these results, we can derive expectations of manager about the price level:


11
   We treat as a fixed parameter. An alternative formulation is to assume that ~ ( ∗ ,          ) where     may be
interpreted as the precision of a common prior. With this formulation, we cannot distinguish   and     (precision of
the public signal ) with our data because we observe only     + . Therefore, if one believes that is stochastic,
he should interpret our results as providing an estimate of + , that is, the combined precision of the public signal
and the common prior.

                                                                                                                                                             14
           [ ]=         +        (1 − ) +                           = (1 −             ) +                  .                       (13)
Aggregating across agents gives the average expectation about the price level:
          [ ]=          +        (1 − ) +                           = (1 −             ) +              .                           (14)
The individual expectation of the left-hand side in equation (14) is an individual manager’s higher-order
expectation:

               [ ] =         +        [(1 −            ) +                ] = (1 −                    ) +               .           (15)

Aggregating equation (15) gives the mean of the higher-order expectation:

           [ ]=          +       [(1 −         ) +                      ] = (1 −            ) +                     .               (16)
         These derivations demonstrate that firms in the noisy-information model have two sources of
uncertainty: noise in the public signal and noise in the private signal. When firms make inferences about
the fundamental        or when we consider unconditional distributions of ̅ , both sources of uncertainty
appear. However, for a given time period, firms observe                                     and thus firms do not face uncertainty about
what other firms observe. Indeed, equation (12) demonstrates that the price level is a function of public
signal   (observed) and fundamental                    (unobserved). Because for firm the expected value of                        is a linear
combination of      and private signal             , the only source of uncertainty about ̅ is the realized private signals
of other firms. As a result, uncertainty about ̅ is described by distributions conditional on . Specifically,
one can show that the unconditional distribution of these expectations is
           [ ]~        , (1 −         )            +(               )          ,                                                    (17a)
          [ ]~         , (1 −      )               ,                                                                                (17b)

               [ ] ~         , (1 −            )                   +(          )        ,                                           (17c)

           [ ]~         , (1 −            )                ,                                                                        (17d)
while the distributions conditional on the public signal (that is, the distributions of beliefs about ̅ in a given
cross-section of managers for a point in time) are:
           [ ]| ~            +     (1 − )                      +          ,(       )          ,                                     (18a)

          [ ]| ~             +    (1 − )                   +              ,0 ,                                                      (18b)

               [ ] | ~            +           (1 −             )     +             ,(             )             ,                   (18c)

           [ ̅ ]| ~          +        (1 −             )       +               ,0 .                                                 (18d)
Note that in this canonical noisy-information model, uncertainty in first-order expectations (Ω{                                     [ ]|   ≡
(    )         given by equation (18a)) is equal to the cross-sectional dispersion of point forecasts

    ( [ ]| ) and the same result applies to higher-order expectations: Ω                                                [ ]|
                                                                                                                               =    [ ] |    .


                                                                                                                                            15
4.2       Mapping the Model to Unconditional Moments of the Survey Data
Our survey data on the higher-order inflation expectations of firms yielded four key facts: 1) the mean
higher-order inflation expectation was almost identical to the mean first-order inflation expectation, 2)
disagreement was lower for higher-order than lower order inflation expectations, 3) uncertainty was lower
for higher-order than lower order inflation expectations, and 4) there is a strong positive correlation, with a
slope less than one, between first-order and higher-order inflation expectations. We now consider whether
a simple noisy-information model is consistent with these facts and how we can use the quantitative values
from the survey to calibrate key parameters of the model.


4.2.1     Means
The model predicts that the mean of the distribution of firms’ own expectations of the aggregate price level
( [ ]) could be similar to that of the firms’ higher-order expectation of the aggregate price level

        [ ] , that is, their expectation of other managers’ expectation. Specifically, equations (18a) and

(18c) show that for a given realization of public signal , higher-order expectations assign a larger weight
to the public signal and a smaller weight to the private signal (recall that     < 1). The difference between

     [ ] and      [ ] depends on how far     is from    . Indeed,

               [ ]−   [ ] | =      (1 − ) [      − ].                                                    (19)

Thus, even without knowing          and , we can sign [        − ] using the observed difference in average
expectations for high and low orders.

          Table 1 shows that, in our sample,     [ ]| is 3.41 and       [ ]| is 3.50. The negative difference
between these two measures is consistent with          being greater than    (that is, the public signal is more
“inflationary” than the fundamental). Whether the difference is large or small depends on the magnitudes
of      and , but since    ,   ∈ (0,1) we expect that      −   < −0.09. As we show later,       ≈ 0.8 and       ≈
0.55 so that      −   ≈ −1. Incidentally, the survey responses were collected at a time when oil prices
continued to rise possibly sending an “inflationary” public signal.12

4.2.2     Disagreement
Private signals are the reason why agents disagree about macroeconomic variables in the noisy-information
model. Equations (18a) and (18c) predict that the cross-sectional variance of higher-order expectations


12
   Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) document that households’ inflation expectations are sensitive to the price of
oil, gasoline and similar goods. Kumar et al. (2015) and CGK present suggestive evidence of high sensitivity of
managers’ inflation expectations to changes in oil prices and other energy products frequently purchased by
consumers.

                                                                                                                16
(      )        will be smaller than the variance of the managers’ own expectations (                  )       . This happens
as higher-order expectations become more weighted toward the common signal, which is observed by all

agents. Note that the ratio of cross-sectional variances for                     [ ] | and     [ ]| gives us

                     [ ]|
                ( [ ]| )
                             =   (    )
                                                  =           <1                                                     (20)

and, thus, the relative cross-sectional dispersions of higher-order vs first-order expectations can uniquely pin
down , which itself measures the relative importance of private and public signals (recall that                  ≡          ).

           Consistent with the theoretical prediction of                 < 1, we documented in Table 1 that disagreement
is larger for low-order inflation expectations (standard deviation is 3.06) than for high-order inflation
expectations (standard deviation is 2.43). The ratio of these two standard deviations implies                     ≈ 0.8, that
is, the precision of the private signal is about four times larger than the precision of the public signal.
           Because          ( [ ]| ) = (              )         , we can go even further and use the amount of disagreement
in the data to precisely identify the levels of precision in each signal (               and    ) if we know both    and         .
                                          (       )
As we derived above,             =(           )
                                                              and so we can estimate    if we have an estimate of strategic
                                                  (       )

complementarity          along with our estimate of . While we cannot obtain                     directly from moments of
inflation expectations, we can recover this parameter from a series of hypothetical questions that were also
included in the survey:
           For the next three questions, suppose that neither you nor your competitors face any costs in
           changing your prices. Also suppose that you get news that the general level of prices went up
           by 10% in the economy:
           a. By what percentage do you think your competitors would raise their prices on average?
           b. By what percentage would your firm raise its price on average?
           c. By what percentage would your firm raise its price if your competitors did not change their
               price at all in response to this news?

Afrouzi (2018) shows that            is the slope in the regression of {the answer in “b” minus the answer in “c”}
on {the answer in “a”}. When we implement this regression in our sample, we find                       ≈ 0.7 (standard error
0.02). It follows that        ≈ 0.55, that is, firms put 55% weight on their private signals and 45% on the public
signal when setting prices.
           With this value of         , we can now pin down the precision of private and public signals. Because
in the data disagreement is               ( [ ]| ) = (               )      = 3.06 , it follows that    ≈ 0.02. Using        ≡
      , we find that          = 0.005. These estimates suggest that both signals could be rather imprecise.

However, this imprecision is in agreement with the notion that firms should pay little attention to inflation
if inflation is stable and low (e.g., Sims 2003, Mackowiak and Wiederholt 2009), which is the case in New
Zealand, an early adopter of inflation targeting. Hence, the data on disagreement in both first- and higher-

                                                                                                                            17
order expectations can, when combined with an independent estimate of strategic complementarity, pin
down all of the relevant structural parameters in the model.

4.2.3    Uncertainty
We can alternatively use firms’ uncertainty about aggregate variables to back out parameters of the model.
First, note that, as with disagreement, the ratio of uncertainty in high-order expectations to uncertainty in

low-order expectations also uniquely pins down              since Ω        [ ]|
                                                                                  ⁄Ω{    [ ]|     =            =     < 1.
                                                                                                      (   )

Hence, having data on both uncertainty and disagreement over-identifies . Strikingly, column (4) of Table
1 shows that the ratio of standard deviations implied by the reported distributions for own expectations of
inflation (=1.11) and for expectations about other managers (=0.89) is 0.8, the same value as found using
data on disagreement. Hence, despite using two different moments to pin down the same parameter, we
find comparable values across the two approaches.
         Second, the model predicts that the level of disagreement (cross-sectional standard deviation of
point predictions) and the level of uncertainty (the average standard deviation implied by reported
distributions for future inflation) should be the same and equal to (             )      . Indeed, both are determined
by the variance of the noise in the private signals. In the data, uncertainty is about a third of disagreement,
so this restriction implied by the canonical model is at odds with the data.13 If we use uncertainty instead of
disagreement to recover          and      ,       ( [ ]| ) = (         )      . Because in the data uncertainty is
     ( [ ]| ) = 1.11 , it follows that         ≈ 0.15 and        ≈ 0.04. While the levels are not identical to those
implied by the level of disagreement, they still imply rather imprecise signals.

4.2.4    Relationship between First-Order and Higher-Order Expectations
Because the private signal         is the only source of cross-sectional variation in expectations, our model
predicts a perfect correlation between higher- and lower-order expectations. Given measurement errors in
expectations data and other idiosyncratic variation in survey responses, a perfect correlation is unlikely to

be borne out in the data. Indeed, we observe a high correlation                   [ ],          [ ]   ≈ 0.6 in our sample,

but this is still well below one. Perhaps a more interesting prediction is that variation in low-order


13
   One possible way to rationalize the difference in the levels of uncertainty and disagreement in the data is if agents
in the model report beliefs as in Patton and Timmermann (2010). Specifically, suppose that the reported forecast is a
weighted average of the signal-based forecast and the individual’s belief about the long-run average: [ ] =            +
(1 − ) [ | , ] where is individual’s belief about the long-run average,             is the variance (uncertainty) of this
belief, and =        ( [ | , ])/(         ( [ | , ]) + ). Note that cross-sectional dispersion of long-run beliefs
     ( ) is decoupled from the uncertainty in the belief . In this case, the cross-sectional variance of the mean
predicted price level is                 ( ) + (1 − )         ( [ | , ]) while uncertainty is                    + (1 −
  )      ( [ | , ]) which is smaller than disagreement if         ( )> .

                                                                                                                       18
expectations       [ ] should translate in less than one-to-one changes in high-order expectations                  [ ].

Specifically, the model implies that regressing                [ ] on   [ ] should yield a slope coefficient equal to

                         [ ],    [ ]
              =           ( [ ])
                                       =          =     < 1.                                                    (21)

Hence, a regression of first-order expectations on higher-order expectations provides a third way to pin
down . As shown in Figure 1, the estimated slope of the regression in our survey data is between 0 and 1,
consistent with the theory. But its value of 0.66 is significantly smaller than the value of 0.80 found using
either disagreement or uncertainty moments. One interpretation is that this discrepancy could be due to
measurement error in survey measures of expectations. If we treat the value of            = 0.80 from disagreement
and uncertainty moments as the true value, we can infer how much measurement error is needed to generate
an estimated slope of 0.66. Assuming classical measurement error, we find an implied variance of the
measurement error of 0.5%, which seems reasonable given the nature of survey questions.
            The joint distribution of first- and higher-order beliefs can also inform us about the level of the public

signal       and the fundamental           . Note that when     [ ]=       [ ] , equations (13) and (15) imply that

     [ ]=         [ ] =         = . Our regression estimates suggest that this point (that is, when the fitted

regression line crosses the 45-dergee line in Figure 1) occurs at          [ ]=        [ ] = 3.6 and therefore         =

3.6. In section 4.2.1, we derive that         −    ≈ −1 and so we can infer     ≈ 2.6. In other words, the underlying
inflation in New Zealand is approximately 2.6 percent during this period but firms systematically believe
inflation is higher because of an inflationary public signal. Strikingly, the implied fundamental is close to
actual inflation: CPI and PPI inflation rates in 2018Q1 were 2.2 and 2.7 percent respectively.

4.3         Interpreting Treatment Effects in a Noisy-Information Model
We now consider how to interpret the experimental evidence described in section 3 in terms of a model of
noisy information. Equations (11) and (13) imply that manager ’s own expectation about the price level is
a linear combination of the public signal             and their expectation about the fundamental      , that is,   ( ).
When firms are provided with new private information, they revise their beliefs about                               and,
correspondingly, about the price level. Specifically, a unit increase in         ( ) translates into      unit increase

in    [ ] and           unit increase in        [ ].

                        =                         +            [ ].                                             (22)
                  [ ]            +     (1 − )
            We consider three types of signals provided to firms to be consistent with the experiment done in
the survey. First, we provide firms with [ ] (that is, the average of managers’ own expectations about

                                                                                                                       19
inflation),        [ ] (that is, the average expectation about other managers’ expectation about inflation), and
past inflation. Equations (18b) and (18d) indicate that if firms believe that this information has no noise,
then they can infer from these signals the exact value of                     . In this case, their beliefs would all converge to
the same full information value. In the survey, it is clear that beliefs of different agents do not fully converge
after the provision of these information treatments. One potential way to avoid this extreme prediction from
the model is to assume that firms interpret received signals as having some noise. For example, the signal
for [ ] is given by
               = [ ]+          ,                                                                                                        (23)
where        ~ (0,       ) and        is uncorrelated with noise and                  .14 Note that because [ ] = (1 −                      ) +
          and firms observe          directly, signal           has the same content as signal ̃ =                            +     =          +
     with       ≡       . Using Bayes rule, we can derive beliefs about                           after observing ̃
              ( | ̃ ,    , )=        ( | , )+               ̃ −             ( | , ) ,                                                   (24)
where         =            (        +(         )        )       is the gain of the Kalman filter and              is the precision of the
prior       ( | , ). We can re-write this equation as:

                    ( ) = (1 −             )       ( )+           ̃ =                                  ( )+       ̃ ,                   (25)
                                                                              (       )

where             ( ) denotes expectations after receiving the additional information while                                       ( ) denotes
expectations before receiving additional information. Importantly, the coefficient on the prior belief
        ( ) can identify           , the precision of the signal ̃ . This is because we can measure (                                   )
directly as this is equal to the uncertainty of the prior belief (equation 18c). The uncertainty in the posterior

beliefs            ( ) is given by                                 . Hence, under the assumption that agents perceive the
                                                    (       )

information treatment as a noisy signal, the coefficient on the prior beliefs should help us recover the
perceived precision of that signal.
            One can derive similar expressions for the signal about higher-order expectations:

               =      [ ]+         = (1 −          ) +                  +                                                               (26)
with      ~ (0,         ) and an equivalent signal ̃ =                            +           =        +   with           ≡        so that

                    ( ) = (1 −             )       ( )+           ̃ =                                  ( )+       ̃                     (27)
                                                                             (        )


which has variance                                      and        =                      (       +(       )          )       is the gain from
                                       (       )

the Kalman filter. Note that even if signals about first-order and higher-order expectations were perceived


14
  Although       does not have index (we drop it to simplify notation), we interpret                       as a private signal because we
do not tell a firm receiving this signal that other firms receive this signal too.

                                                                                                                                               20
as equally precise (         =         ), we would have                  >    , that is, signal          receives a higher weight than
signal        when firms update their beliefs. Intuitively, as we increase the order of expectations in the signal,
the signal contains less information about the unobserved                              and gets less attention from managers. This
result implies that, under equally precise signals, we would expect to observe a stronger response of both
first-order and higher-order beliefs to information about the average first-order belief than about the
information about the average higher-order belief. Given that we observe the opposite empirically in section
3, this suggests that signals about higher-order beliefs must be interpreted by agents as being significantly
more precise than signals about first-order beliefs.
             If both signals are provided and the noise in the signals is uncorrelated, then
                    ( ) = (1 −             )     ( )+              ̃ ,                                                        (28)
where          =[                ]′,       =       {          ,      , and         =            (     +                 ) . When two
signals are provided, the variance of                  ( ) is smaller than in the case when only one signal is provided.
             Finally, we assume that providing firms with past inflation is equivalent to giving them signal                         =
         +      =        +       where         ~ (0,          ),     =       , and         measures the persistence of fundamental
  from one period to another. In this case,

                    ( ) = (1 −             )      ( )+             ̃ =                               ( )+        ̃ .          (29)
                                                                               (       )

Note that this signal provides information about the fundamental directly so that, conditional on the prior,
the revision of beliefs in response to this signal does not depend on the strategic behavior of firms.
             Equations (25), (27), (28) and (29) can be generalized to a generic signal ̃ :
                    [ ] = (1 −         )       [ ]+       ̃                                                                   (30)
which we can estimate by regressing post-treatment expectations on pre-treatment expectations and a
constant. Combining equations (22) and (30), one can show that the response of expectations of                               and [ ]
to information is given by

                             =                                     + (1 −          )                 +             ̃.         (31)
                       [ ]                 +     (1 − )                                        [ ]
Note that weight on the prior (1 −                ) is the same for low- and high-order expectations about the price
level. Equation (31) implies that, for a given signal, agents should update their first-order and second-order
beliefs about inflation by the same amount. This is remarkably consistent with what we observe in Table 2,
where we cannot reject the null of equality for responses of first-order and higher-order beliefs to each type
of information treatment.
             With these results in mind, we revisit the quantitative response of expectations to our information
treatments reported in Table 2. When firms were provided with information about the mean forecast of
other firms (Treatment B), they assigned a 0.50 weight on the prior when they updated their first-order

                                                                                                                                     21
inflation expectations (column 1) and 0.43 weight when they updated their high-order inflation expectations
(column 2). If we normalize these weights by the weights in the control group, the adjusted weights are
approximately 0.7 and 0.6 for first-order and high-order beliefs respectively. Using equation (25) to
compute the precision of information provided in Treatment B and              =1−           (   is the estimate slope

in the regression of post-treatment expectations on pre-treatment expectations), we find:               =          =
                           .
      ×     ( [ ]| )
                       ≈           ×       ≈ 0.1, that is, the signal is approximately as strong as the precision of
                               .       .

pre-treatment beliefs (given by            +    ).
          We can then do the same analysis for other treatment groups. For group C (treatment with higher-
order expectations of other firms), the estimated weights on priors are considerably smaller: 0.09 and 0.12
for low- and high-order beliefs. These estimates suggest that firms would need to perceive a much higher

precision of the signal in Treatment C than the precision of the signal in Treatment B:             =         ≈9 .

The weights on the prior are similar in Treatment D. Finally, for firms receiving information about the past
realization of inflation, the weight on the prior is 0.059 for low-order expectations and 0.062 for high-order

expectations. Thus, the precision of the signal about past inflation is                 =         ≈ 15 , which is

qualitatively similar to the precision of the signal about               [ ]. Explaining why firms adjust their
expectations so much more to information about past inflation or higher-order beliefs than first-order beliefs
therefore requires very large differences in implied signal precisions across these treatments.

4.4       Summary
We use a simple model of noisy information with infinite regress of expectations to interpret the data on
higher-order expectations from the survey. We show that the moments from the survey can be used to
recover the realized shocks and the underlying parameters of the model, a feature which should be useful
to discipline these models in the future. Furthermore, the model makes over-identifying restrictions on
parameters in the sense that different moments can be used to identify the same parameters. Strikingly, we
find that these different moments are generally consistent with one another in terms of the parameter values
they imply. The model can also rationalize the fact that agents update both their first-order and higher-order
expectations by similar amounts in response to an information treatment.
          However, we also document several limitations of the canonical noisy-information model with
infinite regress in terms of its ability to rationalize the data. First, while first- and higher-order expectations
are highly correlated across firms in the data, there is significant heterogeneity that the canonical model
cannot easily explain. Second, the model predicts that the level of uncertainty and cross-sectional dispersion
of expectations should be the same, a feature we can strongly reject in the data. Third, if we view the


                                                                                                                  22
information treatments as being noisy signals, it is difficult to rationalize the difference in response across
types of treatments. This interpretation of the data would require firms to believe that the signal about the
higher-order expectations of other firms be almost 10 times more precise than the signal about the first-
order expectations of other firms. Finally, the basic noisy-information model, which lacks capital or any
friction other than information rigidity, appears to be too simple to rationalize why firms respond to
information treatments by adjusting their employment and investment rather than their prices.
        There are a number of potential ways to try and address the differences between our empirical results
and the baseline noisy-information model with infinite regress considered here. One approach would be to
augment the signal space with a semi-public signal. This could help generate additional idiosyncratic variation
in expectations and weaken the predicted link between first-order and higher-order expectations. A second
would be to make the model dynamic, which would generate variation in prior beliefs of agents even before
they receive their idiosyncratic signals. A third approach is to consider behavioral/cognitive constraints that
prevent agents from engaging in the infinite regress used in our stylized model. In the next section, we consider
novel empirical evidence to assess one such departure from infinite regress due to level-k thinking.


V.      Level- Thinking
Standard noisy-information models assume that agents undertake infinite degrees of reasoning about the
pricing decisions of others. Reasoning of this sort is, however, difficult and computationally intensive.
Managers are therefore likely, due to either cognitive constraints or recognizing the costs of such reasoning,
to limit their degrees of thinking to levels well below infinity. In this section, we discuss the results of a
beauty contest done in the survey which allows us to categorize the thinking types of firm managers. While
this approach to measuring thinking types is common in the experimental literature, it has not, to our
knowledge, been included in a survey that also obtains macroeconomic expectations. We further extend the
beauty contest question to study the beliefs of firm managers about the guesses of other managers. This
allows us to compare the properties of level-k behavior we observe with the predictions of existing models
of degrees of reasoning and cognitive hierarchy. We find that the higher-order beliefs in the guessing game
do not correspond with current models of level-k thinking. We further find that a manager’s reasoning type
does not influence the manager’s reaction to information.

5.1     Categorizing Types
Following Nagel (1995), Nagel and Duffy (1997) and many others, we characterize managers’ degree of
reasoning by asking the following question:
        “Please choose a number from zero to 100. We will take your number as well as the numbers
        chosen by other managers to calculate the average pick. The winning number will be the number
        that is closest to two-thirds (2/3) of the average. The individual(s) with the winning number will


                                                                                                              23
            receive (or share with other winners in case of tie) $500.”
       th
A       -level thinker provides the following guess:

             ( )=         × 50                                                                                    (32)

The distribution of managers’ guesses appears in Figure 2. Guesses appear throughout the entire interval
(0-100). However, when we restrict the sample to those managers who spent at least 20 seconds on the
question, the guesses pile on integers associated with reasoning types as defined by equation (32) between
     = 1 and      = 5, with the number of managers of each type declining with . Accordingly, we classify
these managers by their guess and assign           = 0 to those who answer the question in less than 20 seconds.15
As a robustness check, we consider an alternative treatment of guesses with short response times: we code
responses as level-zero thinking if response times are less than 20 seconds and responses are between 47
and 53; we set level of thinking to missing for other responses with response time less than 20 seconds. We
denote this alternative coding with ′.
            The average guess in our sample is 33 when we use all responses and 21 when we use guesses with
response time of 20 or more seconds. Camerer (1997) reports that average responses for CEOs at Cal Tech’s
Board of Trustees, for portfolio managers, and for Wharton’s MBA students are 38, 24, and 38 respectively.
However, Camerer (1997) reports generally lower average scores for subjects participating in experimental
settings. Indeed, the thinking types of managers in our survey appear somewhat more dispersed than in
experimental studies. We see a greater density of thinkers at            = 0, partially due to the way we assign this
rating (as anyone who does less than 20 seconds of thinking about the question). In our survey, 36.8 percent
of managers are        = 0, as opposed to 20 to 27.3 percent in the experimental studies. Our sample is also
more heavily weighted towards higher thinking types ( ≥ 3) than other papers, with roughly a quarter of
the sample performing such high degrees of reasoning.
            We find that level of thinking is generally uncorrelated with observed characteristics of firms and
managers as well as industry fixed effects (Table 5). The only variable that is relatively robustly correlated
with level of thinking is the share of domestic sales in total sales. However, even for this variable the
quantitative strength of the link is weak: a standard deviation increase in the share is associated with a 0.14-
point decrease in the level of thinking.


5.2         Beliefs About Other Managers
The two primary models of limited reasoning (level- thinking and cognitive hierarchy) have different
approaches to a participant’s beliefs about the types of other participants. In the Nagel level- thinking model,



15
     The guesses associated with   = 0 therefore fall throughout the [0,100] interval, rather than at 50 as in Nagel (1995).

                                                                                                                         24
a level- thinker believes that everyone else in the game performs at level ( − 1). Camerer, Ho, and Chong
(2004) develop a model of “cognitive hierarchy” that allows agents to form beliefs about the distribution of
other reasoning types in the sample. A level- thinker is assumed to observe the correct frequency of thinkers
of his type and at levels below his own, but to incorrectly assume that there are no thinkers performing the
same or higher degrees of reasoning. As a result, he posits inaccurate relative frequencies of thinkers. As a
thinker’s reasoning type, , increases and he observes the true frequencies of a greater number of types, his
expectation of the density over the sample becomes “increasingly rational” and closer to the true distribution
of types. Both of these models emphasize a particularly important aspect of level- thinking: individuals
cannot conceive of thinkers at their own level or levels above. To do this would be to engage in the next level
of reasoning. Therefore, by definition, a level- thinker must believe that he is the smartest player (or among
the smartest players) in the game.
            We introduce a new question designed to elicit beliefs about the distribution of types so that we
may compare these beliefs with the modeling assumptions of these two models. Specifically, we ask
managers to provide a probability distribution over ranges of other managers’ guesses (this question appears
in Table 6). Note that we allow managers to choose dominated strategies (e.g., range 60 to 70) to avoid
priming of responses.
            Table 7 (Appendix Figure 5) shows the average believed distribution of guesses for each thinking
level      as well as the true distribution across guesses (column 8) and the average belief across levels of
thinking (column 7). All thinking types believe that the majority of managers share their own type and all
managers at levels         ≤ 3 assign probability to bins associated with players at levels both higher and lower
than their own. All managers underestimate the true dispersion of guesses. Accordingly, none of the
thinking types correctly conjectures the true density of types, nor do beliefs about the density become closer
to the truth with increasing , as in Camerer, Ho, and Chong (2004). However, the average density across
types (column 7) is relatively close to the actual distribution of guesses (column 8), reflecting the fact that
i) a typical manager believes that other managers have the same level of thinking as the manager and ii) as
we discuss below, managers appear to not use 2/3 of the average response of other managers. 16
            These results are not fully consistent with either level-k or cognitive hierarchy models. Roughly 80
percent of managers of all reasoning levels assign positive probability to multiple bins, a fact that is not
consistent with the Nagel model of reasoning. A level-k thinker as defined by the guess in equation (32)
should report positive probability on exactly one bin, the one associated with the level (        − 1) guess. A
level- thinker from either model will also not place positive probability on the bin associated with her own
guess. For types        = 1,2,3, managers place an average probability of 0.72 to 0.77 on this bin, meaning they


16
     Results are similar for ′, an alternative coding for level of thinking.

                                                                                                              25
think that between 72 and 77 percent of other managers are the same type as them. All levels,                  ≥ 1,
assign positive probability to bins associated with thinkers beneath their own level, consistent with both
Nagel (1995) and Camerer, Ho, and Chong (2004). However, only types                   ≥ 4 report believing that a
majority of managers will fall into bins associated with lower level thinkers. Thinkers at types          ≤ 3 also
report positive probability on bins associated with levels of       above their own.
           These distributions, however, may still be internally consistent in the sense that guesses are equal
to two thirds of the average of the conjectured distribution of other managers’ guesses. In other words, to
win the prize, a manager should submit a guess of two-thirds of their believed average guess of other
managers.17 To test the consistency of a manager’s guess in the beauty contest game with their beliefs about
the average guess of other managers, we can estimate the following specification:
                       =   ×    [           ]+                                                             (33)
where                is the guess submitted by manager ,      [           ] is manager ’s average guess for other
managers’ guesses. We find (Table 8) that the estimated           is generally close to one for managers with low
     and the estimated slope gets closer to 2/3 as    decreases. For example, for       = 4, we cannot reject the
null of     = 2/3 (but we can reject this null for     = 5). Note that when we compute the implied mean of
the reported distribution of other managers’ beliefs, we use mid-points of the bins provided in the survey
question. Generally, the results for low     are insensitive to using alternative assumptions for picking points
within bins, while the results for high      tend to be more sensitive to how one assigns weights within bins
because bins get increasingly coarse for high levels of thinking. With alternative assumptions, one may get
estimates of     closer to 2/3 for   ≥ 3.
           In summary, these results pose a puzzle for popular models in which agents are characterized by varying
depths of reasoning. First, managers assign positive probability of other managers having higher levels of
thinking. Second, many managers believe that other managers have the same level of thinking. Third, guesses
of low-level thinkers appear to be inconsistent with what these thinkers believe about guesses of other managers.

5.3        Expectations and Actions by Level of Thinking
In Appendix B, we extend the noisy information model of section 4 to a setting in which agents can be either
k=0, 1 or 2 in their level of thinking. For simplicity, we assume each type of agent believes all other agents
are of the same or lower level-k of thinking. In short, this model makes several predictions. First, in this setting,
agents with higher levels of thinking place more weight on the public signal as they are more cognizant of the
role of other agents’ expectations in their own optimal price-setting decisions. Second, mean expected
inflation should be broadly similar across level-k types, albeit higher level-k’s would have mean forecasts that

17
   It may be the case that when asked directly about other managers, survey participants will engage an additional
level of reasoning that was not present when they formed their own guess or expectation.

                                                                                                                  26
move more with the public signal. Third, because higher level-k agents place more weight on the public signal,
we should observe declining levels of disagreement in both first-order and higher-order forecasts with the
level of k, and the same prediction should hold for uncertainty in each type of forecast.
        To assess these predictions, Table 9 documents how various moments of survey expectations from
Nez Zealand vary with the level of k of each agent. Mean expected inflation and disagreement about future
inflation decrease in , while uncertainty is approximately constant across . These patterns hold for low-
and high-order inflation expectations and are broadly consistent with theoretical predictions: low- firms
should disagree more and should be more likely to have expectations with larger departures from
fundamentals. We also observe that as         increases, the degree of complementarity in pricing       tends to
increase as well. The precision of signals (     ,   ), the relative precision of the private signal ( ), and the
weight on the private signal (    ) exhibit an inverted-U shape in . In contrast, our theory predicts that     ,

should decrease in    monotonically. Finally, while in our theoretical setting the cross-sectional correlation
between low- and high-order inflation expectations is perfect (recall that private signals    is the only source
of variation in the cross-section), one might expect the correlation to be stronger for low-level thinkers
because these thinkers do not distinguish between low- and high-level expectations. In fact, we find that
the correlation between low- and high-order inflation expectations is weakly increasing in .
        Appendix B also extends this level-k model to incorporate responses to information analogous to
the experiment described in Table 2. This analysis suggests that the response of managers to new
information should vary in the level of thinking, , although the differences may be quantitatively small
given the observed strategic complementarity in pricing ( ), a high weight on private signals ( ), and a
large share of level-0 managers (    ). To assess the degree of heterogeneity in the weight assigned to priors
across , we estimate equation (1) for     equal to 0, 1, and 2+ and report results in Table 10.
        The results are inconsistent with several key predictions made by the theory. First, level-0 firms
should not make a distinction between signals B and C because giving information about low-order
expectations or high-order expectations does not make a difference for this type of agents (these agents
iterate forward neither “prices” nor “expectations”). Inconsistent with this prediction, we observe that the
weight on the prior is systematically smaller for Treatment C than for Treatment B and the magnitudes are
similar to what is observed for     = 1 and    ≥ 2. Furthermore, level-0 firms should not make a distinction
between signals B and D because they do not differentiate between information contained in expectations
and information contained in fundamentals. Again, this prediction is not borne out in the data. Hence, level-
0 managers in our data differentiate between signals just as much as higher-level agents, contrary to the
theory. Second, level-1 firms should respond differently to signal E than to signals B, C, or D and should
respond similarly to signals B and C (firms in this group understand the difference between fundamentals
and expectations but do not distinguish among orders of expectations). Again, we find no support for this

                                                                                                              27
prediction: level-1 managers distinguish sharply between signals B and C and between signal B and C/D,
just like other agents. Finally, our theory predicts that, ceteris paribus, the weight on the prior should be
increasing with the level of thinking. In contrast, we find little variation how much weight agents assign to
their priors relative to new information across different levels of .
        While we find no evidence that agents’ level of k affects how they respond to new information,
these cognitive constraints could still affect how information translates into their economic decisions. In
Table 11, we report the effects of inflation expectations on employment, investment, prices, and wages
from estimating equation (2) for each level    separately. We typically cannot reject equality of responses
for each outcome variable across different levels of . Thus, not only do firms appear to process information
similarly for different levels of k, they also transmit revisions in their expectations into their economic
decisions in the same way regardless of their level of thinking.
        This evidence should be interpreted with caution for several reasons. First, sample sizes are
relatively small so the sampling uncertainty in the estimates is relatively large. This could be resolved in
future work through the use of larger samples to sharpen inference. Second, the amount of predicted
variation in sensitivity of beliefs and possible actions to new information across different k can be
quantitatively small depending on underlying parameter values. The fact that we cannot uncover
meaningful differences depending on the level of thinking may therefore reflect underlying parameter
values rather than a failure of the model. For example, values of   closer to zero would reduce the predicted
differences in reactions across . A third caveat to bear in mind is that, while beauty contest questions are
commonly used to assess the level of thinking in the experimental literature, these measures may not
necessarily be appropriate to measure the levels of thinking used by managers when they revise their
inflation expectations or make decisions about employment, investment, etc. In this case, the fact that we
do not find variation in expectations or behavior for different levels of k could simply reflect a poor
identification of relevant   . Future work could consider alternative approaches to measure cognitive
abilities of firm managers to assess whether these affect their beliefs and decisions.

VI.     Concluding remarks
This paper presents novel survey evidence on the higher-order expectations of firms and how these
expectations affect their decisions. We find evidence that, along a number of key dimensions, is broadly in
line with noisy-information models in which firm managers face strategic complementarities in pricing,
requiring them to form higher-order beliefs about other managers. We also show how moments from
higher-order beliefs, along with first-order expectations, can help calibrate previously unknown parameters
in this class of models and test overidentifying restrictions implied by these models. These results can
therefore be of immediate practical use for future work using this class of models.


                                                                                                          28
        Our results can also help identify along which dimensions these models could be extended. Indeed,
while simple models of noisy information can go a long way in rationalizing observed expectations of firms
and households, the mapping from expectations to actions is more complex than is commonly postulated
by these models. One increasingly popular departure from the noisy information model with infinite regress
is to assume cognitive constraints on agents in the form of level-k thinking. But our results suggest that this
approach is unlikely to be fruitful in accounting for apparent deviations between the data and theory. While
we are able to identify the level of thinking associated with each manager, we find little evidence that any
important dimension of the data is related to these differing levels of thinking.
        Particularly challenging for the noisy information model with infinite regress, as well as the
extended version of the model with level-k thinking, is understanding why treatments using higher-order
beliefs of other firms have such a large effect on the expectations of managers, particularly compared to
treatment effects from providing the first-order beliefs of other firms. While these results present a
theoretical challenge, they nonetheless should be of immediate interest to policy-makers. For example, our
results indicate that not all types of information move inflation expectations equally: providing information
about recent inflation and the higher-order expectations of other firms has much larger effects on beliefs
than providing them with information about the average expectations of other firms. Using this randomized
controlled variation in information received by managers, we also document that these information
treatments affect firms’ actions, not just their expectations. These results provide a rationale for utilizing
survey measures of inflation expectations in policymaking as well as a foundation for policies operating
via information treatments. Our findings therefore contribute to a broader research agenda explaining the
expectations formation of agents and utilizing these expectations in policymaking.



References
Afrouzi, Hassan (2018). “Strategic Inattention, Inflation Dynamics and the Non-Neutrality of Money,”
        manuscript.
Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian (2018). “Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge,”
        forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’O (2009). “Incomplete Information, Higher-Order Beliefs and
        Price Inertia,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56(S1):19-37.
Armantier, Olivier, Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar (2015).
        “Inflation Expectations and Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act on Their Beliefs?”
        International Economic Review 56: 505-536.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric Van Wincoop (2008). “Higher-order Expectations in Asset Pricing,” Journal
        of Money, Credit, and Banking 40(5): 837–866.
Bruine de Bruin, Wandi, Baruch Fischhoff, Susan Millstein and Bonnie Halpern-Felsher (2000). “Verbal
        and Numerical Expressions of Probability: It’s a Fifty-Fifty Chance,” Organizational Behavior and
        Human Decision Processes 81: 115-131.


                                                                                                            29
Camerer, Colin F. (1997). “Progress in Behavioral Game Theory,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(4):
        167-188.
Camerer, Colin F., Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong (2004). “A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of Games,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 861–898.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia (2017). “Inflation Expectations, Learning,
        and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments,” American Economic Journal:
        Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015). “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All?
        Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal –
        Macroeconomics 7(1): 197-232
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar (2018). “How Do Firms Form Their
        Expectations? New Survey Evidence,” forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele (2018). “Inflation Expectations and Firm
        Decisions: New Causal Evidence,” manuscript.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Mathieu Pedemonte (2018). “Inflation
        Expectations as a Policy Tool?” NBER Working Paper 24788.
Costa-Gomes, Miguel A., and Vincent P. Crawford (2006). “Cognition and Behavior in Two-Person
        Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,” American Economic Review 96(5): 1737–1768.
Fahri, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning (2017). “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
        Markets,” Mimeo.
Fischhoff, Baruch, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin (1999). “Fifty-Fifty = 50%?” Journal of Behavioral
        Decision Making 12: 149-163.
Gabaix, Xavier (2016). “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model,” NBER Working Paper 22954
Garcia-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford (2015). “Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A
        Paradox of Perfect Foresight Analysis”. Mimeo.
Harsanyi, John C. (1967). “Games with incomplete information played by “Bayesian” players, I-III. part I.
        The Basic Model,” Management Science14(3): 159–182.
Keynes, John (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. Palgrave Macmillan
Kleinjans, Kristin, and Arthur van Soest (2010). “Rounding, Focal Point Answers and Nonresponse to
        Subjective Probability Questions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(4): 567-585.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015). “Inflation Targeting
        Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand,” Brookings Papers
        on Economic Activity 2015 (Fall), 151-225.
Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt (2009). “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention,”
        American Economic Review 99(3): 769-803.
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002). “The Social Value of Public Information,” American
        Economic Review 92 (5): 1521–1534.
Nagel, Rosemarie (1995). “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,” American Economic
        Review 85 (5): 1313–1326.
Nagel, Rosemarie, and John Duffy (1997). “On the Robustness of Behavior in Experimental Beauty-
        Contest,” Economic Journal 107(445): 1684–1700.
Patton, Andrew J., and Allan Timmermann (2010). “Why do forecasters disagree? Lessons from the term
        structure of cross-sectional dispersion,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(7): 803-820.
Sims, Christopher (2003). “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(3):
        665-690.
Stahl, Dale O., and Paul W. Wilson (1995). “Cognition and Behavior in Two-Person Guessing Games: An
        Experimental Study,” Games and Economic Behavior 10(1): 218–254.
Woodford, Michael (2002). “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy”.
        Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund
        Phelps. Princeton Univ. Press.


                                                                                                      30
                                            Table 1. Expectations of future inflation and other managers’ inflation expectations.

                                                                                                                         St.dev.                             Correlation with
                                                                                             # obs.       Mean                            Uncertainty
                                                                                                                     (disagreement)                         expected inflation
                                                                                               (1)          (2)            (3)                    (4)              (5)
      Initial wave (pre experiment)
         Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                   1,032        3.41             3.06             1.11                 1.00
         Expected inflation expectation of other managers, 12-month ahead                     1,032        3.50             2.43             0.89                 0.68
         p-value for equality of moment                                                                    0.18             0.00             0.00

      Initial wave (post experiment)
         Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                   1,032        3.25             1.76              -                   1.00
         Expected inflation expectation of other managers, 12-month ahead                     1,032        3.23             1.42              -                   0.62
         p-value for equality of moment                                                                    0.79             0.00              -

      Follow-up wave
        Expected inflation, 12-month ahead                                                     515         3.03             2.11             0.89                 1.00
        Expected inflation expectation of other managers, 12-month ahead                       515         3.49             1.74             1.14                 0.70
        p-value for equality of moment                                                                     0.00             0.00             0.00

      Memorandum
        Expected inflation, 12-month ahead, point prediction, initial wave                   1,032         3.76             2.52              -                   0.63
        Perceived inflation, previous 12 months, point prediction, initial wave              1,032         4.11             2.55              -                   0.93


Notes: The table reports basic moments of first-order and higher-order expectations of inflation. Column (3) reports the cross-sectional standard deviation of mean inflation forecasts.
Column (4) reports the average (across managers) standard deviation of the reported distribution for future inflation.




                                                                                                                                                                                     31
                                            Table 2. Effect of Information Treatment on Expectations. .

                                                              Initial wave                                       Follow-up wave
      Row      Treatment                             Own        Higher-order          p-value             Own        Higher-order         p-value
                                                  Expectations Expectations           equality        Expectations Expectations           equality
                                                      (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)               (6)
      (1)      Group A, Control                      0.727***        0.699***           0.35             0.744***       0.708***             0.45
                                                    (0.020)         (0.021)                             (0.038)        (0.038)
      (2)      Group B, [ ]                           0.502***          0.430***        0.21              0.461***          0.513***          0.45
                                                     (0.041)           (0.039)                           (0.065)           (0.049)
      (3)      Group C,      [ ]                      0.090***          0.118***        0.36              0.116***          0.146***          0.61
                                                     (0.018)           (0.024)                           (0.043)           (0.047)
      (4)      Group D, [ ] and          [ ]          0.096***          0.071***        0.37              0.155***          0.097**           0.18
                                                     (0.022)           (0.019)                           (0.038)           (0.042)
      (5)      Group E,                               0.059***          0.062***        0.90              0.088**          -0.006             0.14
                                                     (0.015)           (0.021)                           (0.043)           (0.040)
               Observations                           1,032             1,032                              515               515
                                                      0.757             0.759                             0.653             0.602

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on managers’ pre-treatment inflation expectations in specification (1). The dependent variable in each column is
the post-treatment inflation expectation. All inflation expectations are measured at the one-year-ahead horizon. Group B was provided information about
the average first-order inflation expectation of other firms ( [ ]), group C was provided information about the average higher-order inflation expectation
( [ ]), group D received both pieces of information, while group E was told the most recent inflation rate (             ). Group A is the control group and
received no information. Columns (1) and (2) present results for post-treatment inflation expectations measured immediately after treatment. Columns (4)
and (5) present results for post-treatment inflation expectations measured three months after treatment. Columns (1) and (4) are for firms’ own inflation
expectations Columns (2) and (5) present the same results for the expectation of other firms’ inflation expectations. Column (3) reports p-values of the
null hypothesis that columns (1) and (2) are equal. Column (6) reports p-values of the null hypothesis that columns (4) and (5) are equal. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                               32
                                       Table 3. Effect of Information Treatment on Actions.

                                                                             Percent change in:
         Treatment effect                                                                Price of Main
                                                       Workers          Fixed Assets                                 Wages
         (relative to control group)                                                        Product
                                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                      (4)

         Treatment B ( [ ])
                        ( )−               ( )          0.407***            0.342***            0.141                 0.003
                                                       (0.152)             (0.125)             (0.132)               (0.015)
               Observations                              245                  245                 245                  245
               R2                                       -0.038              -0.050               0.028                0.001
               1st stage F-stat                         149.6                149.6               149.6                149.6

         Treatment C (      [ ]])
                            ( )−           ( )          0.493*              0.141**            -0.078                 0.043*
                                                       (0.260)             (0.063)             (0.072)               (0.024)
               Observations                              252                 252                   252                 252
               R2                                       -0.097              0.103                -0.043              -0.198
               1st stage F-stat                         15.47               15.47                 15.47               15.47

         Treatment D ( [ ] and          [ ]]))
                        ( )−              ( )          -0.264               0.214***            0.019                 0.016
                                                       (0.184)             (0.060)             (0.062)               (0.018)
               Observations                              253                 253                  253                  253
               R2                                       0.004               0.066                0.002                0.010
               1st stage F-stat                         318.8               318.8                318.8                318.8

         Treatment E: (       )
                           ( )−           ( )           0.352***            0.251***            0.096                 0.021
                                                       (0.095)             (0.096)             (0.094)               (0.013)
              Observations                               251                 251                   251                 251
              R2                                        0.049               -0.028               -0.005              -0.000
              1st stage F-stat                          49.19               49.19                 49.19               49.19

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on the revision of a firm’s first-order inflation expectation in specification (2). The regressand
in each column is the forecast error for a given firm-specific outcome indicated in the second row of the table. The regressor is
instrumented with surprise component in the provided signal, that is, the difference between information provided in a treatment and
pre-treatment expectation for the variable provided in the treatment. 1st stage F-stat reports the first-stage F-statistic. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                        33
                                                     Table 4. Horserace regressions.

                                                                       Panel A. Second-stage regression
                                                                      Dependent variable: percent change in:
                                                                                           Price of Main
      Regressors                                     Workers            Fixed Assets                                      Wages
                                                                                              Product
                                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)                       (4)
                           −                           -0.086               0.168**             0.036                     0.028
                                                       (0.222)             (0.083)            (0.053)                    (0.021)
                  [ ( )] −            [ ( )]           -0.239               0.062             -0.023                     -0.016
                                                       (0.206)             (0.071)            (0.077)                    (0.016)
      Observations                                      253                  253                 253                       253
      R2                                               0.002                0.100              -0.001                     0.005

                                                                        Panel B. First-stage regression
                                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                                     −                             [ ( )] −                   [ ( )]
                                                                   (1)                                   (2)
                      −                                           0.906***                            -0.044**
                                                                 (0.037)                              (0.019)
                  −          [ ( )]                              -0.034                                0.953***
                                                                 (0.030)                              (0.027)
      Observations                                                 253                                   253
      R2                                                          0.656                                 0.679
      1st stage F-stat                                            501.9                                 655.4

Notes: Panel A of the table reports the coefficient on the revision firms’ first-order inflation expectations and the revision of their
higher-order inflation expectation in specification (2). The regressand in each column is the forecast error for a given firm-specific
outcome indicated in the second row of the table. The regressors are instrumented with surprise component in the provided signals, that
is, the difference between information provided in a treatment and pre-treatment expectation for the variable provided in the treatment.
The first-stage regression is reported in Panel B. 1st stage F-stat reports the first-stage F-statistic. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                            34
                                                  Table 5. Predictors of level of thinking.

                                                                                       Sample
Dependent variable:                                                                                               Responses with non-
                                               All responses                  Responses with      >0
 , level of thinking                                                                                                   missing ′
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)           (6)
Firm characteristics
   Ln(Employment)                        -0.314***         -0.315***         -0.023           -0.021             -0.131           -0.140
                                         (0.066)           (0.068)           (0.088)          (0.090)            (0.093)          (0.095)
  Ln(Age)                                -0.038            -0.035             0.022            0.023             -0.023           -0.017
                                         (0.048)           (0.048)           (0.055)          (0.055)            (0.057)          (0.057)
  Share of domestic sales                -0.013**          -0.011            -0.012*          -0.013*            -0.017**         -0.019**
                                         (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.007)          (0.008)            (0.007)          (0.008)
  Number of competitors                   0.044***          0.043***          0.002            0.002              0.008            0.007
                                         (0.011)           (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.012)            (0.012)          (0.012)
Manager characteristics
  Manager’s tenure at the firm           -0.011*           -0.012*           -0.007           -0.006             -0.002           -0.003
                                         (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.009)          (0.009)            (0.009)          (0.009)
  Manager’s gender (female = 1)           0.006            -0.005             0.093            0.084              0.007           -0.031
                                         (0.110)           (0.111)           (0.126)          (0.129)            (0.133)          (0.137)
  Manager’s years of schooling            0.008             0.010             0.024            0.024              0.021            0.021
                                         (0.023)           (0.023)           (0.026)          (0.026)            (0.027)          (0.027)

Observations                               1,032            1,032               654              654                726             726
R2                                         0.144            0.148              0.009            0.011              0.019           0.022
Industry FE                                 No               Yes                No               Yes                No              Yes

  Notes: The table report results of regressing level of thinking on firm and manager characteristics. Industry fixed effects are at the
  one-digit level. Coding ′ for level of thinking sets = 0 for responses with response time of 20 seconds or more and responses close
  to 50 and response time less than 20 seconds. The coding of and ′ are identical for > 0. Robust standard errors are reported in
  parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                   Table 6. Distribution of beliefs about other managers’ guesses in the beauty contest game.

          Other managers are asked to guess a number from zero to 100, with the goal of making their guess as close
          as possible to two-thirds of the average guess of all those participating in the contest. What percentage of
          other managers’ guesses do you think will fall in each of the following ranges?

          Range of Guesses                               Percentage of Other Managers
          From 0 to 9.99                                 ……………… %
          From 10 to 19.99                               ……………… %
          From 20 to 29.99                               ……………… %
          From 30 to 39.99                               ……………… %
          From 40 to 49.99                               ……………… %
          From 50 to 59.99                               ……………… %
          From 60 to 69.99                               ……………… %
          From 70 to 79.99                               ……………… %
          From 80 to 89.99                               ……………… %
          From 90 to 100                                 ……………… %

       Note: table reports the survey question to elicit manager beliefs about the distribution of guess submitted by other managers.


                                                                                                                                        35
                                  Table 7. Beliefs about distribution of other managers’ guesses.

                                             Level of thinking                                   Average
                                                                                                                    Actual      memorandum
                                                                                                 expected
Range of Guesses           =0         =1            =2        =3       =4         =5                             distribution       =0
                                                                                                distribution
                          (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)                 (7)             (8)           (9)
From 0 to 9.99            5.9         0.0           1.0       9.8     25.0       79.0              8.9               8.9           1.0
From 10 to 19.99          7.1         1.6          11.9      74.5     68.7       18.8             22.4              22.4           2.2
From 20 to 29.99          7.8        12.1          76.3      14.6      4.9        2.0             19.7              19.7           6.8
From 30 to 39.99          7.4        72.3          10.1       1.1      1.1        0.1             19.7              19.7          11.0
From 40 to 49.99         12.7        13.2           0.7       0.0      0.2        0.0              7.5               7.5          26.3
From 50 to 59.99         19.4         0.8           0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0              7.3               7.3          21.5
From 60 to 69.99         13.2         0.0           0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0              4.8               4.8          14.8
From 70 to 79.99         11.3         0.0           0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0              4.2               4.2           9.0
From 80 to 89.99          9.0         0.0           0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0              3.3               3.3           4.6
From 90 to 100            6.0         0.0           0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0              2.2               2.2           2.8

Notes: The table reports average probabilities assigned to the beliefs of other managers’ guesses. Column (7) is the average of columns
(1)-(6) weighted by the share of managers with level thinking. Column (8) shows the actual distribution of guesses. Classification of
managers into various level of is described in section 5.1. Coding ′ for level of thinking sets = 0 for guesses in the beauty contest
with response time of 20 seconds or more and responses close to 50 and response time less than 20 seconds. The coding of and ′ are
identical for > 0. Column (9) reports the average probabilities for = 0.




                     Table 8. Test of internal consistency of reported guesses in the beauty contest game.

 Dependent                                                             Estimation sample:
 variable:                  All
                                             >0              =0             =1           =2               =3               =4       =5
                         responses
                            (1)              (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)

   [           ]          0.982***       0.912***          1.005***    0.937***     0.881***         0.932***        0.707***     0.814***
                         (0.010)        (0.005)           (0.014)     (0.005)      (0.007)          (0.012)         (0.031)      (0.054)

 Observations              1,032             654            378         216              160              134          110           34
 R2                        0.950            0.985          0.943       0.992            0.989            0.979        0.938        0.887
 p-value(slope=2/3)         0.00            0.00           0.00        0.00             0.00              0.00         0.14         0.01

Note: The table reports the estimated slope in specification (33) by level of thinking . Classification of managers into various levels of
  is described in section 5.1. p-value(slope=2/3) reports the p-value for the null that the estimate is equal to 2/3. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                           36
                                     Table 9. Moments of inflation expectations and implied parameter values by level of thinking.

                                                                                                  Level of thinking
                                                                                                                                                      memorandum
                                                                           =0           =1          =2           =3           =4          =5
                                                                                                                                                          =0
                                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)
             Moment of own inflation expectations
                Mean                                                     5.16         2.60         2.24         2.40        2.46         1.54              3.53
                Disagreement                                             2.83         2.91         2.50         2.71        2.60         2.49              2.87
                Uncertainty                                              1.29         1.06         0.95         0.92        1.02         1.03              1.10

             Moment of high-order inflation expectations
                Mean                                                     4.87         2.83         2.74         2.69        2.62         2.13              3.87
                Disagreement                                             2.09         2.40         2.17         2.32        2.20         1.58              2.54
                Uncertainty                                              0.88         0.95         0.80         0.92        0.93         0.86              0.90

             Correlation between low- and high-order inflation           0.48         0.66         0.68         0.70        0.71         0.79              0.65
             expectations

             Strategic complementarity in pricing,                       0.68         0.69         0.75         0.56        0.84         0.82              0.82

             Implied parameters
                                                                         0.74         0.82        0.87         0.86         0.85        0.63              0.89
                                                                         0.47         0.59        0.62         0.72         0.47        0.24              0.58
                                                                         0.015        0.028       0.047        0.052        0.023       0.004             0.032
                                                                         0.004        0.007       0.012        0.013        0.006       0.001             0.008

             Observations                                                 378          216         160          134          110          34                72

Notes: The table reports moments of inflation expectations by level of thinking . Classification of managers into various level of is described in section 5.1. Coding ′ for level
of thinking sets = 0 for guesses in the beauty contest with response time of 20 seconds or more and responses close to 50 and response time less than 20 seconds. The coding of
  and ′ is identical for > 0. Disagreement is the cross-sectional standard deviation of mean inflation forecasts. Uncertainty is the average (across managers) standard deviation
of the reported distribution for future inflation. Parameters , , , , implied by these moments are calculated as in section 4. Precision of signals , is calculated using
disagreement in low- and high-order inflation expectations.




                                                                                                                                                                               37
                                                 Table 10. Revisions of beliefs by level of thinking

                                                        =0                                  =1                                   ≥2
                                                        Higher-                              Higher-                                 Higher-
                                            Own                                  Own                                 Own
                                                         order                                order                                    order
                                         Expectations                         Expectations                        Expectations
                                                      Expectations                         Expectations                            Expectations
                                             (1)          (2)                     (3)          (4)                      (5)             (6)
      Group A, Control                     0.704***     0.715***                0.722***     0.634***                 0.732***        0.726***
                                          (0.042)      (0.028)                 (0.033)      (0.058)                  (0.035)         (0.028)
      Group B, [ ]                         0.554***     0.284***                0.522***     0.521***                 0.446***        0.500***
                                          (0.109)      (0.058)                 (0.068)      (0.127)                  (0.061)         (0.054)
      Group C,      [ ]                    0.100***     0.141**                 0.029        0.053                    0.098**         0.127***
                                          (0.031)      (0.056)                 (0.021)      (0.035)                  (0.038)         (0.038)
      Group D, [ ] and          [ ]        0.082**      0.079                   0.107***     0.028*                   0.090**         0.066**
                                          (0.035)      (0.049)                 (0.039)      (0.014)                  (0.035)         (0.028)
      Group E,                             0.033*       0.065                   0.103**      0.036                    0.071**         0.102**
                                          (0.019)      (0.048)                 (0.046)      (0.031)                  (0.032)         (0.044)
      Observations                           378          378                     216          216                      438             438
      R2                                    0.753        0.785                   0.777        0.755                    0.719           0.723

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on managers’ pre-treatment inflation expectations in specification (1) by level of thinking . Classification of
managers into various level of is described in section 5.1. The dependent variable in each column is the post-treatment inflation expectation measured
immediately after treatment. All inflation expectations are measured at the one-year-ahead horizon. Columns (1), (3), and (5) are for firms’ own inflation
expectations. Columns (2), (4), and (6) present the same results for the expectation of other firms’ inflation expectations. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                             38
                                        Table 11. Effect of Information Treatment on Actions.

                                                                                       Percent change in:
     Treatment effect                                -level                                          Price of
                                                                   Workers          Fixed Assets                             Wages
     (relative to control group)                                                                   Main Product
                                                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                     (4)

     Treatment B ( [ ])
                    ( )−                ( )            =0            0.597*              0.534**             0.178              0.034
                                                                    (0.311)             (0.252)             (0.209)            (0.035)
                                                       =1            0.264               0.361              -0.058             0.000
                                                                    (0.188)             (0.240)            (0.102)           (0.000)
                                                       ≥2            0.365               0.259               0.211            -0.027
                                                                    (0.270)             (0.201)            (0.234)           (0.021)

     Treatment C (       [ ]])
                         ( )−           ( )            =0            0.222               0.160             -0.145              0.014
                                                                    (0.302)             (0.100)            (0.133)            (0.020)
                                                       =1            1.511              -0.724              2.182              1.252
                                                                   (16.412)             (8.896)           (24.137)           (14.267)
                                                       ≥2            1.203               0.170*            -0.132              0.071
                                                                    (0.780)             (0.088)            (0.127)            (0.052)

     Treatment D ( [ ] and           [ ]]))
                    ( )−                ( )            =0           -0.219               0.239**            0.187*             0.031
                                                                    (0.390)             (0.114)            (0.113)            (0.042)
                                                       =1           -0.407               0.214**           -0.290              0.000
                                                                    (0.425)             (0.089)            (0.192)            (0.000)
                                                       ≥2           -0.425               0.242***          -0.034             -0.014
                                                                    (0.355)             (0.092)            (0.040)            (0.009)

     Treatment E: (         )
                       ( )−            ( )             =0            0.224*              0.135*             0.006              0.005
                                                                    (0.123)             (0.072)            (0.073)            (0.017)
                                                       =1            0.791**             0.525**            0.665              0.004
                                                                    (0.319)             (0.232)            (0.605)            (0.004)
                                                       ≥2            0.390***            0.352             -0.002              0.043
                                                                    (0.119)             (0.223)            (0.084)            (0.030)

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on the revision of firms’ first-order inflation expectations in specification (2) by level of thinking
 . Classification of managers into various level of is described in section 5.1. The regressand in each column is the forecast error for
a given firm-specific outcome indicated in the second row of the table. The regressor is instrumented with surprise component in the
provided signal, that is, the difference between information provided in a treatment and pre-treatment expectation for the variable
provided in the treatment. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and
0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                            39
                                         Figure 1. Own Expectations and Higher-order Expectations.

                  14

                                                                                                 45 degree
                  12        8 10
       Implied Eπ, other managers
     -2 0      2   4    6




                                                                                slope = 0.66 (0.02)
                                                                                    R2 = 0.61
                  -4




                                    -4       -2       0       2    4    6    8                      10        12         14
                                                             Implied Eπ, own

Notes: The figure reports the relationship between a managers’ own expectation of inflation and their higher-order expectation of
inflation. Expectations are measured as mean expectations implied by the reported probability distributions for future inflation (see
Appendix Table 3 for the wording of the questions). Expectations are for the one-year-ahead horizon.




                                                                                                                                        40
                                        Figure 2. Responses to Beauty Contest Question.


          .4
                                                                                  response time >=20 seconds
                                                                                  response time <20 seconds
                                                   K=1
          .3




                                        K=2
      Density




                                K=3
        .2




                          K=4
          .1




                      K=5
          0




                 0         10         20         30        40       50           60         70         80        90        100
                                                                   Guess

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of guesses from the beauty contest game. We asked managers to provide a guess between zero
and 100 with the guess closest to 2/3 of the average guess receiving a prize. For managers who spent at least 20 seconds in considering
their guess, we see clumping of guesses at those points which correspond neatly with level-k types as defined in Nagel (1995). Those
managers who answered the question in less than 20 seconds made guesses dispersed across the full interval.




                                                                                                                                    41
Online Appendix




                  42
        Appendix A:

Additional Tables and Figures




                                43
                                           Appendix Figure 1. Revision of beliefs immediately after treatment: low-order beliefs.


                                       Panel 1: Control group                                                               Panel 2: Treatment B
Point prediction Eπ, posterior




                                                                                      Point prediction Eπ, posterior
                          15




                                                                                                              10
                   10




                                                                                                        5
               5




                                                                                               0
 -5     0




                                                                                       -5
                                 -5             0           5       10          15                                     -5        0          5        10
                                                    Implied Eπ, prior                                                           Implied Eπ, prior
                                           Panel 3: Treatment C                                                             Panel 4: Treatment D
Point prediction Eπ, posterior




                                                                                      Point prediction Eπ, posterior
                                                                                                                10
                         10




                                                                                                        5
                  5




                                                                                                0
 -5      0




                                                                                       -5




                                 -5                  0          5              10                                      -5         0          5        10
                                                    Implied Eπ, prior                                                           Implied Eπ, prior
                                           Panel 5: Treatment E
Point prediction Eπ, posterior
               5    10    15




                                                                                                                                    fitted line
                                                                                                                                    45-degree line
  -5     0




                                      -5             0       5        10         15
                                                    Implied Eπ, prior



                                                                                                                                                           44
                                       Appendix Figure 2. Revision of beliefs immediately after treatment: high-order beliefs.


                                       Panel 1: Control group                                                               Panel 2: Treatment B
Point prediction E π, posterior




                                                                                     Point prediction E π, posterior
                           15




                                                                                                          6    8
                   10
2




                                                                                     2

                                                                                                 2    4
           5




                                                                                      -2 0
   0




                                       0          5     2
                                                             10                 15                                     -2    0      2     2
                                                                                                                                            4      6   8
                                               Implied E π, prior                                                                Implied E π, prior
                                           Panel 3: Treatment C                                                             Panel 4: Treatment D
Point prediction E π, posterior




                                                                                     Point prediction E π, posterior
                           10




                                                                                                          6    8
2




                                                                                     2

                                                                                                      4
                5




                                                                                      -2 0      2
    0




                                       0                2
                                                         5                      10                                     -2    0      2     2
                                                                                                                                            4      6   8
                                               Implied E π, prior                                                                Implied E π, prior
                                           Panel 5: Treatment E
Point prediction E π, posterior
                  5      10
2




                                                                                                                                     fitted line
                                                                                                                                     45-degree line
 -5      0




                                  -5            0       2
                                                           5               10
                                               Implied E π, prior



                                                                                                                                                           45
                                               Appendix Figure 3. Revision of beliefs in the follow-up survey: low-order beliefs.


                                          Panel 1: Control group                                                                  Panel 2: Treatment B
Implied Eπ, posterior (follow-up)




                                                                                         Implied Eπ, posterior (follow-up)
                            15




                                                                                                                    10
                     10




                                                                                                           5
               5




                                                                                                   0
  -5     0




                                                                                           -5
                                    -5             0           5       10           15                                       -5        0          5        10
                                                       Implied Eπ, prior                                                              Implied Eπ, prior
                                              Panel 3: Treatment C                                                                Panel 4: Treatment D
Implied Eπ, posterior (follow-up)




                                                                                         Implied Eπ, posterior (follow-up)
                                                                                                                      10
                            10




                                                                                                            5
                   5




                                                                                                   0
  -5      0




                                                                                           -5




                                    -5                  0          5              10                                         -5         0          5        10
                                                       Implied Eπ, prior                                                              Implied Eπ, prior
                                              Panel 5: Treatment E
Implied Eπ, posterior (follow-up)
               5      10     15




                                                                                                                                          fitted line
                                                                                                                                          45-degree line
    -5    0




                                         -5             0       5        10         15
                                                       Implied Eπ, prior



                                                                                                                                                                 46
                                              Appendix Figure 4. Revision of beliefs in the follow-up survey: high-order beliefs.


                                          Panel 1: Control group                                                                    Panel 2: Treatment B
Implied E π, posterior (follow-up)




                                                                                          Implied E π, posterior (follow-up)
                             15




                                                                                                                 6     8
                    10




                                                                                                       2   4
            5
2




                                                                                          2

                                                                                            -2 0
     0




                                          0           5     2
                                                                 10                  15                                        -2    0      2     2
                                                                                                                                                    4      6   8
                                                   Implied E π, prior                                                                    Implied E π, prior
                                              Panel 3: Treatment C                                                                  Panel 4: Treatment D
Implied E π, posterior (follow-up)




                                                                                          Implied E π, posterior (follow-up)
                             10




                                                                                                           4    6      8
                5




                                                                                                      2
2




                                                                                          2

                                                                                            -2 0
      0




                                          0                 2
                                                             5                       10                                        -2    0      2     2
                                                                                                                                                    4      6   8
                                                   Implied E π, prior                                                                    Implied E π, prior
                                              Panel 5: Treatment E
Implied E π, posterior (follow-up)
                  5         10




                                                                                                                                             fitted line
                                                                                                                                             45-degree line
           0
2

  -5




                                     -5             0       2
                                                               5                10
                                                   Implied E π, prior



                                                                                                                                                                   47
                           Appendix Figure 5. Beliefs about distribution of other managers’ guesses.

      80
                                                                                                    level k=0
                                                                                                    level k=1
      70



                                                                                                    level k=2
                                                                                                    level k=3
      60




                                                                                                    level k=4+
                                                                                                    actual
      50




                                                                                                    average expected
      40
      30
      20
      10
      0




             0          10         20         30          40     50        60               70         80         90         100
                                                            probability bin

Notes: This figure shows the average belief of each reasoning type ( = 0, 1, 2, … ), about other managers’ guesses in the beauty contest
game. Individuals of each type believe that the majority of other managers provide guesses similar to their own. All thinking types
underestimate the true dispersion of guesses.




                                                                                                                                     48
                           Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics for the initial wave of the survey.
                                                                                  Mean          St.dev.
                                                                                    (1)           (2)
                         Firm characteristics
                            Employment                                            37.70          67.98
                            Age                                                   25.97          19.23
                            Share of domestic sales in total sales                97.19           7.69
                            Number of competitors                                   8.78          6.26
                         Manager characteristics
                            Tenure at the firm                                    11.48           7.32
                            Gender (female=1)                                       0.19          0.39
                            Years of schooling                                    16.71           1.92
                         Level of thinking
                                                                                    1.50          1.51
                              ′                                                     2.13          1.38
                              | >0                                                  2.37          1.24
                                              Notes: the number of observations is 1,032.



                        Appendix Table 2. Predictors of selection into the follow-up wave of the survey.
                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                       Participation in the follow-up wave of the survey
                                                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)

                      Ln(Employment)                        -0.026         -0.022         -0.020         -0.023
                                                            (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.024)
                      Ln(Age)                               -0.028         -0.029         -0.029         -0.027
                                                            (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)
                      Share of domestic sales               -0.002         -0.002         -0.002         -0.003
                                                            (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
                      Number of competitors                 -0.004         -0.005         -0.005         -0.005
                                                            (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)
                      Manager’s tenure at the firm                         -0.004         -0.004         -0.004
                                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
                      Manager’s gender (male = 1)                          -0.015         -0.015         -0.023
                                                                           (0.039)        (0.039)        (0.040)
                      Manager’s years of schooling                          0.001          0.001          0.001
                                                                           (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)
                      Level of thinking, k                                                 0.004          0.004
                                                                                          (0.011)        (0.011)
                      Constant                              0.892***       0.926***       0.913***       1.000***
                                                           (0.222)        (0.259)        (0.262)        (0.268)

                      Observations                           1,032          1,032           1,032         1,032
                      R-squared                              0.005          0.007           0.007         0.011
                      Industry FE                             No             No              No            Yes

Notes: the table reports estimates of the linear probability model to check selection on observable characteristics of firms and managers.
Participation is the dummy variable equal to one if a firm participates in the follow-up and zero otherwise. Industry fixed effects are at
the one-digit level. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10
percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                       49
                                   Appendix Table 3. Distribution of probability bins

                                               Panel A. Own expectations
Please assign probabilities (from 0-100) to the following ranges of possible overall price changes for the New Zealand
economy over the next 12 months: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
        Percentage Price Changes PER YEAR over the next 12 months.
                                                           Probabilities
        More than 25%:                                  ……………… %
        From 15 to 25%:                                 ……………… %
        From 10 to 15%:                                 ……………… %
        From 8 to 10%:                                   ……………… %
        From 6 to 8%:                                    ……………… %
        From 4 to 6%:                                    ……………… %
        From 2 to 4%:                                    ……………… %
        From 0 to 2%:                                   ……………… %
        From -2 to 0%:                                   ……………… %
        From -4 to -2%:                                 …………….. %
        From -6 to -4%:                                 …………….. %
        From -6 to -8%:                                 ……………… %
        From -8 to -10%:                                ……………… %
        From -10 to -15%:                               ……………… %
        From -15 to -25%:                               ……………… %
        Less than -25%:                                  ……………… %
        Total (the column should sum to 100%):              100         %


                                  Panel B. Expectations of Other Managers’ Beliefs
We would like to know what your opinion is about what other managers (drawn from all sectors of the New Zealand
economy in a representative way) think will happen to overall prices in the economy. Please assign probabilities
(from 0-100) to the following ranges of beliefs that other managers might hold about overall price changes in the
economy over the next 12 months for New Zealand: (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)
       Percentage Price Changes PER YEAR over the next 12 months.
                                                         Probabilities
       More than 25%:                                  ……………… %
       From 15 to 25%:                                 ……………… %
       From 10 to 15%:                                 ……………… %
       From 8 to 10%:                                  ……………… %
       From 6 to 8%:                                   ……………… %
       From 4 to 6%:                                   ……………… %
       From 2 to 4%:                                   ……………… %
       From 0 to 2%:                                   ……………… %
       From -2 to 0%:                                  ……………… %
       From -4 to -2%:                                 …………….. %
       From -6 to -4%:                                 …………….. %
       From -6 to -8%:                                 ……………… %
       From -8 to -10%:                                ……………… %
       From -10 to -15%:                               ……………… %
       From -15 to -25%:                               ……………… %
       Less than -25%:                                 ……………… %
       Total (the column should sum to 100%):             100         %




                                                                                                                   50
                                Appendix Table 4. Effect of Information Treatment on Expectations.

                                                                                                  Follow-up
                                                                           Initial wave
                                                                                                    wave
                          Row      Treatment                                  Own                   Own
                                                                           Expectations          Expectations
                                                                               (1)                    (4)
                          (1)      Group A, Control                           0.968***              0.973***
                                                                              (0.014)              (0.045)
                          (2)      Group B, [ ]                               0.625***              0.574***
                                                                              (0.051)              (0.076)
                          (3)      Group C,      [ ]                          0.122***              0.157**
                                                                              (0.026)              (0.061)
                          (4)      Group D, [ ] and           [ ]             0.115***              0.175***
                                                                              (0.031)              (0.049)
                          (5)      Group E,                                   0.073***              0.096*
                                                                              (0.020)              (0.054)
                                   Observations                                1,032                  515
                                                                               0.840                 0.672

Notes: the table replicates analysis in Table 2 with the regressor being the point prediction for inflation rather than implied mean. See
note to Table 2 for more details.




                                                                                                                                       51
                                 Appendix Table 5. Effect of Information Treatment on Future Plans.

                                                                              Percent change in:
         Treatment effect                                                                 Price of Main
                                                       Workers           Fixed Assets                                 Wages
         (relative to control group)                                                         Product
                                                          (1)                (2)               (3)                      (4)

         Treatment B ( [ ])
                        ( )−               ( )           0.004               0.491**             0.396*               -0.015
                                                        (0.338)             (0.250)             (0.218)               (0.036)
               Observations                               245                  245                 245                  245
               R2                                        -0.000              -0.011               0.016               -0.001
               1st stage F-stat                          149.6                149.6               149.6                149.6

         Treatment C (      [ ]])
                            ( )−           ( )           0.017               0.027              -0.140                 0.098
                                                        (0.367)             (0.138)             (0.231)               (0.083)
               Observations                               252                 252                   252                 252
               R2                                        -0.000              0.005                -0.033              -0.021
               1st stage F-stat                          15.47               15.47                 15.47               15.47

         Treatment D ( [ ] and          [ ]]))
                        ( )−              ( )           -0.220               0.219**             0.106                 0.036
                                                        (0.187)             (0.093)             (0.125)               (0.055)
               Observations                               253                 253                  253                  253
               R2                                        0.008               0.006                0.002                0.009
               1st stage F-stat                          318.8               318.8                318.8                318.8

         Treatment E: (       )
                           ( )−           ( )            0.109               0.098              -0.202                -0.012
                                                        (0.204)             (0.121)             (0.148)               (0.030)
              Observations                                251                 251                   251                 251
              R2                                         0.001               0.007                -0.024              -0.004
              1st stage F-stat                           49.19               49.19                 49.19               49.19

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on revision of own inflation expectations in specification (2). The regressand in each column is
revision in plans for a given firm-specific outcome indicated in the second row of the table; that is, the outcome variable in specification
(2) is 3-month-ahead plan in the follow-up wave minus the 6-month-ahead plan in the initial wave. The regressor is instrumented with
surprise component in the provided signal, that is, the difference between information provided in a treatment and pre-treatment
expectation for the variable provided in the treatment. 1st stage F-stat reports the first-stage F-statistic. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                         52
                              Appendix Table 6. Effect of Information Treatment on Actions, OLS.

                                                                            Percent change in:
         Treatment effect                                                               Price of Main
                                                      Workers          Fixed Assets                               Wages
         (relative to control group)                                                       Product
                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)                    (4)

         Treatment B ( [ ])
                        ( )−              ( )          0.169**             0.145**            0.146**              0.003
                                                      (0.072)             (0.057)            (0.074)              (0.005)
               Observations                             245                 245                 245                 245
               R2                                      0.038               0.061               0.028               0.001

         Treatment C (     [ ]])
                           ( )−           ( )          0.155*              0.127***           0.010                0.008
                                                      (0.089)             (0.046)            (0.029)              (0.005)
               Observations                             252                 252                 252                 252
               R2                                      0.025               0.105               0.001               0.013

         Treatment D ( [ ] and         [ ]]))
                        ( )−             ( )          -0.149               0.134***           0.023                0.013
                                                      (0.129)             (0.047)            (0.036)              (0.011)
               Observations                             253                 253                 253                 253
               R2                                      0.010               0.103               0.002               0.010

         Treatment E: (      )
                          ( )−           ( )         0.207***            0.117***              0.042             0.010**
                                                      (0.066)             (0.036)             (0.030)            (0.005)
              Observations                              251                 251                 251                251
              R2                                       0.096               0.093               0.009              0.024

Notes: The table reports the OLS coefficient on revision of own inflation expectations in specification (2). The regressand in each
column is forecast error for a given firm-specific outcome indicated in the second row of the table. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                     53
           Appendix Table 7. Effect of Information Treatment on Actions, higher-order expectations on the RHS.

                                                                                Percent change in:
     Treatment effect                                                                       Price of Main
                                                          Workers          Fixed Assets                               Wages
     (relative to control group)                                                               Product
                                                             (1)               (2)               (3)                    (4)

     Treatment B ( [ ])
                   [ ( )] −              [ ( )]            0.644***           0.540***            0.223                0.005
                                                          (0.245)            (0.205)             (0.215)              (0.023)
           Observations                                      245               245                   245                245
           R2                                              -0.144             -0.294               -0.028             -0.003
           1st stage F-stat                                 60.64             60.64                 60.64              60.64

     Treatment C (     [ ]])
                      [ ( )] −           [ ( )]            0.326**            0.093**            -0.052                0.028**
                                                          (0.162)            (0.043)             (0.046)              (0.014)
           Observations                                     252                252                   252                252
           R2                                              0.039              0.022                -0.009              0.047
           1st stage F-stat                                561.8              561.8                 561.8              561.8

     Treatment D ( [ ] and [ ]]))
                   [ ( )] −     [ ( )]                    -0.355              0.288***            0.026                0.021
                                                          (0.244)            (0.084)             (0.084)              (0.024)
           Observations                                      253               253                  253                 253
           R2                                              -0.010             -0.010               0.003              -0.016
           1st stage F-stat                                 182.9             182.9                182.9               182.9

     Treatment E: (    )
                   [ ( )] −            [ ( )]              0.311***           0.222**             0.085                0.018
                                                          (0.095)            (0.089)             (0.085)              (0.012)
          Observations                                      251                251                   251                251
          R2                                               0.035              0.033                -0.012              0.000
          1st stage F-stat                                 83.65              83.65                 83.65              83.65

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on revision of higher-order inflation expectations in specification (2). The regressand in each
column is forecast error for a given firm-specific outcome indicated in the second row of the table. The regressor is instrumented with
surprise component in the provided signal, that is, the difference between information provided in a treatment and pre-treatment
expectation for the variable provided in the treatment. 1st stage F-stat reports the first-stage F-statistic. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                     54
          Appendix B:
Response to Information by Level-K




                                 55
Our discussion in Section 4 assumes that firms perform infinite iteration of the optimal pricing function.
That is, firms are capable of infinite degrees of reasoning, an assumption which models of level- thinking
challenge. To make our model of expectations consistent with level- thinking, we revise the optimal
pricing equation in equation (10) such that firm will weigh the public and private signals according to
                    ∑
          ( )=                    ∑
                                                                    ,                                                                         (B1)

where    is the firm’s type. We allow firms to fall into one of three different thinking types such that                                              =
0,1,2. A level-0 firm will have pricing strategies in equation (11) with                                   ,    =       and       ,   = 1 − . These
strategies ignore the strategic complementarity in prices and rely only on the relative precision of the public
and private signals. One can show that the strategies for level-1 and level-2 firms will shift weight towards
                                                                                                                                        ⋯ (    )
the public signal; that is,             ,   >                   ,   >   ,    and   ,   <   ,   <       ,       as       ,   =                        and
                                                                                                                                        ⋯

   ,   =1−      ,   .
        The aggregate price-level will then be a weighted average of the pricing behavior of each type of firm
          =∑                    ( )                                                                                                           (B2)

where      is the proportion of firms thinking at level- and ( ) =                                 ,           +    ,       .
        Heterogeneity in strategies means that firms must consider the distribution of types in forming their
expectations. Our data on the expectations of firms about the distribution of other types suggests that firms
assign the greatest weight to firms of their own type. For simplicity, we model that all firms behave as if
all firms are of their own type.
        Level-0 firms will form expectations of the aggregate price level

          ,   [ ]=          ,    + 1−               ,               =       + (1 − ) .                                                        (B3a)
Just as these firms do not iterate expectations in the price-setting equation, they do not iterate on
expectations of the price level. Namely, they fail to substitute their expectation of                                           into equation (B2).
        Level-1 and level-2 firms are capable of iterating their expectation of the price level. Accordingly,
their first-order expectations are:

          ,   [ ]=          ,         + 1−                  ,                                                                                 (B3b)

          ,   [ ]=          ,         + 1−                  ,                                                                                 (B3b)
        The aggregate expectation for each type is therefore:
              [ ]=ϕ     ,        + 1−ϕ          ,                                                                                             (B4a)
              [ ]=ϕ     ,         + 1−ϕ                 ,                                                                                     (B4b)
              [ ]=ϕ     ,         + 1−ϕ                 ,                                                                                     (B4c)
Aggregating across types and firms gives:


                                                                                                                                                     56
             [ ]=∑                                         [ ]=(                  (1 − )                   ,       +               )    + 1−(          (1 − )          ,   +    )   , (B5)
where        =∑                           ,           . Because by definition level-0 and level-1 firms are unable to iterate expectations
past their first-order expectation, their higher-order expectation is the same as their first-order expectation:

             ,            [ ] =               ,            + 1−                       ,               =            + (1 − ) ,                                                        (B6a)

             ,     [ ]] =                         ,        [ ] + (1 −                             ,       ) =          ,               + 1−        ,       .                         (B6b)
Unlike level-0 and level-1 firms, level-2 firms will be able to iterate their expectations for a second time,
substituting       [ ]=                           + (1 − ) :

             ,            [ ] =               ,             [ ]+ 1−                                   ,            =           ,            + 1−       ,           .                 (B6c)

        The aggregate higher-order expectations for each type are:

                 [ ]=ϕ                ,       + 1−                    ,                                                                                                              (B7a)

                 [ ]=                 ,               + 1−                ,                                                                                                          (B7b)

                 [ ]=                 ,                + 1−                   ,                                                                                                      (B7c)
The average higher-order expectation is then:

                 [ ]=∑                                     [ ].

        As Section 4.3 outlines, managers can transform signals about the average first-order and higher-
order inflation expectation (signals B and C) into signals about                                                                                 . Signal B, in Equation (23), will be
differently perceived by managers at different                                                             levels.
         ̃   ,    =           ,           +                =ϕ     ,           +                                                                                                      (B8a)
         ̃   ,    =           ,           +                =ϕ     ,                   +                                                                                              (B8b)
         ̃   ,    =           ,           +                =ϕ     ,                   +                                                                                              (B8c)
Note that the interpretation of signals may be incorrect because agents’ perception of the data generating
process (DGP) may deviate from the actual DGP. For example, for level-0 firms perception of DGP is given
by equation (B3a) while actual DGP is given by equation (B2). Indeed, only agents with the highest                                                                                         have
the correct perception. As a result, although agents believe they should interpret signals as in equations
(B8), the effective signals are different. For level-0 firms:


                      ̃   ,   =(              (1 − )                  ,       +                   )        + 1−(                       (1 − )      ,   +       )       +       − 1−ϕ   ,
                  =               ,       + (                − 1)                 ,           +                    ,   +                ,    (    − )+
                  =               ,       +            ,                                                                                                                             (B8a’)

where    ,       ≡ (                  − 1)             ,    +                             ,   +                ,           (       − )+          . Thus, level-0 firms interpret           ,   as


                                                                                                                                                                                               57
uncorrelated noise, but in fact the “noise” is correlated with fundamental                                                                                           and public signal . This
interpretation of the signal means that, in the long run, level-0 firms may be overconfident in their
expectations because                                              ,           >         (           ) and, relatedly, these firms may have more disagreement
because they may overreact to the perceived signals.
           Likewise, for level-1 and level-2 firms:
            ̃       ,   =         ,           +       ,   =                   ,         +            ,                                                                                                           (B8b’)
            ̃       ,   =         ,           +       ,   =                   ,         +            ,                                                                                                           (B8c’)
where           ,       ≡                 ,       +               −               ,     (           − )+                     and             ,   ≡           ,   +           −       ,               (           − )+
      .
           For each group, we can then show:

                    ,       [ ]=                                                                    [ ]+         ,       ̃       ,                                                                               (B9a)
                                                              ,


                    ,       [ ]=                                                                    [ ]+             ,       ̃       ,                                                                           (B9b)
                                                              ,


                    ,       [ ]=                                                                    [ ]+             ,       ̃       ,                                                                           (B9c)
                                                              ,

where the coefficient on the prior corresponds to (1 −                                                                               ) in equation (25). Because                 ,       <               ,       <         ,    ,
we can predict that the weight on the prior increases in level of thinking .
           Combining equations (B3), (B6) and (B9) gives:

                                              ,                               1−            ,                                                                                ,
  ,                     =                                                                                +                                           ,               +                   ,   ̃       ,
            [ ]                                   ,                           1−            ,                                        ,                       [ ]             ,

                                              ,                                   1−            ,                                                                                    ,
  ,                     =                                                                                    +                                           ,               +                                   ,    ̃   ,
            [ ]                                   ,                               1−            ,                                        ,                         [ ]               ,

                                              ,
                                                                                                         1− ,
  ,                     =                                                                                                                                +                                               ,                          +
            [ ]                                   ,                                   1−        (        (1 − )                      ,   +       )                       ,                                                [ ]
                                          ,
                                                          ,           ̃   ,
                                      ,

Note that the difference in weight on priors across                                                                      is largely governed by variation in                                     ,           across .
Given our parameter estimates for                                                     and           as well as the distribution of types, we find that                                                   ,       ≈ 0.80,

      ,   ≈ 0.59,             ,           ≈ 0.55. Thus, while the model predicts differentiated responses to signals across ,
the differences could be rather small.
           We can derive similar expressions for signal C, which gives firms the average higher-order
expectations. Because firms incorrectly perceive the DGP, signals must be translated into the effective
signals:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           58
                      ̃       ,    =        ,        +       ,       =               ,         +               ,                                                                                                                                                                            (B10a’)
                      ̃       ,    =        ,        +       ,       =               ,          +                      ,                                                                                                                                                                    (B10b’)
                      ̃       ,    =        ,        +       ,       =               ,                 +                   ,                                                                                                                                                                (B10c’)
where                ,            ≡ (1 −             )       ,       +                    ,     +                                  ,                ( −                                             )+       ,       ,           ≡                  ,   + (1 −                      )               ,           +

             ,                    ( −           )+       , and               ,       ≡                             ,       +                            ,                           + (1 −                       )       ,                ( −           )+              .
                     Firms then update their expectations of the fundamental according to:

                              ,    [ ]=                                                                            [ ]+                         ,                   ̃       ,                                                                                                               (B11a)
                                                                         ,


                              ,    [ ]=                                                                                [ ]+                             ,               ̃               ,                                                                                                   (B11b)
                                                                         ,


                              ,    [ ]=                                                                                    [ ]+                                 ,                   ̃       ,                                                                                               (B11c)
                                                                         ,

Equations (B11a) and (B11b) imply that, provided                                                                                                                =                               , the weight on priors for level-0 and level-1
firms is the same when firms are presented with signals B and C because these firms cannot perform a
second iteration on expectations.
                     Combining equations (B3), (B6) and (B11) gives:

                                                     ,                                   1−                ,                                                                                                                                            ,
     ,                             =                                                                                           +                                                                                 ,                             +                        ,   ̃   ,
                     [ ]                                 ,                               1−                ,                                                                            ,                                            [ ]                ,

                                                     ,                                    1−                   ,                                                                                                                                                ,
     ,                             =                                                                                                   +                                                                                     ,                      +                                   ,       ̃       ,
                     [ ]                                 ,                                1−                   ,                                                                                ,                                             [ ]               ,


                                                                                                                                           ,                                                                     1−                       ,
                                                                 ,                             =
                                                                                         [ ]                                       +                                                                             1−                   ,
                                                                                                                                                            ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                               +                                                                                                             ,                      +                                       ,           ̃   ,
                                                                                                                                           +                                                                                                  [ ]               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                ,

Given our parameter estimates for                                                             and                  as well as the distribution of types, we find that                                                                                                               ,       ≈ 0.80,

         ,       ≈ 0.59,                ,            ≈ 0.44. These estimates determine the difference in the weight given to priors across
 .
                     Firms in Group D receive both signals. If the noise terms in both signals are uncorrelated

                              ,    ( )= 1−                           ,           ,                     ( )+                                ,        ̃           ,           ,                                                                                                               (B12)
where                     ,       =[        ,            ,   ]′,             ,       =[            ,                                   ,       ]′,                                      ,       =[       ,                       ,            ]′,           =                   {                   ,               ,

and              ,    =                         ,            +                            ,            ,                       .
                     All thinking types are able to correctly process Signal E, which contains an estimate of past
inflation. Intuitively, signal E provides direct information about the fundamental and updating beliefs does


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                59
not require thinking about the behavior of other agents in the economy. We therefore do not expect to see
any difference between responses to this signal across .




                                                                                                      60
   Appendix C:
Sampling Frame and
  Response Rate




                     61
Appendix Table B.1: Number of Firms by Sector and Size in NZ, 2016
                                                Number of Firms
                                                  6-9 Workers    10-19 Workers      20-49 Workers   50-99 Workers   100+ Workers   ˃ 6 Workers
 Manufacturing                                        1737            1791              1248             420            312            5508
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                        528             330               153              15             36            1062
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services &
 Administrative Support Services                      2595            2016              1188            357             336           6492
 Financial and Insurance Services                      267             159                96             42              69            633
 Construction                                         2487           1821               837             204              93           5442
 Wholesale Trade                                      1284            1107               657            222             120           3390
 Retail Trade                                         2172           1704               678             258             315           5127
 Accommodation and Food Services                      2601            2511              1230            201             108           6651
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information
 Media                                                 744            681                438            171             156          2190
 Total                                               14415           12120              6525            1890           1545          36495
Source: Statistics New Zealand


Appendix Table B.2: Percentage of Firms by Sector and Size in NZ, 2016
                                                Percentage of Firms
                                                  6-9 Workers       10-19 Workers   20-49 Workers   50-99 Workers   100+ Workers   ˃ 6 Workers
                                                       (%)               (%)             (%)             (%)            (%)            (%)
 Manufacturing                                        31.54             32.52           22.66            7.63           5.66           100
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                       49.72             31.07           14.41            1.41           3.39           100
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services &
 Administrative Support Services                      39.97             31.05           18.30           5.50           5.18           100
 Financial and Insurance Services                     42.18             25.12           15.17           6.64           10.90          100
 Construction                                         45.70             33.46           15.38           3.75           1.71           100
 Wholesale Trade                                      37.88             32.65           19.38           6.55           3.54           100
 Retail Trade                                         42.36             33.24           13.22           5.03           6.14           100
 Accommodation and Food Services                      39.11             37.75           18.49           3.02           1.62           100
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information
 Media                                                33.97             31.10           20.00           7.81            7.12          100
Source: Statistics New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                 62
Appendix Table B.3: Number of Firms by Sector and Size in the Population of our Survey, 2017
                                                Number of Firms
                                                  6-9 Workers    10-19 Workers      20-49 Workers     50-99 Workers   100+ Workers   ˃ 6 Workers
 Manufacturing                                        946              975                680              420            312            3333
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                        200             125                 58               15             36             433
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services &
 Administrative Support Services                       868             674                397             357             336           2633
 Financial and Insurance Services                       80              47                 29              42              69           267
 Construction                                         241              177                 81             204              93           796
 Wholesale Trade                                       65               56                 33             222             120           496
 Retail Trade                                          84               66                26              258             315           750
 Accommodation and Food Services                       272             263                129             201             108            973
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information
 Media                                                 20              32                  48             164            156            420
 Total                                                2776            2415               1481             1883           1545          10100


Appendix Table B.4: Percentage of Firms by Sector and Size in the Population of our Survey, 2017
                                                Percentage of Firms
                                                  6-9 Workers       10-19 Workers     20-49 Workers   50-99 Workers   100+ Workers   ˃ 6 Workers
                                                       (%)               (%)               (%)             (%)            (%)            (%)
 Manufacturing                                          28                29                20              13             9             100
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                         46                29                13              3              8             100
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services &
 Administrative Support Services                        33                26                15             14             13            100
 Financial and Insurance Services                       30                18                11             16             26            100
 Construction                                           30                22                10             26             12            100
 Wholesale Trade                                        13                11                 7             45             24            100
 Retail Trade                                           11                9                  4             34             42            100
 Accommodation and Food Services                        28                27                13             21             11            100
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information
 Media                                                  5                 8                 11             39             37            100




                                                                                                                                                   63
Appendix Table B.5: Survey Framework of Main Wave, Number of Firms According to Employment Size Group
                                   6-9 Workers              10-19 Workers             20-49 Workers                                                   50-99 Workers                         100+ Workers




                                             Approached




                                                                                Approached




                                                                                                                   Approached




                                                                                                                                                         Approached




                                                                                                                                                                                              Approached
                                                          Response




                                                                                             Response




                                                                                                                                Response




                                                                                                                                                                      Response




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Response
                                  Stats NZ




                                                                     Stats NZ




                                                                                                        Stats NZ




                                                                                                                                           Stats NZ




                                                                                                                                                                                 Stats NZ
                                  Records




                                                                     Records




                                                                                                        Records




                                                                                                                                           Records




                                                                                                                                                                                 Records
                                             Firms




                                                                                Firms




                                                                                                                   Firms




                                                                                                                                                         Firms




                                                                                                                                                                                              Firms
 Manufacturing                    1737       946          73         1791       975          94         1248       680          83         420           420          44         312          312          25
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate   528        200          14         330        125          13         153        58           13         15            15           9          36           36           0
 Professional, Technical,
 Scientific Services &
 Administrative Support
 Services                         2595       868          41         2016       674          46         1188       397          66         357           357          36         336          336          5
 Financial and Insurance
 Services                         267        80           21         159        47           17         96         29           29         42            42           10         69           69           4
 Construction                     2487       241          18         1821       177          19         837        81           24         204           204          16         93           93           3
 Wholesale Trade                  1284       65           12         1107       56           14         657        33           17         222           222          11         120          120          2
 Retail Trade                     2172       84           32         1704       66           27         678        26           35         258           258          14         315          315          15
 Accommodation and Food
 Services                         2601       272          9          2511       263          12         1230       129          14         201           201          5          108          108          1
 Transport, Postal,
 Warehousing & Information
 Media                            744        20           13         681        32           23         438        48           33         171           164          12         156          156          8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           64
 Appendix Table B.6: Survey Framework of Main Wave, Percentage of Firms According to Employment Size Group
                                  6-9 Workers              10-19 Workers              20-49 Workers                                             50-99 Workers                       100+ Workers




                                             Approached




                                                                                Approached




                                                                                                                   Approached




                                                                                                                                                      Approached




                                                                                                                                                                                         Approached
                                  Stats NZ
                                  Records




                                                          Response




                                                                                             Response




                                                                                                                                Response




                                                                                                                                                                   Response




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Response
                                                                     Stats NZ




                                                                                                        Stats NZ




                                                                                                                                           Stats NZ




                                                                                                                                                                              Stats NZ
                                                                     Records




                                                                                                        Records




                                                                                                                                           Records




                                                                                                                                                                              Records
                                             Firms




                                                                                Firms




                                                                                                                   Firms




                                                                                                                                                      Firms




                                                                                                                                                                                         Firms
                                 (%)



                                             (%)

                                                          (%)




                                                                     (%)



                                                                                (%)

                                                                                             (%)




                                                                                                        (%)



                                                                                                                   (%)

                                                                                                                                (%)




                                                                                                                                           (%)



                                                                                                                                                      (%)

                                                                                                                                                                   (%)




                                                                                                                                                                              (%)



                                                                                                                                                                                         (%)

                                                                                                                                                                                                      (%)
Manufacturing                    32          28           23         33         29           29         23         20           26         8          13           14         6          9            8
Rental, Hiring and Real Estate   50          46           29         31         29           27         14         13           27         1          3            18         3          8            0
Professional, Technical,
Scientific Services &
Administrative Support
Services                         40          33           21         31         26           24         18         15           34         5          14           19         5          13           3
Financial and Insurance
Services                         42          30           26         25         18           21         15         11           36         7          16           12         11         26           5
Construction                     46          30           23         33         22           24         15         10           30         4          26           20         2          12           4
Wholesale Trade                  38          13           21         33         11           25         19         7            30         7          45           20         4          24           4
Retail Trade                     42          11           26         33         9            22         13         4            28         5          34           11         6          42           12
Accommodation and Food
Services                         39          28           22         38         27           29         18         13           34         3          21           12         2          11           2
Transport, Postal,
Warehousing & Information
Media                            34          5            15         31         8            26         20         11           37         8          39           13         7          37           9




                                                                                                                                                                                                           65
Appendix Table B.7: Survey Framework of Main Wave, Total Firms
                                                                                                Number of Firms                                Percentage of Firms




                                                                                                                  Response (#)




                                                                                                                                 Records (%)
                                                                                                  Approached




                                                                                                                                                  Approached
                                                                                  Records (#)




                                                                                                                                                                 Response
                                                                                  Stats NZ




                                                                                                                                 Stats NZ
                                                                                                  Firms




                                                                                                                                                  Firms

                                                                                                                                                  (%)



                                                                                                                                                                 (%)
                                                                                                  (#)
 Manufacturing                                                                    5508            3333            319            100              61            10
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                                                   1062            433             49             100              41            11
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services & Administrative Support Services   6492            2633            194            100              41            7
 Financial and Insurance Services                                                 633             267             81             100              42            30
 Construction                                                                     5442            796             80             100              15            10
 Wholesale Trade                                                                  3390            496             56             100              15            11
 Retail Trade                                                                     5127            750             123            100              15            16
 Accommodation and Food Services                                                  6651            973             41             100              15            4
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information Media                               2190            420             89             100              19            21
 Total                                                                            36495           10100           1032           100              27.64         10.22




                                                                                                                                                                            66
Appendix Table B.8: Survey Framework of Follow-up Wave, Number of Firms
                                6-9 Workers        10-19 Workers       20-49 Workers                          50-99 Workers              100+ Workers              Totals




                                      Approached




                                                              Approached




                                                                                      Approached




                                                                                                                Approached




                                                                                                                                           Approached




                                                                                                                                                                     Approached
                                                   Response




                                                                           Response




                                                                                                   Response




                                                                                                                              Response




                                                                                                                                                        Response




                                                                                                                                                                                  Response
                                      Firms




                                                              Firms




                                                                                      Firms




                                                                                                                Firms




                                                                                                                                           Firms




                                                                                                                                                                     Firms
Manufacturing                              73      36              94       43             83      42                44        26               25       10             319       157
Rental, Hiring and Real Estate             14       6              13        8             13       4                 9         2                0        0              49        20
Professional, Technical, Scientific
Services & Administrative Support
Services                                   41       22             46      22              66      38                36       17                 5        0             194        99
Financial and Insurance Services           21       10             17      10              29      15                10        4                 4        2              81        41
Construction                               18        6             19      11              24      13                16        7                 3        2              80        39
Wholesale Trade                            12        7             14       6              17       9                11        3                 2        1              56        26
Retail Trade                               32       15             27      14              35      14                14       11                15       10             123        64
Accommodation and Food Services             9        5             12       6              14       8                 5        2                 1        0              41        21
Transport, Postal, Warehousing &
Information Media                         13         6            23        13            33        18              12          6                8        5             89         48
Total                                    233       113           265       133           314       161             157         78               63       30           1032        515




                                                                                                                                                                                             67
Appendix Table B.9: Survey Framework of Follow-up Wave, Response Rates
                                                                6-9 Workers     10-19 Workers    20-49 Workers    50-99 Workers    100+ Workers
                                                               Response Rates   Response Rates   Response Rates   Response Rates   Response Rates
 Manufacturing                                                       49               46               51               59              40
 Rental, Hiring and Real Estate                                      43               62               31               22               0
 Professional, Technical, Scientific Services & Administrative
 Support Services                                                    54              48               58               47               0
 Financial and Insurance Services                                    48              59               52               40               50
 Construction                                                        33              58               54               44               67
 Wholesale Trade                                                     58              43               53               27               50
 Retail Trade                                                        47              52               40               79               67
 Accommodation and Food Services                                     56              50               57               40               0
 Transport, Postal, Warehousing & Information Media                  46              57               55               50               63




                                                                                                                                                    68
