NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET SEARCH WITH IMPERFECT INFORMATION AND LEARNING
John J. Conlon
Laura Pilossoph
Matthew Wiswall
Basit Zafar
Working Paper 24988
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24988

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018

The authors thank Fatih Karahan and Gregor Jarosch for valuable feedback, and thank seminar
participants at the 2018 CESifo Subjective Expectations Workshop, the 2018 NBER Summer
Institute, Cambridge University, Essex, Northwestern University, NY Fed Brown Bag Series,
Princeton Labor Working Lunch, Royal Holloway, SF Fed, UChicago Harris, UCL, and
University of Michigan for invaluable comments. All errors that remain are ours. The views
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
the Federal Reserve System as a whole, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by John J. Conlon, Laura Pilossoph, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Search With Imperfect Information and Learning
John J. Conlon, Laura Pilossoph, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 24988
September 2018
JEL No. D83,D84,J64
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of information frictions in the US labor market using a new nationally
representative panel dataset on individuals' labor market expectations and realizations. We find
that expectations about future job offers are, on average, highly predictive of actual outcomes.
Despite their predictive power, however, deviations of ex post realizations from ex ante
expectations are often sizable. The panel aspect of the data allows us to study how individuals
update their labor market expectations in response to such shocks. We find a strong response: an
individual who receives a job offer one dollar above her expectation subsequently adjusts her
expectations upward by $0.47. The updating patterns we document are, on the whole, inconsistent
with Bayesian updating. We embed the empirical evidence on expectations and learning into a
model of search on- and off- the job with learning, and show that it is far better able to fit the data
on reservation wages relative to a model that assumes complete information. The estimated
model indicates that workers would have lower employment transition responses to changes in
the value of unemployment through higher unemployment benefits than in a complete
information model, suggesting that assuming workers have complete information can bias
estimates of the predictions of government interventions. We use the framework to gauge the
welfare costs of information frictions which arise because individuals make uninformed job
acceptance decisions and find that the costs due to information frictions are sizable, but are
largely mitigated by the presence of learning.
John J. Conlon
Harvard University,
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02131
johnjconlon17@gmail.com
Laura Pilossoph
Macroeconomics and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
pilossoph@gmail.com

Matthew Wiswall
Department of Economics University
of Wisconsin-Madison 1180
Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
matt.wiswall@gmail.com
Basit Zafar
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 879801 Tempe,
AZ 85287
and NBER
basitak@gmail.com

1

Introduction

When individuals decide on whether or not to accept a job opportunity, expectations play a
central role. In particular, individuals with a job offer in hand weigh whether to accept it,
or to reject it and wait for a better opportunity. This decision process takes center stage in
the hallmark models of labor market search and unemployment (Pissarides, 1985; Mortensen
and Pissarides, 1994; Burdett and Mortensen, 1998), and key to these calculations are workers’
beliefs about the likely value of future offers. These setups and nearly all research in this area
(with a few notable exceptions, which we turn to below) have in common the default assumption
that workers’ beliefs are correct: workers know the distribution of wages from which they draw
job offers. These “complete information” assumptions are often made, yet rarely tested, because
from standard observational data on employment and wage outcomes, it is difficult to separate
heterogeneity in expectations from heterogeneity in productivity and received offers.
This paper offers novel empirical evidence on information frictions in the labor market, and
uses this data, in combination with labor market models, to quantitatively assess their welfare
consequences. The core of our study is a collection of new panel data on workers’ expectations
(about the number and value of future job offers) along with actual employment outcomes from
a representative survey of US household heads. The unique expectations and realizations data
come from a series of new questions we designed and added to the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE), Labor Market Survey. Our data cover
the July 2014 to November 2017 waves, and include over 4,300 unique individuals surveyed
every 4 months for up to one year, for a total of 8,883 person-wave observations over 11 survey
waves. Modeled after the Current Population Survey (CPS), the panel survey includes the
standard information on employment and wages, and a collection of new questions we designed
on expectations about future job arrivals and wage offers. The panel structure of our data allows
us to study not only the distribution of individual expectations at a point in time, but also how
each individual’s expectations relate to realizations in the following 4-month period (e.g., wage
offers), allowing for an analysis of the accuracy of the expectations and how individuals learn
from their labor market experiences. In addition, we collect detailed information not only
on accepted offers, but also on offers individuals end up rejecting which, to the best of our
knowledge, makes our dataset unique.
We begin by showing empirically how beliefs about the labor market relate to actual realizations. We then further exploit the panel aspect of the data to show how beliefs are updated over
time in relation to individual labor market experiences. We find that workers’ beliefs predict
subsequent outcomes. For example, the average respondent’s expected wage offer (over the next
four months) is $32.3 per hour. This is quite close to the average actual received offer wage,
$30.4 per hour, suggesting that these expectations data have useful informational content. How-

1

ever, “shocks” – the difference between realized and expected salary offers – are often sizable.1
Although the median shock is close to zero (-$0.6), the 10th percentile is -$14.6/hour (an overestimation of the realized hourly wage by $14.6), and the 90th percentile is +$8.2/hour. This
heterogeneity in accuracy could play an important role in analyzing heterogeneity in labor market dynamics, which we investigate more formally in the context of the model of labor market
search and learning we develop below.
In terms of learning, we find that individuals respond to these labor market shocks in a
way that is consistent with the presence of information frictions: a positive shock, indicating a
higher than expected salary offer, causes individuals to update their beliefs about future wages
upward. The slope of the updating curve is about 0.47; that is, every additional unexpected
dollar offered increases expected earnings in the next period by about $0.47. We find little
evidence that learning is consistent with standard Bayesian updating. First, when splitting the
sample by the precision of reported expectations using elicited information on the individual’s
prior belief, we find that individuals who are more certain about the expected offer update
their beliefs by more in response to a shock. Moreover, relative to the Bayesian benchmark
that we construct for each respondent (again using data on the self-reported precision of their
prior belief), the updating seems to be excessive– the average slope under Bayesian updating
would be about 0.16, substantially lower than what we observe in the data. This over-reliance
of respondents on recent information is consistent with individuals using a “representative”
heuristic (Grether, 1980).
The second part of our paper incorporates the expectations and learning data into an otherwise standard model of on-the-job search, and uses the model to quantify the welfare costs
of information frictions. We introduce expectations and learning by allowing workers to have
individual-specific beliefs about the mean of the offer distribution they face, which may differ
from the true mean (Burdett and Vishwanath, 1988). Job offers arrive in both unemployment
and employment and, as job offers arrive, workers update their beliefs about future expected
wage offers using the information contained in the offer they receive, if any. Because an individual’s beliefs about the offer distribution affect their job acceptance decisions, those with
a relatively pessimistic view of their job offer prospects have lower reservation wages and will
accept more offers; those with relatively optimistic beliefs have higher reservation wages, and
are more “picky” about the jobs they take.
We use our new data on expectations and learning to estimate the learning rule, and identify
and estimate the remaining parameters of the model using the probabilities of receiving offers
1

The fact that realized wage offers differ from expected wage offers is not necessarily evidence of a “shock”.
For example, random search models would predict that this type of event happens all the time, even when
workers have complete information. However, the fact that we see workers updating their beliefs in response to
these events, as we describe below, suggests that the realized deviation contains information useful for future
predictions. Hence, we refer to this deviation as a “shock” going forward.

2

on- and off- the job, as well as observed transition rates to and from employment. In particular,
we estimate preference parameters (the flow value of unemployment and the cost of making a
job to job transition) via Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) and match the unemploymentto-employment and employment-to-employment transition rates we observe, taking into account
the heterogeneity in reported beliefs and learning. We allow rich patterns of heterogeneity in
model parameters, including by the worker’s education, and find that the parameter estimates
one would obtain under the complete information assumption substantially differ from the estimates under our model of incomplete information and learning. This is not surprising given
the large degree of heterogeneity in expectations which we document.
We also show that counterfactual changes in the flow value of unemployment (e.g. changes
in unemployment benefits) have different implications under a complete information benchmark
relative to our model of incomplete information and learning. Under the complete information
model, changes in the value of unemployment would have a larger effect on transitions out
of unemployment than in our baseline model with heterogeneous beliefs and learning.2 In
our model, unemployed individuals have heterogeneous responses to changes in the value of
unemployment because of heterogeneity in their beliefs. The different predictions of the two
models indicate that assuming incorrectly that workers have complete information can bias
estimates of the effects of government interventions, such as increases in unemployment benefits.
To validate our model, we use data on respondents’ self-reported reservation wages (data
not used in the model estimation) to investigate how our model-predicted reservation wages
compare with reported reservation wages in the data. We find that our model does far better in
capturing heterogeneity in reported reservation wages than the predictions of a model estimated
assuming complete information, as reported reservation wages have a much higher correlation
with the reservation wages predicted by our general model (heterogeneous beliefs and learning)
than with reservation wages implied by the complete information model.
In our final exercise, we compute welfare in our estimated model and compare it to welfare
under two alternative environments: (1) complete information, and (2) heterogeneous beliefs,
but no learning. The former informs us about the importance of information frictions more
broadly for welfare, while the latter informs us about the importance of learning for welfare.
We find that non-college (college) workers in our sample would be, on average, willing to pay
$175 ($817) per year to have complete information. Given average annual full-time earnings of
$53,444 ($83,734) for non-college (college) workers, this is not a very high willingness to pay to
remove information frictions. However, we find that the average willingness to pay for complete
information is substantially larger when workers are unable to learn– $1,525 ($,3,174) per year
for non-college (college) workers. That is, learning mitigates most of the damage caused by
2

As we describe later, this is not a general result, as the difference in predictions depends on the distribution
of beliefs in our sample.

3

information frictions. Although subjective beliefs are quite heterogeneous, and some workers’
beliefs are biased, the high rate of learning implies that workers’ beliefs converge towards the
truth quite quickly.
We next assess how the costs of information frictions compare to those of more commonly
studied frictions in the labor market. To do so, we ask how the welfare gains from removing
information frictions compare to those of reducing search frictions. We find that the increase
in utility when moving to complete information is roughly equivalent to raising the arrival
probability of offers in non-employment by 5% (15%) for non-college (college) workers. On the
other hand, the gains of moving from the no-learning case to the case with complete information
are equivalent to raising the arrival probability of offers in non-employment by about 40% (100%)
for the non-college (college) workers. Thus, we find welfare costs arising from information
frictions are as important as the traditional search frictions which is the focus of the previous
literature. We emphasize that our results are arguably a lower bound on the importance of
incomplete information, because we assume that workers are not fully informed about only one
aspect – the mean of the offer distribution – of the labor market.
Our paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we review some related literature and
clarify our contributions. Section 3 describes the survey and provides a description of the
sample. Section 4 looks at the labor market expectations and realizations data from the survey
and analyzes how respondents update their expectations. Section 5 develops a model of onthe-job search that allows for heterogeneous beliefs and learning, and Section 6 outlines the
estimation of the model. Section 7 presents the model estimates and validates the model using
evidence on reported reservation wages. Section 8 quantifies the welfare of information frictions,
and Section 9 concludes.

2

Related Literature

Our work is closely related to the literature on job search among the employed and non-employed,
but extends the basic setting to allow for deviations from complete information, as in Burdett
and Vishwanath (1988).3 We build on Burdett and Vishwanath (1988) in three important
ways. First, we provide new and rich empirical evidence on the nature of beliefs and how they
evolve with heterogeneous labor market experiences which inform our model. Standard data sets
usually only contain information on accepted offers and actual transitions; there is typically no
information on other offers that individuals may have received and rejected, or on respondents’
labor market expectations. Second, we extend the Burdett and Vishwanath (1988) theoretical
3

Our framework studies beliefs and learning about the mean of the wage offer distribution. For work which
studies learning about one’s own quality, job finding rate, or productivity, see Gonzalez and Shi (2010) and
Doppelt (2016). For a model in which both firms and workers learn about their joint match quality, see Jovanovic
(1979).

4

framework to allow for search on-the-job and a learning rule that is not necessarily Bayesian,
but instead is informed by the data on belief updating we collect. Finally, we estimate our
model and provide calculations for the welfare costs of information frictions.
Central to our analysis is the data on reported expected wage offers as well as rejected offers.
Spinnewijn (2015) also uses elicited expectations from a sample of job seekers in Michigan
and Maryland surveyed between 1996 and 1998 by Price et al. (1998), and compares their
expectations of being employed to realized employment, finding that unemployed workers tend
to overestimate the rate at which they will find jobs, leading them to under-save. In another
recent paper, Potter (2017) studies Bayesian learning in a search environment, but workers
learn instead about the arrival rate of offers. Potter estimates his model using survey data on
unemployed workers in New Jersey during the Great Recession. Like these papers, we also find
that unemployed respondents over-estimate offer arrival rates, and provide new evidence that
the same pattern holds for employed workers. However, we find no evidence of such a bias in the
case of expectations regarding wage offers. Furthermore, we also find that the costs of biased
beliefs, both from under-estimating and over-estimating future offers, can be significant, but
that these costs are mitigated by the ability of workers to learn over time. Faberman, Meuller,
Sahin, and Topa (2017), using a different supplemental cross-sectional annual survey to the same
datasource that we use (SCE), study the relative efficacy of search between the employed and
non-employed using information on search behavior as well as rejected wage offers. We exploit
the additional panel structure in our data to study learning and how beliefs are updated over
time in response to labor market outcomes.4
We also use the data we have on reported reservation wages as a test of our model against a
complete information environment. There are a handful of other papers which also have information on reported reservations wages in addition to accepted offers and labor market transitions.
Krueger and Mueller (2016) collect rich panel data from unemployed job seekers in New Jersey.
They analyze how reported reservation wages evolve over the spell of unemployment and find
that reservation wages for the unemployed start out high, and do not adjust downward enough,
providing suggestive evidence that workers “persistently misjudge their prospects or anchor
their reservation wage.” Le Barbanchon, Rathelot, and Roulet (forthcoming) use administrative
data in France, where unemployed individuals must declare their reservation wage in order to
claim unemployment insurance, to examine the relationship between potential benefit duration
and reported reservation wages, for which they find an elasticity of zero. We instead study the
relationship between job-finding rates and changes in the value of unemployment/leisure within
4

Typically longer panels, that collect data on both expectations and realizations, are needed for such an
investigation, which are fairly rare in the context of labor market outcomes. One exception is Stephens (2004)
who, using the Health and Retirement Study, finds that job loss expectations are in fact predictive of subsequent
job losses. The ex post accuracy of expectations has been investigated in many other contexts, including survival
(Hurd and McGarry, 2002) and education (Jacob and Wilder, 2011).

5

our structural model, and contrast the predictions of our learning model to the predictions of
the complete information environment. Our approach thus contrasts with the methods put
forth by Lancaster and Chesher (1983), who show how to “deduce” the parameters governing
this elasticity using reported reservation wages and expectations rather than estimating them
within a structural model. Our more structural approach, however, allows us to ask questions
regarding welfare under different counterfactual models of learning.
More broadly, our paper is related to a growing literature which collects and uses subjective
expectations data to understand decision-making under uncertainty (see Manski, 2004, for an
earlier survey of this literature). Recent work in this area has investigated the importance
of information gaps in decision-making. For example, Wiswall and Zafar (2015) embed an
information experiment (that provides information on returns associated with different college
majors) in a survey that elicits subjective expectations data directly from college students.
They find that students are quite misinformed about returns to different majors, and use these
data to estimate a model of college major choice. We similarly use our data on expectations
to study the importance of information gaps, and quantify the information frictions both in
terms of welfare losses and their search friction equivalents. Our results are also consistent
with other recent work that uses different ways to show that job seekers may be misinformed
about some aspect of the job search environment. For example, Belot, Kircher, and Muller
(2016) find that providing job seekers with relevant alternative search opportunities based on
actual labor market data - ones that would not have otherwise been utilized - increases their
interview prospects. In particular, they show that individual search strategies indeed react to
the news provided by the experiment, which is what we might expect if, as the authors state,
“seekers lack relevant information”. Likewise, using high-frequency panel data on individuals’
job applications, Kudlyak, Lkhagvasuren, and Sysuyev (2014) show that job seekers learn over
the search process.
To summarize, we believe the paper makes three main contributions. First, to our knowledge,
it is the first paper to empirically investigate the nature of learning in the labor market. Rather
than assuming homogenous prior beliefs and Bayesian learning, we allow for heterogeneous
beliefs and non-Bayesian learning, informed by our direct panel data on beliefs. Second, unlike
most prior work in this area that focuses on the unemployed, our sample is fairly representative
of the population of US job seekers, and includes unemployed and employed workers. Third,
we quantify the importance of information frictions by embedding the subjective data and the
data-based updating into a job search model that is disciplined by our novel data.

6

3

Data

3.1

Survey Design and Administration

Our data come from the Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE) Labor Market Survey. To the
original survey, we added two broad sets of questions: (1) an “Experiences” component that
collects data on labor market outcomes, such as offers received in the past 4 months, earnings,
search behavior, reservation wages, and labor market transitions, and (2) an “Expectations”
component that collects data on expectations regarding future job offers, labor market transitions, and earnings.5 Respondents also provide information on many demographic variables.
When appropriate, questions have built-in logical checks (for instance, percent chances of an
exhaustive set of events have to sum to 100). Item non-response is extremely rare, and almost
never exceeds one percent for any question.
The SCE is fielded by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The SCE is an internet-based
monthly survey of a rotating panel of approximately 1,300 household heads from across the US.
The survey, as its name suggests, elicits expectations about a variety of economic variables,
such as inflation and labor market conditions. Respondents participate in the panel for up to
twelve months, with a roughly equal number rotating in and out of the panel each month.6
Respondents are invited to participate in at least one survey each month.
The survey is conducted online by the Demand Institute, a non-profit organization jointly
operated by The Conference Board and Nielsen. The sampling frame for the SCE is based
on that used for The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey (CCS). Respondents to
the CCS, itself based on a representative national sample drawn from mailing addresses, are
invited to join the SCE internet panel. The response rate for first-time invitees is around 55%.
Respondents receive $15 for completing each survey.7
Active panel members who had participated in an SCE monthly survey in the prior three
months are eligible to participate in the Labor Market Survey. The structure of the survey – with
both forward-looking and retrospective questions – combined with the panel structure makes
this data well-suited to study learning in the context of labor markets. Because respondents are
in the SCE panel for up to 12 months, they may end up taking between one and three Labor
Market Surveys during their tenure on the panel.

5

See https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/sce/labor#/ for details.
In that sense, the panel differs from most online survey platforms where samples are not refreshed regularly.
The concern that the sample consists of enthusiastic survey-takers is then less applicable in our case.
7
See Armantier et al. (2017) for a technical background of the SCE, and visit www.newyorkfed.org/
microeconomics/sce.html for additional information.
6

7

3.2

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows that our dataset consists of 8,883 total observations, covering the period from
July 2014 to November 2017. Our sample includes 4,388 unique individuals, of whom 33.6%
have taken 1 labor market survey, 32.2% have taken 2 surveys, and the remainder 3 surveys. The
first column of Table 1 shows the characteristics of our sample, while the second column shows
the characteristics of household heads in the Current Population Survey (CPS) over the period
January 2015-September 2017. Our sample aligns well with the demographic characteristics of
the United States household heads along most dimensions. For instance, the average age of our
respondents is 45.8 years, 51.8% are males, and 76.8% are white; the corresponding numbers
among US household heads in the CPS are 44.7 years, 51.6%, and 77.0%. Our sample, however,
is significantly more educated: 57.3% of our respondents have at least a Bachelors’ degree, while
only 35.9% of the US household heads fall into this category. This may partly be a result of
differential internet access and computer literacy across education groups in the US population.
We return to this point later when we estimate our model of learning on this sample, where we
estimate model parameters separately for college and non-college educated respondents.
Turning to variables related to the labor market, although there are differences between our
sample and the CPS sample, we see that our sample compares favorably with national-level
statistics. Although our sample is more likely to be working full-time (69.4% versus 64.9%),
the unemployment rate is similar. 8 Likewise, for both college and non-college workers, the
hourly wage conditional on working full-time in our data is similar to that in the CPS. For
example, the average hourly wage for college workers in our data is $40.3 versus $42.0 in the
CPS. In fact, Appendix Figure A1 shows that the distributions of full-time earnings for college
and non-college workers are very similar in the two datasets.
Before proceeding, it is best to clarify some key data choices that we make. First, we convert
all earnings variables (realizations and expectations) to July 2017 dollars, based on the CPI.
Second, we convert all annual earnings variables into hourly earnings, assuming people work 52
weeks a year and 40 hours a week if full-time and 20 hours a week if part-time. We directly
ask whether received offers were part-time or full-time, so we adjust offer salaries accordingly.
If someone is working part-time, we assume her beliefs (including reservation wage) are about
part-time work. If someone is not working part-time (including non-employed), we assume
her beliefs are about full-time work. Third, we drop individuals whose wages (for current
job, offers, or expectations) are less than $4.81/hr ($10,000 a year, full-time). We also drop
respondents whose revisions in beliefs (about earnings, salary wages) between surveys, revisions
in realizations, or the gap between the realization and the previous period expectation is greater
8

In addition, Appendix Table A1 shows the labor force transition rates in the SCE and the CPS. While
the horizons for the two surveys differ, 4-months (3-months) for the SCE (CPS), the transition rates in the two
samples are comparable.

8

than $48.1 ($100,000 a year, full time). These criteria drop less than 10% of the observations.
We also winsorize the top 1% of each of these variables within education groups. That is,
within education groups, we set everyone whose value is above the 99th percentile to the 99th
percentile.

4

New Evidence on Expectations and Labor Market Dynamics

In this section, we explore our novel data on expectations and labor market dynamics. We
analyze two key areas of the labor market: the arrival rate and wage distribution of job offers.
The panel structure of our data allows us to study not only the distribution of individual
expectations at a point in time, but also how each individual’s expectations (expected number
and wage of future job offers) relate to realizations in the following 4-month period (actual
number and wages of received job offers). This in turn allows an analysis of the accuracy of
expectations, how beliefs form, and how individuals learn from their experiences. In the later
sections, we use these data to estimate a model of labor market search with heterogeneous beliefs
and learning.

4.1

Expectations about Job Offers

We begin our analysis with the arrival rate of job offers, the key distinction between classical
models of the labor market where workers are always presented with a job at some prevailing
wage and frictional-based search models where job offers are not always available. We asked
unemployed and out-of-the-labor-force (OLF) workers the following question about expected
job offers:
“What do you think is the percent chance that within the coming four months, you will receive
at least one job offer? Remember that a job offer is not necessarily a job you will accept.”
For currently employed individuals, the question wording was slightly different, and we asked
about job offers from “another employer.” Answers to this question can range from 0 percent
chance (probability 0) to 100 percent chance (probability 1) of receiving a job offer. In the
remainder of the paper we express all probabilistic data as probabilities [0, 1] rather than percent
chances [0, 100]. In addition to questions about the percent chance of receiving any offer, we
also asked all respondents about their expected number of job offers over the next 4 months.
Panel A of Table 2 presents summary statistics on expected job offers. The overall average
expected probability of receiving at least one job offer in the next 4 months was 0.32. For
employed individuals, it was 0.32. For unemployed workers, the average expected rate was higher
9

at 0.61, and for OLF individuals the average expectation was 0.19. The difference in expectations
is consistent with the higher search intensity for unemployed workers versus employed workers,
and lowest search intensity for OLF respondents. The heterogeneity in expectations is apparent
from the large standard deviations, reported in parentheses.
The second set of statistics in Panel A is for the expected number of offers in the next 4
months. The average number of expected job offers is 0.8, reflecting that a majority of workers
do not expect any job offer at all (the median is 0). Again, following the patterns with the
expected arrival rate of any job offer, unemployed workers on average expect more job offers
(2.0), followed by employed workers (0.8 offers), and OLF individuals (0.6 offers).
Conditional on reporting a non-zero likelihood of receiving at least one offer in the next
four months, respondents are also asked about their expectation regarding salary offers. We
denote these individual-specific expectations as Ei (wi,t ) where the i subscript on the expectations
symbol represents an individual’s belief as reported in the data. The expectation is over the
wage offer in period t, which in our data collection is the next 4 months. The earnings beliefs
(Ei (wi,t )) is elicited as follows:
“Think about the job offers that you may receive within the coming four months. Roughly
speaking, what do you think the average annual salary for these offers will be? ”
Because this question is conditional on expecting (with non-zero probability) to receive at least
one offer, the sample sizes for these questions are necessarily smaller. We construct hourly wage
offers from the salary expectations by dividing the reported belief by 40 hours for full-time
workers, and 20 hours for part-time workers.
The final row in Panel A of Table 2 shows that the average expected salary offer is $32.3
per hour. Employed workers expect higher salary offers ($34.0) compared to unemployed workers ($20.1). The large standard deviations indicate that there is substantial heterogeneity in
respondents’ wage expectations.
Finally, we examine how these labor market expectations are related to key demographics
and labor market activities. The top panel of Table 3 shows that many of the relationships
are sensible. In each of these regressions, we include survey fixed effects (for month and year
of survey) which absorbs any aggregate business cycle effects or idiosyncrasies associated with
particular surveys. We see that individuals who report searching for jobs, on average, expect
to receive 1.1 more job offers than their counterparts who are not searching (the mean of this
variable is 0.84). Those searching also expect to receive higher wage offers. The expected offer,
unsurprisingly, is positively correlated with one’s current salary, education, and age. Conditional
on these other characteristics, being unemployed is not systematically related with expectations
regarding number of offers. However, non-employed individuals expect to receive substantially
lower offer wages.
10

4.2

Realized Job Offers

Panel B of Table 2 presents our survey data on labor market realizations. An important feature
of our data is that we collect data on job offers received, regardless of whether the job offer
was actually accepted. In standard data sets, accepted job offer data is usually the only data
available to analyze labor market dynamics.
In our survey, we asked the following question:
“How many job offers did you receive in the last 4 months? Remember a job offer is not
necessarily a job that you accepted.”
Panel B of Table 2 reports that about 19 percent of all individuals received at least one job offer
in the past 4 months, and the average number of job offers received was 0.34. The asterisks
in panel B indicate that the mean realizations are statistically significantly different from the
mean expectations. Interestingly, employed and unemployed workers in our sample receive job
offers at roughly the same rate, despite their different expectations (see above). OLF individuals
received the fewest job offers, with only 9 percent receiving any job offer at all.
Survey respondents’ received salary offers are quite similar, on average, to their 4 month prior
expectation. The average received salary offer was $30.4 compared to an average expectation of
$32.3 (they, however, differ statistically from each other at the 10% level). The median expected
and realized salary offers were quite similar, around $25 for both. Following the pattern in
expectations reported in Panel A, employed individuals reported receiving higher salary offers
than unemployed workers ($30.8 versus $24.2).9
The lower panel of Table 3 shows the correlates of labor market realizations. Although
searching for a job leads to a slightly higher number of offers, the returns to search effort are
substantially lower than what respondents expected (Panel A). In addition, searching for a job
is not systematically related to the received wage offer.
Appendix Table A2 replicates Table 2, but restricts it to the subset of respondents who take
at least two labor market surveys, so that we have their data on expectations in one survey and
realizations in the subsequent survey. Generally, we see similar patterns in this table. One point
worth noting is that our final dataset contains 545 instances where the respondent receives at
least one offer and has data on her prior expectations. This subsample forms the basis of our
analysis that investigates the accuracy of expectations, and the role of learning.

9

This is consistent with Faberman et al. (2017), who using a separate module added to the SCE, find that
employed individuals fare better than the non-employed in job search.

11

4.3

Accuracy of Expectations and Shocks

We next compare the accuracy of expectations at the individual respondent level, exploiting
the panel structure of our data. Figure 1 plots the expected number of offers on the horizontal
axis (0 to 5) and the corresponding average number of actual offers received 4 months later.
The increasing height of the bars indicates that a higher expected number of offers is positively
correlated with more actual offers. However, individuals tend to expect a much higher number
of offers than what they receive.10 This gap between expectations and realizations appears to
be mostly among the individuals who expected a high number of offers: those expecting 5 offers
actually received less than 2 offers on average. At the lower end, those who expected 0 offers
had fairly accurate expectations, as they actually received less than 0.1 offers on average (i.e.,
about 90 percent were exactly correct in predicting no offer would be received).
Figure 2 performs a similar exercise as in Figure 1, but compares actual and expected salary
offers. For each decile of the expected salary offer distribution, we compute the mean actual
offer received. This figure reveals a high positive correlation in expectations and actual salary
offers 4 months later. Regressing the actual wage offer onto the expectation (reported in the
prior survey) yields an estimate that is not statistically different from 1.
Although expectations and realizations have a high aggregate correlation, there is still considerable individual-level heterogeneity in the accuracy of expectations. We construct the salary
offer “shock” for each individual, defined as the realized salary minus expected salary:
wi,t − Ei (wi,t ).
Here Ei (wi,t ) is i’s expectation about period t earnings reported in the prior survey (4 months
earlier). Figure 3 shows the distribution of the shocks for our sample. The figure indicates that
about half the sample experienced a positive shock (realized salary offer was better than the
4-month prior expectation) and about half the sample experienced a negative shock (realized
salary worse than expected). Although the median and average shock was close to 0 (mean
being -$1.8 and median being -$0.6), the size of the shocks for some sample respondents was
sizable, with the 10 percentile at -$14.6/hour (an over-estimation of the realized hourly wage
by $14.6), and the 90th percentile at $8.2/hour (an under-estimation of the realized offer wage
by $8.2.).11
10

The fact that expectations about number of offers are systematically higher than actual number of offers
does not necessarily mean that expectations are biased. For example, such a pattern may arise if individuals
stop search as soon as they receive an offer that is much better than they accepted. If that were the case, the
gap between expectations and realizations should be larger for those individuals who accept an offer. We do
not find evidence of such a pattern, suggesting that expectations of number of offers are at least partly biased.
In addition, as we show below, the fact the respondents systematically update their beliefs about number of
offers in response to the gap between the realized and expected number of offers indicates that the deviation has
informational content.
11
It is worth noting that we find little correlation between shocks in number of offers and wage offers. The

12

We next investigate correlates of the size of the shock in Table 4. The first column shows estimates of univariate regressions, where the absolute log shock is regressed onto each demographic
variable, one at a time. We see that older and OLF individuals, on average, have substantially
larger absolute shocks. The finding that these individuals are less accurate on average is perhaps
not surprising, since earnings dispersion increases with age (Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante, 2014; Guvenen et al., 2016), and OLF individuals, by definition, are less attached to the
labor force and hence less likely to be well-informed. The absolute shock is, on average, smaller
for male respondents and those with higher current/past salaries. More educated individuals
do not have smaller average absolute shocks.
These relationships are qualitatively the same when we estimate a multivariate regression in
the second column of Table 4. The R squared reported in the last row indicates that this rich
set of demographic controls explains only a fifth of the variation in the absolute shocks. This
heterogeneity in accuracy in expectations could potentially play an important role in analyzing
the distribution of labor market dynamics, a topic we return to later.12

4.4

Learning

With our panel data, we can study how expectations are updated in response to realized salary
offers, and use the data to describe the labor market learning process directly. For each respondent, we construct the change in salary expectations between two consecutive 4 month
periods:
Ei (wi,t+1 ) − Ei (wi,t ),
where Ei (wi,t ) is respondent i’s expectation about period t earnings formed in the prior 4 month
period, and Ei (wi,t+1 ) is respondent i’s expectation about future t + 1 earnings formed in the
current period t.
Figure 4 plots the change in expected salary Ei (wi,t+1 )−Ei (wi,t ) relative to the shock reported
by that individual, wi,t − Ei (wi,t ). The figure shows the binscatter, where the shock is binned
into deciles, as well as a line based on a linear regression of the change in expectations onto the
shock. The slope of the linear regression line in Figure 4 indicates the direction and degree of
expectations updating in response to the new information (i.e., the shock). The upward slope
indicates that on average individuals are responding in a logical way to the shock: a positive
shock, indicating higher than expected salary offers, causes individuals to update their beliefs
Spearman rank correlation is in fact negative (-0.10; p-value = 0.04). So it is not the case that individuals who
are optimistic about the number of offers are also optimistic about the wage offer.
12
We can likewise investigate the correlates of the shock in the number of offers (results available from the
authors). We find that it is those individuals who report actively searching for jobs that make substantially
larger errors. We also find that males, on average, have larger errors. However, a rich set of covariates can
explain less than 5% of the variation in the shocks.

13

about future wages upward. The slope of the updating curve, which is flatter than the 45 degree
line, indicates that individuals do not fully (one-to-one) update in response to the current shock,
and that prior expectations (perhaps gained from years of past labor market experience) still
inform expectations.
Table 5 analyzes expectations updating using a simple regression analysis. The dependent
variable here is the change in expected earnings, Ei (wi,t+1 ) − Ei (wi,t ), and the main right-hand
side variable is the shock, wi,t − Ei (wi,t ):
Ei (wi,t+1 ) − Ei (wi,t ) = ζ0 + ζ1 (wi,t − Ei (wi,t )) + εit .

(1)

ζ1 reflects the weight the respondent puts on the shock. Another way to view this updating
equation (1) is to rearrange it as:
Ei (wi,t+1 ) = ζ0 + (1 − ζ1 )Ei (wi,t ) + ζ1 wi,t + εit .

(2)

Equation (2) shows that the “posterior” expectation Ei (wi,t+1 ) is the weighted average of
the prior belief Ei (wi,t ) and the signal (the offer wage one receives), wi,t . In a standard Bayesian
learning model, the ζ1 parameter has a particular value that depends on the individual’s uncertainty relative to the strength of the signal. Because our data includes beliefs (before and after
the signal is received) and the signal value itself (realized wage offers), we can simply estimate
the updating equation and weighting parameter ζ1 without any restriction. This allows us to
freely analyze the learning process, “letting the data speak for itself,” without assuming that
individuals are standard Bayesian learners.
The first column in Table 5 shows that the estimated ζ1 is around 0.47, i.e., every $1 in
unanticipated salary offer in the current period increases expected earnings in the next period
by $0.47. Mirroring Figure 4, the effect has the sensible positive sign, but is far less than 1,
indicating that current shocks do not cause “full” updating to the most recent wage offer. The
regression also has a high R2 , indicating that these shocks can explain a significant proportion
of the updating behavior observed in the data. Column (2) adds additional demographic variables. We see that the estimate of ζ1 remains unchanged.13 The next two columns of the table
show slightly higher responsiveness to the shocks for the sub-sample of non-college respondents,
relative to college respondents (a ζ1 estimate of 0.56 versus 0.45), though the difference is not
statistically significant at conventional levels (p-value = 0.28). Finally, the last two columns of
the table present estimates of the same specification as in the first two columns, except in logs.
13

One concern is that measurement error in reported expectations could bias the estimate of ζ1 . To investigate
this, we estimate equation (2) where we instrument the respondent’s expectation in period t with the lagged
expectation reported in period t − 1. This exercise can only be done for the subset of respondents whom we
observe in all three waves. We find that the estimate of ζ1 in this instrumented regression is 0.44, almost identical
to the estimate of 0.47 in the baseline regression. This suggests that measurement error in reported expectations
is not a serious concern.

14

We see that the estimates are similar to those in the first two columns.14
A signal from the labor market (that is, a received offer) may enable the respondent to learn
about her own type and/or may provide information about the labor market (though aggregate
time-varying labor market effects are soaked up by the survey fixed effects in the specifications
in Table 5). Our data do not allow us to disentangle these two potential channels. Although it
may be useful to understand what exactly the workers are learning about, we take the learning
process as we observe in the data directly to our search model, without having to take a stand
about whether workers are learning about their own type or about the labor market.15
We next investigate the heterogeneity in how respondents revise their expectations in response to the shocks. The first two columns of Appendix Table A3 shows that respondents who
are older are more responsive to the shock, relative to their younger counterparts (p-value =
0.10). In a stationary labor market with Bayesian learning, individuals with greater experience
in the labor market should be less responsive to any new signals. However, if labor market
volatility increases with age (i.e., older workers face more uncertainty), this finding can be rationalized.16 The next two columns show that the response to the shock does not differ by
whether the respondent reported doing anything to look for a new job. Columns (5) and (6) of
the table show that the response to positive shocks (underestimation of offer wages) is similar
to that of negative shocks.
The survey also collected respondents’ uncertainty about wage offers over the next four
months.17 Bayesian-consistent updating would predict that more uncertain respondents should
be more responsive to the shock. This is investigated in the last two columns of Table A2.
We see little evidence of this: in fact, the ζ1 estimate is larger for respondents with lower
uncertainty (though the estimate is not statistically different from that of their more uncertain
14
We similarly see that expectations about number of offers are systematically revised in response to the
shock in the number of offers: an unanticipated additional offer increases expected number of offers in the next
period by 0.50.
15
Given that we have a panel survey, individuals may also be learning about how to answer and take the
survey over time. Although we cannot rule this out entirely, we do not find evidence of this. For example, our
estimate of ζ1 is virtually the same whether we use only the first two observations for a given individual in the
panel, or the last two.
16
Among older workers, the median salary of those who get offers is the 48th percentile of the salary distribution, compared to the 51st percentile for those who do not get offers. Among younger workers, the median
salary of those who get offers is the 49th percentile, compared to 50th percentile for those who do not get offers.
So, selection into who receives offers does not appear to be driving the difference in updating between older and
younger workers.
17
Respondents were asked: “Think again about the job offers that you may receive within the coming four
months. What do you think is the percent chance that the job with the best offer will have an annual salary
for the first year of Less than 0.8*X; Between 0.8*X and 0.9*X; Between 0.9*X and X; Between X and 1.1*X;
Between 1.1*X and 1.2*X; More than 1.2*X ”, where X is the respondent’s expectation about the salary for
the best offer they expect to get in the coming four months. Responses to the bins were required to sum to
100. The number of bins receiving non-zero probability should go up as a respondent becomes more uncertain.
Here, we classify respondents who assign non-zero mass to above-median number of bins as “High Uncertainty”
respondents.

15

counterparts).
Finally, one may ask how the estimated ζ1 compares with what it would be if individuals
updated in a Bayesian manner. Appendix section B shows how we construct the individualspecific Bayesian-updating parameter. The Bayesian ζ1 , averaged across all respondents, is 0.14,
substantially smaller than the estimate of 0.43 that we obtain directly from the data (column 5
of Table 5). In fact, we find that the observed (individual-specific) updating parameter is higher
than the Bayesian-predicted updating parameter for 65.3% of our respondents.18 Thus, respondents seem to put excessive weight on the signals, relative to the Bayesian benchmark that we
construct. Previous psychological and experimental economics literature on belief updating has
documented several systematic biases in beliefs, including the tendency of individuals to rely
too heavily on recent information- the literature refers to this as the “representative” heuristic (Grether, 1980; Kahneman and Tversky, 1982). Our results suggest, as does this earlier
literature, that Bayesian updating may not be a good assumption in this setting.

4.5

Reservation Wages

To measure how respondents’ expectations affect their willingness to accept future job offers,
we also elicited their subjective reservation wages. Our survey included the following question:
“Suppose someone offered you a job today in a line of work that you would consider. What
is the lowest wage or salary you would accept (BEFORE taxes and other deductions) for this
job? ”19
We then convert respondents’ answers into hourly wages.20 Among employed respondents, the
average reservation wage was $38.8/hr, compared to $27.9/hr for the non-employed. Intuitively,
employed individuals should generally have reservation wages somewhat larger than their current
wage to justify paying the cost of switching jobs, and this prediction is borne out in the data.
The average difference between employed respondents’ reservation wage and their current salary
is $5.3, and this difference is positive for 70% of employed respondents.
Table 6 regresses respondents’ reported reservation wage on their expected average salary
offer, and (for the employed) their current salary. We see that, even accounting for respondents’
18

Construction of the Bayesian-updating parameter requires assumptions on the variance of the offer distribution, that are described in the appendix. Conversely, one could rationalize the updating parameter of 0.43
through Bayesian updating by backing out the variance of the offer distribution that would be consistent with
the .43 slope. This variance would be about 30-40% of the variance that we arrive at.
19
This wording is similar to the one first used in the May 1976 Current Population Survey, and since used in
many studies including Krueger and Mueller (2016).
20
Prior to March 2017, respondents could report their reservation wage in annual, monthly, biweekly, weekly,
or hourly terms. Starting in March 2017, they could only report their reservation wage in annual terms. As
above, we assume part-time workers consider job offers with 20-hour work weeks, while full-time workers and the
non-employed consider 40-hour work weeks. We set reservation wages to missing if revision in hourly reservation
wage is greater than $48.1.

16

current salary, reported reservations wages are significantly related to their expectations about
future offers, indicating that individuals who expect higher future wages, have higher reported
reservation wages. For the employed, the coefficient on expectations is actually larger than
that on current salary, though this difference is only statistically significant for college-educated
respondents.
These results point to the potential importance of incorporating subjective expectations
when modeling labor market transitions. We return to these data below to test whether our
model of job search with learning better predicts respondents’ reservation wages than a more
traditional model with perfect information.

5

A Model of Labor Search with Heterogeneous Beliefs
and Learning

In this section we develop a model of job search augmented to allow for heterogeneous worker
beliefs and learning. In the following section, we use our data on labor market expectations
to estimate this model and quantify the importance of heterogeneous beliefs and learning for
welfare.

5.1

Environment

Our modeling framework is based on a standard model of labor market search, allowing for onthe-job search (Burdett 1978). Time t is discrete. Workers are either employed or unemployed.21
All individuals discount the future at rate β ∈ (0, 1).
Workers search for jobs in unemployment and on-the-job, and in each period job offers arrive
in those states with probability λ∗u and λ∗e , respectively. Jobs are destroyed with an exogenous
probability δ ∗ . Each job offer is associated with a wage offer w, where wage offers are distributed
according to F ∗ . We assume that log wage offers are Normally distributed with mean µ∗ and
variance σ ∗2 . As detailed below, we allow for heterogeneity in the wage offer distributions and
arrival rates of jobs by the worker’s observable and unobservable characteristics.
In each period, if an unemployed worker receives a job offer, she decides whether to accept
the offer and leave unemployment or remain unemployed and enjoy the value of leisure b. If
an employed worker receives an outside offer, she decides whether or not to accept the offer
and switch firms after paying some moving cost m.22 Current firms do not compete with the
21

Although we refer to non-employed as unemployed, our empirical work does not distinguish between unemployed and out of the labor force (OLF) states, but rather combines them into one category. This is motivated by
the large number of OLF individuals reporting that they receive job offers that transition directly to employment.
22
We introduce a moving cost because our data clearly indicate reservation wages for employed workers that
differ from their current wage. Without a moving cost, the model would predict a reservation wage that is equal

17

outside wage offers their workers receive. Throughout, we use ∗ to indicate “true” or “actual”
probabilities of receiving wage offers or jobs being destroyed, to distinguish these from the
workers’ beliefs.

5.2

Beliefs and Learning

We augment this otherwise standard model of on-the-job search with a general model of beliefs
and learning. We start with the notion that workers make decisions with possibly limited
knowledge about future wage offers.23 We assume that workers know the dispersion in (log)
wage offers given by σ ∗ , but do not necessarily know the mean of the (log) wage offer distribution
µ∗ . Define µt as the worker’s current (date t) belief about µ∗ ; for simplicity, we have dropped
the i subscript on the worker’s belief. We say that a worker’s beliefs are incorrect if µt 6= µ∗ .24
Note that the true distribution of wage offers F ∗ is not indexed by t because we assume that it is
not time varying. Worker beliefs at time t, characterized by µt and distribution Ft , potentially
evolve over time due to learning.
Workers update their beliefs about µ∗ by learning from their labor market experiences.
Figure 5 summarizes the timing of the model. Workers enter the period with some beliefs
summarized by µt . Employed workers earn their wage w, while unemployed workers earn their
value of unemployment b. Employed workers might separate from their current employer due
to job destruction, in which case we assume they cannot search for new employment within the
period.25 Employed workers who have not separated and unemployed workers may receive job
offers. Conditional on these outcomes, workers then form beliefs about future wage offers in the
next period, where the new belief is µt+1 .
We denote the worker’s updating or learning process as the mapping L from a worker’s
current beliefs µt and realized wage offers wt to next period’s updated beliefs µt+1 , L : µt , wt 7→
µt+1 . We parametrize this mapping as:
µt+1 = (1 − ζ)µt + ζ ln wt .

(3)

Note that (3) is the analog of (2), but in log wages not levels. For the case where no offer is
to the current wage.
23
We focus here on beliefs and learning about wage offers as in (Burdett and Vishwanath, 1988), and not on
learning about arrival rates or job destruction rates, though our data contain information on the latter. This is
because individuals arguably have more ability to control the number of offers they receive (through their search
effort) than the wage offer, and we do not have rich data on search effort to endogenize it. Moreover, because
we model the information frictions pertaining to wage offers which are on average unbiased, our exercise can be
seen as offering a lower bound on the importance of information frictions. For a model which features Bayesian
learning about the arrival rate of offers, see Potter (2017).
24
To connect this model to the notation in the reduced form analysis above, we can write that in period t
each worker i has belief µi,t = Ei (ln wi,t ).
25
This is a simplification. The qualitative results would not change significantly if we instead allowed separated
workers to search as well.

18

received, we assume there is no learning about wage offers.26 ζ is the “learning” or “updating”
parameter, which we identify directly from observed updating in our data, as described below.
ζ = 0 implies no learning: µt+1 = µt . ζ = 1 implies immediate updating to the latest wage offer:
µt+1 = ln wt . In Bayesian learning, ζ is a function of the time-varying precision of the worker’s
belief entering this period and the underlying (known) dispersion of the wage offer distribution.
We do not assume that workers are Bayesian type learners, and allow for non-Bayesian learning
that we infer from the data directly.

5.3

Perceived Values of Unemployment and Employment

We next characterize the perceived flow values of unemployment and employment.27 We characterize each of these values conditional on the initial beliefs of the worker entering period t,
given by µt .
For a worker with beliefs µt , the perceived value of unemployment is
U (µt ) = b +

βλ∗u

Z

max {W (y, µt+1 ), U (µt+1 )}dFt + β(1 − λ∗u )U (µt ),

(4)

y

where b is the flow value of unemployment, and Ft is the worker’s belief regarding the wage offer
distribution, given her current belief µt .28 There are two possible future events: i) if the worker
receives a job offer, she updates her beliefs to µt+1 , and ii) if she does not receive a job offer,
her belief remains at µt .29 For a particular wage offer realization y, µt+1 is the updated mean
of the (log) wage offer distribution given by the learning process in equation (3).
For a worker with current beliefs µt , the value of employment at wage w is
W (w, µt ) = w + βδ ∗ U (µt )
Z
∗ ∗
+β(1 − δ )λe max {W (y, µt+1 ) − m, W (w, µt+1 )}dFt
y

+β(1 − δ ∗ )(1 − λ∗e )W (w, µt ),

(5)

where δ ∗ is the job destruction probability and λ∗e is the probability of receiving an offer while
26

In a possible extension to this model, in which there is learning about the arrival rates of jobs, receiving no
offer in a period could cause the worker to update their beliefs about the arrival rate. In the data, we do observe
that absolute revisions for expectations about wage offer are smaller for individuals who do not receive any job
offer, providing some support for our assumption that workers only learn if they receive an offer.
27
We refer to these as perceived to distinguish them from actual values of employment W ∗ (·, ·) and unemployment U ∗ (·) which we describe in Section 8. These are perceived because they are based on the workers’
beliefs about the offer distribution rather than the actual one.
28
The variance of the worker’s prior is not a state variable because we assume they are certain about their
beliefs.
29
Importantly, the expectation over wage offers is with respect to Ft given belief µt , not the updated belief
about the wage offer distribution Ft+1 given updated belief µt+1 , because the worker is forming expectations
without having received any offers yet, and hence using her current beliefs when entering the period.

19

employed. There are three possible future events: i) if the worker’s job is destroyed, then she
becomes unemployed and there is no learning (her belief in unemployment remains at µt ), ii)
if the job is not destroyed, but the worker does not receive an offer, then she remains at her
current job and her beliefs remain at µt , iii) if the job is not destroyed and the worker receives an
offer, then her beliefs are updated to µt+1 given the learning process (3). If the worker accepts
the offer y, she receives W (y, µt+1 ) − m, where m is the “moving cost” of changing jobs. µt+1
is the updated belief given the received wage offer y following equation (3).

5.4

Reservation Wages

We next move to providing the reservation wage policy in our model with learning. One of
the key features of a model with learning is that the perceived values of unemployment U and
employment W (equations (4)-(5)) depend on the wage offers received, as realized offers provide
information about the unknown wage offer distribution. In particular, the value of search (either
in unemployment or on-the-job) increases as the individual receives a wage offer that is higher
than the worker’s current belief. As Burdett and Vishwanath (1988) point out, models with
learning are therefore not necessarily characterized by standard reservation wage policies, as
individuals could accept relatively low offers, but reject high wage offers which deliver updated
beliefs that make continuing to search more attractive. Burdett and Vishwanath (1988) also
provide general conditions for a reservation wage policy to exist, and then prove that in their
specific Bayesian model with Normally distributed wage offers that a reservation wage policy
does indeed exist.
Our setting is slightly more complicated because we allow for on-the-job search, job switching
costs, and job destruction, in addition to heterogeneous beliefs and non-Bayesian learning. We
take two approaches to analyzing this issue in our model. First, in Appendix C, we extend the
Burdett and Vishwanath (1988) results to provide sufficient conditions for a reservation wage
policy to exist in our model. We then numerically test these assumptions and confirm that a
reservation wage offer policy exists at our estimated primitive parameters.
We now turn to characterizing this reservation wage policy. For an unemployed worker who
enters the period with beliefs µt , the reservation wage is defined as the wage offer which makes
them indifferent between accepting and rejecting the offer. Crucial to our model is that, in
general, this reservation wage takes into account the effect that this offer has on their future
beliefs. The reservation wage in unemployment yru (µt ) is defined by the following equation:





W yru µt , µt+1 − U µt+1 = 0,

(6)

where the updated belief µt+1 depends on the offer y and current beliefs µt according to the
learning process (3). At offers y > yru (µt ), the unemployed worker with current beliefs µt will
20

accept the job and leave unemployment.
The reservation wage for an employed worker depends both on the worker’s current belief
about the wage offer process µt and her current wage w. The reservation wage yre (µt , w) for an
employed individual earning wage w is defined by the following equation:





W yre w, µt , µt+1 − W w, µt+1 = m,

(7)

where the updated belief µt+1 depends on the offer y and current beliefs µt according to the
learning process (3). At offers y > yre (w, µt ) the worker with initial beliefs µt and wage w will
switch to a new employer.

5.5

Employment State Transitions

Finally, we can use the model structure to characterize the employment state transitions. Conditional on current beliefs µt , the probability an unemployed worker moves to employment is
given by:
pr(U E|µt ) ≡ Pr(E in t + 1 | µt , U in t) = λ∗u (1 − F ∗ (yru (µt ))),

(8)

where λ∗u and F ∗ are the true probabilities of job arrivals and job offers, and yru (µt ) is the
reservation wage for a worker who begins the period with beliefs µt .
Similarly, the probability an employed individual at wage w enters the period with beliefs
µt transitions to a new job is given by:
pr(EE|µt , w) ≡ Pr(E in t + 1 |w,µt , E in t) = (1 − δ ∗ )λ∗e (1 − F ∗ (yre (w, µt ))),

(9)

where λ∗e is the true probability that a job offer arrives in employment, δ ∗ is the true separation
probability, and yre (w, µt ) is the reservation wage for an employed worker at wage w and beliefs
µt .
Finally, the probability an employed individual separates to unemployment is simply
pr(EU |µt , w) ≡ Pr(U in t + 1|w,µt , E in t) = δ ∗ .

(10)

Note that the existence of a reservation wage policy for employed workers, as discussed above,
implies that there are no offer realizations that cause a currently employed worker to voluntarily
decide to become unemployed. This could have occurred if, for example, a current wage offer
caused the worker to update their beliefs positively and the probability that an offer arrives
in unemployment was sufficiently larger than that in employment. In this case, once a worker
believes that they face a very favorable offer distribution, they might want to move to unemployment to take advantage of a higher arrival rate of offers. Our primitive assumptions on
21

the reservation wage policy, discussed in Appendix C, rule this out. And, we have confirmed
numerically, that at our estimated parameters, the reservation wage policy exists.

5.6

Model Solution

For a given set of parameters, we solve the model using value function iteration. The model
solution provides reservation wage functions for unemployed and employed workers following
equations (6) and (7), respectively, as well as unemployment-to-employment and employer-toemployer transition probabilities following equations (8) and (9), all of which depend on current
beliefs µt . For details on the numerical solution to the model, see the Appendix, Section D.

5.7

Learning and Labor Market Search

Before moving to the empirical estimation, we pause to examine how heterogeneous beliefs
and learning affect labor market search in this framework. Figure 6 plots the policy functions
(reservation wages) defined in equations 6 and 7. Figure 6 also gives us a sense of the importance
of optimism or pessimism, or more generally how heterogeneity in beliefs affects behavior. We
define “optimists” as individuals whose current belief exceeds the true wage offer parameter
(µt > µ∗ ), and “pessimists” as the converse. If all individuals were pessimists, reservation
wages in unemployment would be relatively low and transition rates would be high. Similarly, if
all individuals were optimistic, reservation wages would be relatively high and transition rates
would be low.
The rate of learning about wage offers also affect reservation wages and thus affect transition probabilities from non-employment to employment, as well as from employer-to-employer.
First, with no learning (ζ = 0), individuals who are more optimistic believe they have higher
option values from search and thus have higher reservation wages. Therefore, all else equal, an
optimistic individual will be less likely to exit non-employment as compared to a pessimistic
individual when faced with the same wage offers. This can be seen in the increasing reservation
wage function in black for unemployment in the left panel and employment in the right panel.30
Introducing learning (ζ > 0) flattens the reservation wage rule everywhere, as current beliefs
begin to matter less for outcomes. In the extreme case where beliefs are completely transitory
(ζ = 1), reservation wages are independent of current beliefs, both in unemployment and employment. In our model timing, current values depend on current beliefs, but if individuals
receive an offer and ζ = 1, they update their beliefs immediately to the new offer- whether they
accept the offer or not - and then choose their reservation wage accordingly. Therefore, in the
30

For employed workers, an important determinant of reservation wages is also the current wage. If an
individual is in a job with a current wage far above the mean of the perceived offer distribution, this worker’s
beliefs will not have a large affect on employment transitions because this individual’s reservation wage will be
high anyway due to a high current wage.

22

model with ζ = 1, no matter the initial beliefs, if two individuals receive the same offer they
update their beliefs to the same point and will thus have the same reservation wage.

6

Identification and Estimation

In general, separately identifying worker beliefs and learning from other model primitives (such
as the value of unemployment) would be difficult without strong parametric assumptions. One
such commonly used set of assumptions is to assume all workers have the same beliefs, those
beliefs are correct, and the worker therefore never learns (or needs to learn) anything in the
labor market. Another set of previous assumptions imposes Bayesian learning on all workers
(Burdett and Vishwanath, 1988). As we detail in this Section, we use our unique data on labor
market expectations to identify a richer model, one that allows for heterogeneous, possibly incorrect beliefs, and general, non-Bayesian, learning. In addition, our data on job offers received,
regardless of whether accepted or not, allows us to directly identify job arrival probabilities and
the actual wage offer distribution. As we detail below, we use our rich dataset to form a simple
and robust multi-step estimator of the model parameters.

6.1

Identification

We first discuss the identification of the model parameters. One model period is assumed to
be four months, as our panel is interviewed once every four months. We set the discount rate
exogenously at β = 0.984 to match an annual discount rate of 5%. The remaining parameters
to be identified are the job destruction and arrival probabilities δ ? , λ?u , λ?e , the actual wage
offer distribution F ∗ for each individual in our sample, the distribution of worker beliefs about
F ∗ , G, learning behavior L, the flow value of unemployment b, and the employer-to-employer
moving cost m. Throughout, we introduce various sources of heterogeneity in these primitives,
in particular allowing for different wage offers, transition probabilities, and job destruction
probabilities by the worker’s education level and other characteristics.
Job Destruction and Arrival Probabilities Using standard data that includes only employment transitions and unemployment durations, job offers are not observed and the offer
arrival probability is identified given the particular model structure. Our richer survey data,
in which respondents directly report any job offers, regardless of whether they accept them
or not, allows us to identify the job offer arrival probabilities robustly, and without any bias
due to model mis-specification. We identify the offer arrival probabilities λ?u and λ?e using the
proportion of unemployed and employed respondents receiving a job offer. We identify the job
destruction/separation probabilities δ ? using the proportion of workers moving from employ-

23

ment to non-employment. We identify the arrival and separation probabilities separately for
groups of workers defined by education (college or non-college), as discussed below.
Actual Wage Offer Distribution As with arrival probabilities, standard labor market data
cannot non-parametrically identify the wage offer distribution from accepted wages. The standard approach is to use the model structure, in particular the implied reservation wages, to
identify the offer distribution from the endogenously determined observed accepted offers. Instead, we use our data on actual wage offers, whether they were accepted or not, to identify the
offer distribution.31
Importantly, we do not want to assume that all workers in our sample face the same wage
offer distribution, as this would imply that any deviation of beliefs from this incorrectly assumed
homogeneous wage offer distribution would reflect some degree of “pessimism” or “optimism,”
rather than actual wage offer heterogeneity. Our approach is to allow for a rich heterogeneous
wage offer distribution, as much as our data allows.
The starting point for our empirical model for log wage offers log(y) is to assume that each
individual i faces an actual log wage offer distribution given by ln yi ∼ N (µ∗i , σi∗2 ), where µ∗i and
σi∗ are the mean and standard deviation of individual i’s specific log wage offer distribution.
We assume that µ∗i is a function of both observable characteristics Xi for each individual (age,
education, gender, and industry), and an unobservable ηi . We assume that ηi has a discrete
distribution with two types, ηi ∈ {η1 , η2 }. µ∗i is then:
µ∗i = α0 Xi + ηi .
We estimate the support of ηi , along with the probability that an individual is a type η1 , π1 ,
using observed log wage offers in our sample. We allow for the unobserved type support {η1 , η2 }
and probability mass parameter π1 to vary by the worker’s education. For details on how we
implement this in practice, see Appendix F. The distribution of unobserved types is identified
from “residual” heterogeneity in wage offers, conditional on observable covariates X.
Because individuals can now be one of two unobserved types, we amend the transition probabilities in equations (8)-(9) to account for this unobserved heterogeneity and “integrate out”
the unobserved type heterogeneity in the standard way. The augmented individual transition
probabilities (conditional on covariates X) are thus given by:

31

One concern could be that the observed empirical offer distribution is truncated from below. Workers may
not actively pursue offers from employers with very low wages and hence not report them in the survey. This
is certainly plausible and might lead us to under predict the degree of wage dispersion in the data. First, using
simulated data from the estimated model, we can show that this is not the case, suggesting that the truncation
of low offers is not a serious issue. In addition, in the reported data, we see that in more than half of the cases
(54%), individuals receive offers that are below their current wages.

24

h


i
pr(U E|X, µt ) = λ∗u π1 1 − F ∗ (X, η1 )(yru (µt )) + (1 − π1 ) 1 − F ∗ (X, η2 )(yru (µt )) ,

(11)

pr(EE|X, µt , w) = (1−δ ∗ )λ∗e [π1 (1 − F ∗ (X, η1 )(yre (w, µt ))) + (1 − π1 )(1 − F ∗ (X, η2 )(yre (w, µt )))] .
(12)
Beliefs and Learning Rather than assume all workers share a common prior belief, we
identify the distribution of beliefs about the mean of the (log) wage offer distribution, µi,t , by
directly using our data on elicited beliefs.32 We impose no parametric distribution on the µi,t
distribution in our sample, and use the sample distribution to non-parametrically identify the
beliefs distribution.
We identify the learning process using our panel data on belief updating and the wage offers
that individuals received. Given prior belief in period t, µi,t , a wage offer wi,t , and an updated
belief µi,t+1 , the learning process takes the form:
µi,t+1 = (1 − ζ)µi,t + ζ ln wi,t .

(13)

We allow for ζ to vary by the worker’s education. Note that the ζ we estimate from data on
belief-updating need not be Bayesian; we do not impose any relationship between the updating
rule and an individual’s level of uncertainty.
Unemployment Value and Moving Costs There are two remaining parameters: the value
of non-employment or “leisure” b and the value of the current employer or “moving cost” m.
We identify these free parameters from the observed employment transitions (unemployment-toemployment and job-to-job). In particular, we use the model-generated policy rules (reservation
wages) - which are a function of an individual’s labor market status and current beliefs - to compute the individual’s implied reservation wage and thus probability of making a transition to
employment or a transition to another employer for the unemployed and employed, respectively.
Given the structure of the model, there is a unique and one-to-one mapping between the transition rates and the b and m values for any labor market. We allow for the b and m values to
vary by the worker’s education.

32

Because our elicited beliefs data is in levels, we estimate the individual µi,t using the reported expectation
in levels given the estimated σ ∗ .

25

6.2

Estimator

We use the identification arguments constructively to form a two step estimator. All model
parameters are estimated by at least education level: non-college (less than a 4-year college
degree) and college (college degree or more). As previously noted, estimation of the actual
wage offer distribution allows even richer heterogeneity based on age, gender, and industry, in
addition to education, and allows for unobserved heterogeneity as described above.
Step 1: Estimate arrival and separation probabilities, actual wage offer distributions, beliefs and the learning rule Arrival and separation probabilities are estimated
directly from our sample. The procedure for estimating the individual-specific wage offer parameters µ∗i and σi∗ has been outlined earlier. To estimate the learning process ζ, we use the
panel data on updated beliefs.
Step 2: Estimate flow value of unemployment (b) and moving costs (m) In the second
step of the estimator, we take the Step 1 values and estimate the (b, m) combination which
minimizes the distance between the empirical probabilities pr(U
ˆ E) and pr(EE)
ˆ
and simulated
ones pr(U E|b, m) and pr(EE|b, m). The simulated transition probabilities depend on the Step
1 parameter estimates, including the data on beliefs. As with all of the other model parameters,
we estimate the model separately for the college and non-college groups. Our estimator for
(b, m) is thus defined as:

0 

[b̂, m̂] = arg min M̂ − M (b, m) M̂ − M (b, m) ,
b,m

(14)

where the vector of sample moments (sample transition probabilities) are given by
0
M̂ = [pr(U
ˆ E) pr(EE))]
ˆ
,

and the vector of model-implied transition probabilities is given by
M (b, m) = [pr(U E|b, m) pr(EE|b, m)]0 .
The model-implied transition probabilities are given in (11) and (12), which we average over all
individuals in the sample to obtain a group-level transition probability. We use simulation to
compute the transition probabilities, the details of which are in the Appendix section E.
We compute the estimator using an approximation to the objective function (as a function
of the unknown parameters b, m). First, we compute each model for 11 b values and 11 m values
(11 x 11 unique values), each of which gives rise to some non-employment to employment and
employer-to-employer transition probabilities. We then approximate the transition probabilities

26

as functions of (b, m) using Chebyshev polynomials, and find the (b, m) combinations that
minimize the distance between the observed transition probabilities and the model-generated
ones. Our estimator performs very well–the fit is near perfect–as discussed below.
Inference To account for the multiple steps of our estimator and the clustered nature of our
panel data, we conduct inference for our model estimates using a panel bootstrap over all steps
of the model estimation. For a sample size of N respondents, we re-sample with replacement
each respondent i = 1, . . . , N and take all of their sample data for every wave of the survey
they participated in. For each bootstrap sample of size N , we then re-estimate all parameters
in sequence, including arrival rates of jobs and job destruction probabilities, actual wage offer
distribution, belief distribution and learning process, and finally the b, m values. For B = 100
bootstrap re-samples, we compute standard errors and confidence intervals. Our block/panel
bootstrap over all model estimation steps accurately reflects the clustered dependence of the
data (by individual) and any sample variability introduced in each estimation step.

7
7.1

Results
Parameter Estimates and Sample Fit

Table 7 summarizes the parameter estimates for σ ∗ , λ∗e , λ∗u , δ ∗ , ζ, η1 , η2 , π1 for each education
group. As might be expected, the offer probabilities are higher for the college educated relative
to the non-college educated, while the separation probability is lower. Additionally, the variance
of wage offers is larger for the college educated. The updating parameter, ζ, is lower for the
college educated, indicating that they tend to place less weight on new offers received relative
to current beliefs as compared to the non-college educated.
The middle panel of Table 7 reports the parameter estimates for the value of leisure and
moving costs (b̂, m̂) as well as the fit of each moment for each model described above. Given
the model is just-identified, we are able to fit the employment transitions for each model almost
exactly. While the estimated b levels are lower for the non-college sample, the estimated value
of leisure relative to the mean offered wage in our non-college and college samples is .24 and
.08, respectively, suggesting that the college educated have a higher opportunity cost of work.
Similarly, moving costs as a fraction of the average hourly wage offer for employed workers in
our sample is 3.2 and 6.6 for the non-college and college workers, respectively. This is consistent
with the notion that more educated workers are in specialized jobs that have higher costs of
moving.
Figure 7 plots the distribution of implied errors (truth - belief) in our sample, both for the
non-college (left panel) and college (right panel) samples. For both samples, the median error is

27

slightly positive ($0.33 and $1.27 for the non-college and college samples, respectively), implying
that the median worker is pessimistic. However, both samples have a wide range of errors, with
a large number of both optimistic and pessimistic individuals in each.

7.2

Model Validation: Reservation Wages

Our estimation strategy employs information on labor market flows and how beliefs are updated
given offers that individuals receive. However, we do not make use of any information on reported
reservation wages and their relationship with beliefs in our estimation. As discussed above, we
have found that in our data, reported beliefs and reservations wages are correlated, consistent
with our model predictions. In this sub-section, we use the reservation wage data to validate
our model predictions directly. In particular, we ask how well our model does relative to a more
standard model of complete information (“CI”) in predicting reported reservation wages.
To do so we solve and estimate a complete information model in which individuals know
the true mean of the (log) wage offer distribution and there is no learning necessary, following
the same procedure as outlined in Section 6.33 This generates estimates for the value of leisure
and moving costs under the complete information model, (b̂CI , m̂CI ), as well as policy functions
(reservation wages) for the unemployed and employed under complete information. In this case,
all unemployed workers of the same type have a common reservation wage, and reservation
wages in employment depend only on current wages. We then also use our estimated model
with subjective beliefs and learning to generate reservation wages implied by the learning model,
which instead are a function of each individual’s current belief µi,t and current wage wi,t if
employed. Finally, we compare how these model-predicted reservation wages fare in explaining
heterogeneity in self-reported reservation wages in our sample.
For this comparison, we do two things. First, for each of the models, we compute the correlation between model-predicted reservation wages and reported reservation wages, separately for
the employed and unemployed. Second, for each of the models, we regress reported reservation
wages on reservation wages implied by the model, demographics, and a constant, separately for
the employed and unemployed. The R2 from this regression is what we are interested in. Table
8 presents these statistics for our learning model, which we refer to as the “baseline” model,
and the “complete information” model. The first two columns show statistics for the employed.
Both the correlation coefficient and the R2 are higher for the baseline model. For example, the
baseline model yields a correlation coefficient of 0.58 for the non-college sample (and an R2 of
0.38) versus 0.52 (and 0.33) for the complete information model. Note that reservation wages
for employed workers depend on current wages in both models, and so the complete information
model is already able to pick up a significant amount of reported reservation wage heterogeneity
That is, beliefs about the mean of the offer distribution, µi,t , are now set equal to their true value µ∗i for
all i and t. See the Appendix G for details regarding the estimation and fit of the perfect information model.
33

28

without needing heterogeneity in beliefs. Nonetheless, belief heterogeneity increases the fit of
model-generated reservation wages with reported ones for employed workers.
More importantly, when we shift to the last two columns of Table 8, we see that the baseline
model does significantly better in picking up the heterogeneity in reported wages for the unemployed. For the non-college and college groups, respectively, the R2 is about 0.3 and 0.35 under
the baseline model, and less than 0.10 for the complete information model for both groups. And,
the correlation coefficient under the baseline model is more than five times that of the complete
information model. This leads us to conclude that the baseline model – with heterogeneous
beliefs and learning – does a much better job of matching the data on reservation wages.34

7.3

Policy Analysis: Counterfactual Changes in b

The two panels of Figure 8 plot the UE rate for our baseline model (blue lines) for counterfactual
changes in the flow value of unemployment b, for the non-college and college subsamples. In both
panels, we also plot the transition rate estimated from our data (the estimation “target”) as a
horizontal line in red. The intersection of the empirical target with the model-implied transition
curves is at our estimated b value reported in Table 7, giving a visual depiction of how this data
moment identifies the b value. All other values of b are “counterfactual.” In interpreting these
counterfactual results, it is important to remember that the flow value in our model represents
any unemployment benefits and the individual’s taste or distaste for unemployment relative to
employment. Changing b counterfactually in these exercises can be interpreted as a change in
the government-provided unemployment benefits.
In both panels, we see the expected negative slope: a higher flow value of unemployment
b implies a lower rate of leaving unemployment (the blue lines).35 Increasing b by $7 over the
ranges shown in the panels leads to a decline of 7.5 percentage points in the transition rate into
employment for the non-college group; increasing b by $5 over the ranges shown in the panels
leads to a decline of about 2 percentage points in the transition rate into employment for the
college group.
One contribution of our framework is to show the importance of incorporating data on prior
beliefs and learning relative to the standard model assuming complete information. To quantify
34

A direct consequence of this analysis is that our model should be able to capture a larger degree of crosssectional wage dispersion relative to a standard model without heterogeneous beliefs (Hornstein, Krusell, and
Violante (2011) so long as beliefs about µ∗ are not above it for all individuals). To confirm this, we simulate
labor market histories for a large number of workers, assuming that they enter the labor market with beliefs
µi,0 equal to their true offer distribution parameters, µ∗i . We then calculate the standard deviation of log wages
in our baseline estimated model (within different µ∗ groups, averaged across groups) as well as the complete
information model with the same parameters. When moving from complete information to our model with
learning, the mean standard deviation of log wages rises from .25 to .27 for the non-college sample, and from .3
to .33 for the college sample in our baseline model relative to complete information.
35
The slope need not be linear, and will in general depend on the belief composition of our sample, over which
we compute the transition probabilities.

29

this comparison, we use our estimated complete information model, which assumes that all
workers have the same beliefs about the wage offer distribution and those beliefs are correct
(equal to the heterogeneous wage offer distribution we estimate): µit = µ∗i for all i, t. For this
counterfactual complete information model, we perform the same exercise as with our baseline
model, and compute the implied transition probabilities for various b values. These are plotted
in the black lines in the figure. For both subsamples, we see that the complete information
model predicts more responsiveness to changes in the value of unemployment.36 The difference
is particularly transparent in the case of the non-college-educated sample. For a change in b
from $1 to $7, the baseline model predicts a drop of approximately 7.5 percentage points in
the UE transition rate, while the complete information model predicts a full percentage point
more than that. The different predictions of the two models indicates that assuming incorrectly
that workers have complete information can bias estimates of the predictions of government
interventions, such as increases in unemployment benefits.

8

The Welfare Costs of Information Frictions

In this section, we quantify the utility/welfare costs of information frictions and translate this
quantity into its search friction equivalent. To do so, we conduct the following exercises. We
solve our preferred baseline model - the model with heterogeneous beliefs and learning- with
the estimated (b̂, m̂) from Table 7 and compute the implied employer-to-employer transition
probabilities, unemployment-to-employment transition probabilities, and the expected present
discounted value of utility. We then repeat this exercise assuming instead that (i) individuals
have complete information, where their initial beliefs about the wage offer distribution are
correct µi,t = µ∗i for all i and t and there is no learning, and (ii) individuals have imperfect
priors, but do not learn over time (ζ = 0 but µi,t 6= µ∗i ). A comparison of the baseline model
with (i) informs us about the welfare consequences of imperfect information. A comparison of
the baseline model with (ii) is informative about the role of learning in this context.
Welfare Calculations In our model with incorrect beliefs, welfare calculations are not as
straight-forward as they would be in standard models. This is because individual behavior
is a function of beliefs about the distribution of offers, but realized welfare is a function of
that behavior and the actual distribution of offers. Therefore, to compute welfare, we keep
preferences, the learning rule, and the associated reservation wage polices as estimated, but
compute welfare using the actual distribution of wage offers as follows.
The actual present-discounted value of unemployment U ∗ (µt ) and employment W ∗ (w, µt )
are defined as:
36

Note that the two models also have different moving costs operating in the background.

30

∗

U (µt ) = b +

βλ∗u

Z

∗

∗

W (y, µt+1 )dF (y) +
yru (µt )

βλ∗u

Z

r (µ )
yu
t

U ∗ (µt+1 )dF ∗ (y)

+β(1 − λ∗u )U ∗ (µt ),

(15)

and
∗

∗

∗

W (w, µt ) = w + βδ U (µt ) + β(1 − δ
+β(1 − δ

∗

)λ∗e

Z

yre (w,µt )

∗

)λ∗e

Z

{W ∗ (y, µt+1 ) − m} dF ∗ (y)

yre (w,µt )

W ∗ (w, µt+1 )dF ∗ (y) + β(1 − δ ∗ )(1 − λ∗e )W ∗ (w, µt ),

(16)

respectively, where the learning rule continues to follow equation (3), and ζ = 0 for the model
without learning and the model with complete information. These values differ from the perceived values described in equations (4) and (5) because they impose the policy functions from
the model with learning we have estimated (that is, the yru (µt ) and yre (w, µt ) for the baseline
case), but use the actual offer distributions that individuals face, rather than the individual’s
belief about the offer distribution.37 Therefore, these values capture actual mean present discounted values of income and thus utility for our (linear utility) model with learning. To provide some interpretation of the magnitudes of welfare that follow, note that earning $1 in hourly
wages in our model forever (without the possibility of separation) has a present discounted value
1
1
= 1−0.984
= $62.5.
(PDV) of utility of 1−β
We start with the complete information model, in which perceived and actual expected
welfare are identical. The results are reported in the first row of each panel in Table 9, with the
top panel corresponding to the non-college sample and the bottom panel corresponding to the
college sample. The first two columns report the implied mean transition probabilities in our
sample. The last two columns depict the average PDV of utility in annual earnings relative to
the CI model and the interquartile range of this mean gain, respectively.38 By definition, these
measures are zero for the first row, which corresponds to the complete information model.
Benchmark 1: Baseline Model To compare our baseline framework to a model with complete information, we then calculate the same objects under our baseline model, the results of
which are reported in the second row of each panel in Table 9. For non-college workers, moving
from the baseline model to a model with complete information reduces the one-period ahead
37

For the empirical priors and no learning model (Benchmark 2 below), we impose the policy functions from
the model with empirical priors and no learning, but again uses the actual offer distributions that individuals
face rather than the individual’s belief about the offer distribution, with the additional assumption that beliefs
are fixed at their starting values.
38
In particular, this is the implied values computed in Equations (15) and (16), multiplied by (1 − β) ∗ 2000
to express it in annual dollars.

31

unemployment-to-employment transition probability by roughly 1.65 percentage points, and the
employer-to-employer transition probability by 0.71 percentage points. In general, the direction
of these changes is ambiguous, and depends on the distribution of beliefs about µ∗i in our sample
relative to each individual’s actual µ∗i . For example, if most people are pessimistic (µi,t < µ∗i ),
then moving to a model with complete information should, on average, lower unemployment-toemployment transition probabilities. Moving to complete information increases an individual’s
beliefs about their outside option of search in unemployment (to the truth), consequently raising
reservation wages and lowering job finding rates. Indeed, we estimate that unemployed individuals are on average pessimistic, with the average unemployed worker under-estimating the
mean of their offer distribution by $.031.39
More importantly, a non-college worker would be willing to pay $175.24 more per year to
have complete information, while a college worker would be willing to pay $816.94 more per
year for complete information. Given that annual earnings for full-time non-college (college)
workers in our sample are $53,444 ($83,734), this is a rather low willingness to pay for complete
information. The direction of this change, unlike the transition probabilities, will always be
negative as we move from CI to our baseline model. Under complete information, individuals’
reservation wages are chosen so as to maximize expected lifetime utility. Therefore, any deviation
from this optimal behavior must lower lifetime utility.40 Another way to interpret these numbers
is that a non-college (college) worker would be willing to make a one-time payment of $10,953
($51,059) to have complete information about the mean offer they would receive.
As we will see next, the welfare losses of information frictions are significantly mitigated
by the fact that individuals are able to learn from their labor market experiences. If instead
individuals never learned and had their beliefs forever fixed at their initial values, the gains from
complete information would be substantially larger.
Benchmark 2: Empirical Priors and No Learning To compare our baseline model to the
model with empirical priors, but without learning, we assume that individuals have the same
initial beliefs µi,t , but that they do not update their beliefs in response to their labor market
experiences (ζ = 0). We then solve for the same objects as above, using the same parameters
as were used in the model with learning, the results of which are reported in the third row
of each panel in Table 9. Moving from a world with complete information to a world with
heterogeneous beliefs without learning significantly lowers expected utility, for both education
groups. On average, welfare falls by about $1,525 dollars per year for the non-college, and
by $3,174 for the college-educated. That is, a non-college (college) worker who cannot learn
from their labor market experiences would be willing to make a one-time payment of $95,303
39
40

For reference, Figure 7 depicts the distribution of errors in the full sample.
Note that this does not preclude short-run losses from moving to complete information.

32

($198,368), respectively, to have complete information. The average willingness to pay in this
case is nearly 9 (4) times as high as in the case with learning for non-college (college) workers.
This suggests that learning mitigates most of the damage caused by information frictions.
Although the mean losses are economically significant, they mask a considerable amount
of heterogeneity, as is evident by the large inter-quartile range of welfare losses presented in
the last column of Table 9. Figure 9 plots the welfare gains of moving from the model with
no learning to the model with complete information as a function of initial errors in beliefs.
If beliefs are initially correct and there is no learning, naturally the gains are zero as the two
models are equivalent. This can alternatively be seen in Figure 10, which plots reservation wages
in the two environments as a function of initial errors. Here, reservation wages are the same in
the two models when beliefs are correct. Moving away from correct beliefs in either direction
(pessimism or optimism) raises the welfare gains of complete information: the farther beliefs
are from the truth, the more costly are the errors associated with the incorrect reservation wage
rules. Moreover, for non-trivial mistakes, the gains are quite large, suggesting that individuals
would be willing to pay a significant amount of money for the opportunity to learn.
Comparing Search vs. Information Frictions Search frictions are embodied in the job
arrival probabilities λu and λe , with values less than 1 implying that workers need to wait for
job offers. To quantify how information frictions compare to search frictions, we look for the rise
in offer arrival probabilities λu and λe that would deliver the same mean increase in expected
utility under our baseline model. The remaining rows of each panel in Table 9 show what
happens to transition probabilities and expected utility as either λu or λe increase from their
estimated values by different amounts (2, 10, and 50 percent). For these calculations, we report
welfare gains in Table 9 relative to our baseline model.
The increase in expected utility when moving to complete information from our baseline
model is roughly equivalent to increasing the arrival probability in non-employment by 5%
(15%) for non-college (college) workers. On the other hand, the gains of going from the nolearning case to the complete information world are equivalent to raising the arrival probability
in non-employment by about 40% (100%) for the non-college (college) workers, indicating that
welfare costs arising from information frictions in the labor market are as large as non-trivial
changes in search frictions.

9

Conclusion

We collect rich data on individuals’ labor market expectations and realizations to understand
the importance of learning and information frictions in the labor market. Although expectations
have high predictive power, we find that the errors in forecasts are sizable. However, we docu33

ment that individuals learn from their experiences, and revise their expectations in meaningful
ways to new information that arrives. We embed these data and learning patterns into a model
of search on- and off- the job, where workers are uncertain about the mean of the offer distribution. We find that the model with heterogeneous beliefs and learning fits the data significantly
better than one estimated assuming complete information, and that policy inference would be
biased if one incorrectly assumed that workers had complete information. Finally, we show that
the welfare gains from eliminating information frictions are nontrivial, and would be even larger
if individuals did not learn from their labor market experiences. In the absence of learning,
welfare losses are comparable to a decline in the arrival rate of offers in non-employment of
more than 40 percent.
This is the first paper to empirically investigate the role of learning in the labor market and
to quantify the role of information frictions in job search. We believe there are at least two
avenues for future research. The first is related to understanding the learning process better.
Although we show that workers learn, our data do now allow us to decompose how much of this
is because of workers learning about their own type versus learning about the labor market.
We also find a rather high rate of learning in the data. Our panel is short, and we are limited
in making progress on this front. Given the importance of learning and information frictions
that we document, it would be useful to collect similar data over longer periods. Second, our
model focuses on learning on only one dimension, the mean of the offer distribution. Workers
may be misinformed about other aspects of the labor market too (such as the arrival rates or
the dispersion of the offer distribution). In that sense our setup may provide a lower bound
on the importance of information frictions. Work that incorporates these additional dimensions
(and collects data to do so) would be useful for understanding job search behavior better and
our results highlight the need for collecting such data and relaxing the complete information
assumption in labor search models.

34

References
[1] Armantier, O., G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar. 2017. “An Overview of the
Survey of Consumer Expectations,” Economic Policy Review, forthcoming.
[2] Michèle, Belot, Kircher, Philip, and Muller, Paul. 2016. “Providing Advice to Job Seekers
at Low Cost: An Experimental Study on Online Advice,” Working Paper.
[3] Burdett, Kenneth. 1978 “A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates.” The American
Economic Review 68, no. 1: 212-20.
[4] Burdett, K., and Dale Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment,” The International Economic Review, 39(2): 257-273.
[5] Burdett, K., and T. Vishwanath. 1988. “Declining Reservation Wages and Learning,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 55(4): 655-665 .
[6] Cogley, Timothy and Sargent, Thomas J. 2008. “Anticipated Utility and Rational Expectations as Approximations of Bayesian Decision Making, ” International Economic Review,
Vol. 49, Issue 1, pp. 185-221.
[7] Doppelt, Ross 2016. “The Hazards of Unemployment: A Macroeconomic Model of Job
Search and Resume Dynamics , ” Working Paper.
[8] Faberman, J., A. Mueller, A. Sahin, and G. Topa. 2017. “Job Search Behavior among the
Employed and Non-Employed,” NBER Working Paper No. 23731.
[9] Fernandez-Blanco, Javier and Edgar Preugschat. ”On the Effects of Ranking by Unemployment Duration.” European Economic Review 104 ( May. 2018) : 92-110 .
[10] Grether, David. 1980. “Bayes Rule as a Descriptive Model: The Representativeness Heuristic.,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95 (3): 53757.
[11] Gonzalez, F, and S. Shi. 2010. “An Equilibrium Theory of Learning, Search, and Wages,”
Econometrica, 78(2): 509-537.
[12] Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song. 2016. “What Do Data on Millions of U.S.
Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Dynamics?” Working Paper.
[13] Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98(4), 1692-1706.
[14] Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G. Violante. 2011. “Frictional Wage Dispersion in Search
Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” American Economic Review, Vol. 101(7), 2873-2898.
35

[15] Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. Violante. 2014. “Consumption and Labor Supply
with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework,” American Economic Review, Vol. 104(7),
2075-2126.
[16] Hurd, Michael and Kathleen McGarry. 2002. “The Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of Survival,” Economic Journal, 112(482): 966-985.
[17] Jacob, Brian and Tamara Wilder. 2011. “Educational Expectations and Attainment,” in
Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income
Children, edited by Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Press.
[18] Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover , ” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5, Part 1, pp. 972-990.
[19] Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1982. “Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness,” in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky (eds) Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[20] Krueger, A., and A. Mueller. 2016. “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, V8(1): 142-179.
[21] Kudlyak, Marianna, Damba Lkhagvasuren and Roman Sysuyev. 2014. “Systematic Job
Search: New Evidence from Individual Job Application Data.” Working Paper
[22] Lancaster, Tony and Chesher, Andrew. 1983. “An Econometric Analysis of Reservation
Wages,” Econometrica, vol. 51(6): 1661-1676.
[23] Le Barbanchon, Thomas, Roland Rathelot, and Alexandra Roulet. 2018. “Unemployment
Insurance and Reservation Wages: Evidence from Administrative Data,” Journal of Public
Economics, forthcoming.
[24] Manski, Charles. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica, 72(5): 1329-1376.
[25] Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, V61(3): 397-415.
[26] Pissarides, C. 1985. “Short-run Dynamics of Equilibrium Unemployment, Vacancies, and
Real Wages,” American Economic Review, V75(4): 676-690.
[27] Potter, T. 2017. “Learning and Job Search Dynamics during the Great Recession,” Working
Paper.

36

[28] Price, Richard H., Amiram D. Vinokur, George Howe, and Robert D. Caplan. 2004. “Preventing Depression in Couples facing Job Loss, ”
[29] Shimer, Robert. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95(1), 25-49.
[30] Spinnewijn, Johannes. 2015. “Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with
Biased Beliefs,” Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 13(1), 130-167.
[31] Stephens, Mel. 2004. “Job Loss Expectations, Realizations, and Household Consumption
Behavior,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 86(1): 253-269.
[32] Wiswall, M., and B. Zafar. 2015. “Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification
using an Information Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 82, 791824.

37

2
Mean Number of Offers within 4 Months
.5
1
1.5
0

0

1
2
3
4
Expected Number of Offers within 4 Months

5

N = 8276
Regression Coefficient = 0.14 (0.01)

Figure 1: Expectations vs. Realizations: Number of Offers

38

80
Average Offer within 4 Months
40
0

0

40
Expected Average Offer within 4 Months
Regression Line

80

45 degree line

N = 545
Regression Coefficient = 0.93 (0.02)

Figure 2: Expectations vs. Realizations: Offer Salary

39

Density

-20

-10
0
10
Shock (Actual Wage Offer - Expected Wage Offer)

20

N = 545

Figure 3: Distribution of Offer Shocks

40

Change in Offer Wage Expectation
-10
0
10
20
-30

-20
-10
0
10
Shock (Actual Wage Offer - Expected Wage Offer)
45 degree line

Linear Regression

N = 493
Regression Coefficient = 0.47 (0.03)

Figure 4: Updating Offer Expectations

41

20

µt
t

production

job offer arrivals y
separation

belief updating µt+1
Figure 5: Model Timing

42

accept/reject

µt+1
t+1

28

50

no learning
=.5
=1

45
40

no learning, w = 10
=.5, w = 10
=1, w = 10

26
24

35

22
30

20
25

18
20

16

15

14

10
5
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

12

140

0

Reservation Wage, Unemployment

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Reservation Wage, Employment

Figure 6: The Effect of Beliefs and Learning on Reservation Wages
Notes. The left panel plots the reservation wage for unemployed workers for different expected offers for the
model with no learning (black line, ζ = 0), for the model with some learning (blue line, ζ = .5), and for the
extreme case of updating to current offers (red line, ζ = 1). The right panel plots the reservation wage for the
same scenarios for an employed worker at a particular wage level w = 10.

43

100

160

90

140

80
120
min: -84.82
max: 73.42
mean: -0.45
median: 0.33
std deviation: 15.38

60
50

sample share

sample share

70

40

100
80

min: -142.95
max: 81.56
mean: 0.71
median: 1.27
std deviation: 26.19

60

30
40
20
20

10
0
-80

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

0
-150

60

Non-college Sample

-100

-50

0

50

College Sample

Figure 7: Estimated Sample Distribution of Errors
Notes. The left panel plots the distribution of errors for the non-college sample (left panel) and the college
sample (right panel). Errors are defined as the deviation in implied means of the log wage offer distribution,
∗
∗
exp(µ∗i + σ2 ) − exp(µi,t + σ2 )

44

0.23

0.2

CI w/ new estimates
baseline

0.22

CI w/ new estimates
baseline

0.195
0.19

0.21

0.185

0.2

0.18

0.19
0.175

0.18
0.17

0.17

0.165

0.16

0.16

0.15

0.155

0.14

0.15

0

2

4

6

8

10

(a) Non-College Sample

0

1

2

3

4

5

(b) College Sample

Figure 8: The Effect of b on Transition Probabilities
Notes. Panel (a) plots the unemployment to employment transition probability, P r(U E), for different values of
b for both the complete information model (black line) and the model with empirical priors and learning (blue
line) for the non-college group. Panel (b) plots the same objects for the college subsample. In all panels, the
horizontal dotted line plots the targeted transition probability from the estimation, while the horizontal line
corresponds to the estimated b in our baseline model. Note that, while not pictured, each model has a different
estimated moving cost as well.

45

60

120

Non-Employed
Employed, w=25

50

100

40

80

30

60

20

40

10

optimists

Non-Employed
Employed, w=39

20

pessimists

optimists

-20
-10

-10
-8

pessimists

0

0

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

-5

0

5

10

College Sample

Non-college Sample

Figure 9: Welfare Gains as a Function of Errors in the Model with no Learning
Notes. The left panel plots the welfare gains for unemployed workers (blue line) and employed workers (red line)
for different deviations from a particular µ∗ for the non-college sample. The right panel plots the welfare gains
for unemployed workers (blue line) and employed workers (red line) for different deviations from a particular µ∗
for the college sample. The x-axis is the implied deviations in expected average offers.

14

unemployed

30.8

30.6

13

employed

22

CI
no learning

unemployed

50.5

20

30.4

18

30.2

16

30

14

29.8

12

29.6

10

50

12

CI
no learning

49.5

11

49

10

48.5

9

8
-10

employed

0

10

29.4
-10

0

8
-10

10

Non-college Sample

48

0

10

47.5
-10

0

10

College Sample

Figure 10: Deviations in Reservation Wages as a Function of Errors in the Model with no
Learning
Notes. The left panel plots the reservation wage for unemployed workers (left plot) and employed workers (right
plot) for different deviations from a particular µ∗ for the non-college sample for both the rational expectations
model (blue line) and the model with no learning (red line). The right panel plots the reservation wage for
unemployed workers (left plot) and employed workers (right plot) for different deviations from a particular µ∗
for the college sample for both the rational expectations model (blue line) and the model with no learning (red
line). The x-axis is the implied deviations in expected average offers.

46

Table 1: Demographic Characteristics

Oberservations
Number of unique individuals
% 1 Survey
% 2 Surveys
Male
Age

Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean

Min.
Max.
Bachelor’s Degree or higher
Mean
White (Not Hispanic)
Mean
Married/partnerc
Mean
Number of children
Mean
Min.
Max.
Employed
Mean
Unemployed
Mean
OLF
Mean
Unemployment Rate
Mean
Working Full-timed
Mean
Working Part-Time
Mean
Full-time Hourly Wage (College)
Mean
Full-time Hourly Wage (Non-college) Mean

SCE
CPSa
8883
1458056
4388
33.61
32.18
51.80
51.58
45.83
44.70
(12.12) (12.30)
22.00
22.00
65.00
65.00
57.31
35.88
76.82
77.03
65.16
58.91
0.64
0.88
0.00
0.00
20.00
9.00
79.17
74.49
3.60
3.24
17.22
22.28
4.35
4.16
69.35
64.80
9.38
8.95
40.25
41.95
25.69
23.52

p-valueb

0.69
0.00

0.00
0.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.43
0.00
0.17
0.00
0.00

Table reports means, with standard deviations in parentheses.
a
Statistics are based on the January 2015- September 2017 CPS monthly data.
b
p-value of the equality of the CPS (in col 2) and SCE (in col 1) means.
c
The SCE asks ”Are you currently married or living as a partner with someone?”. CPS
respondents are classified as married or living with a partner if they are ”Married, spouse
present,” ”Married, spouse absent,” or if someone else in their household reported themselves as the head of household’s ”Partner roommate” or ”Unmarried partner.”

47

Table 2: Labor Market Expectations and Realizations - Full Sample
All

Employed

Unemployed

OLF

0.32
(0.46)
[0.00]
8276

0.32
(0.47)
[0.00]
6999

0.61
(0.49)
[1.00]
295

0.19
(0.39)
[0.00]
982

Number of offers

0.84
(2.42)
[0.00]
6538

0.82
(2.43)
[0.00]
5575

2.04
(2.17)
[2.00]
228

0.60
(2.26)
[0.00]
735

Salary Offer

32.32
(23.47)
[24.92]
5895

34.00
(23.81)
[27.95]
5194

20.15
(17.76)
[14.79]
262

19.80
(15.00)
[14.83]
439

0.19**
(0.39)
[0.00]
7411

0.20***
(0.40)
[0.00]
6303

0.20***
(0.40)
[0.00]
257

0.09**
(0.28)
[0.00]
851

Number of offers

0.34***
(1.00)
[0.00]
7411

0.36***
(1.01)
[0.00]
6303

0.40**
(1.12)
[0.00]
257

0.17
(0.81)
[0.00]
851

Salary Offer

30.43*
(25.77)
[24.04]
1374

30.78*
(25.07)
[24.44]
1252

24.24
(31.35)
[13.72]
50

28.63
(32.56)
[19.41]
72

Panel A: Expectations
Received at least 1 offer

Panel B: Realizations
Received at least 1 offer

Table reports means, standard dev in parentheses, and medians in brackets. Sample
size in the last row of each variable panel. ***, **, * denote that mean realizations differ
from mean expectations at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

48

Table 3: Determinants of Job Offer Expectations and Realizations
Number of Offers

Log Average Offer

0.23
(0.28)
-0.15*
(0.08)
1.07***
(0.10)
0.33
(0.35)
-0.15***
(0.06)
0.15*
(0.09)
-0.70*
(0.39)
-0.07
(0.07)
2.53***
(0.64)
Yes
0.84
6538.00
0.04

-0.27***
(0.08)
-0.31***
(0.04)
0.05***
(0.02)
-0.08
(0.09)
0.35***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.11*
(0.07)
0.28***
(0.02)
-0.81***
(0.24)
Yes
3.27
5895.00
0.46

-0.27**
(0.13)
-0.16***
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.04)
0.30**
(0.15)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
-0.41***
(0.12)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.71***
(0.18)
Yes
0.34
7411.00
0.01

0.00
(0.24)
-0.02
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.25)
0.52***
(0.04)
0.12***
(0.03)
0.30**
(0.12)
0.17***
(0.03)
-2.84***
(0.40)
Yes
3.17
1374.00
0.54

Panel A: Expectations
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Searched for job
Searched for job * Non-employed
Log Current/Most Recent Salary
Male
Age
BA or higher
Constant
Survey Fixed Effects
Mean of Dep. Variable
N
R2
Panel B: Realizations
Unemployed
Out of labor force
Searched for job
Searched for job * Non-employed
Log Current/Most Recent Salary
Male
Age
BA or higher
Constant
Survey Fixed Effects
Mean of Dep. Variable
N
R2

Table reports OLS estimates. Robust standard errors (clustered at the individual level)
in parentheses: ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

49

Table 4: Correlates of the Absolute Offer Wage Shock (logs)
(1)
-0.031
(0.041)
0.348***
(0.106)
-0.033
(0.028)

Unemployed
Out of labor force
Searched for job
Searched for job * Non-employed
Log Current/Most Recent Salary
BA or higher
Age/100
Male

-0.133***
(0.027)
-0.031
(0.032)
0.338***
(0.121)
-0.074**
(0.029)

Constant
Survey Fixed Effects
Mean of Dep. Variable
N
R2

Yes
0.286
545

(2)
-0.013
(0.128)
0.311***
(0.102)
-0.042
(0.026)
-0.036
(0.137)
-0.126***
(0.028)
0.034
(0.029)
0.307***
(0.113)
-0.037
(0.027)
1.523***
(0.294)
Yes
0.286
545
0.227

OLS estimates presented. Dependent variable is the absolute shock
(the gap between the actual offer and the expected offer) in logs. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.
a
Column (1) shows the estimates from univariate regressions. Each
cell in the first column is an estimate from a separate regression.
Columns (2) and (3) show estimates from a multivariate regression.

50

51
No
-0.13
493
0.32

Demographics Included?b
Mean of dependent variable
Observations
R2
Yes
-0.13
493
0.38

Yes

(2)
All
0.47***
(0.06)

Yes
0.05
331
0.39

Yes

Yes
-0.49
162
0.56

Yes

(3)
(4)
College Non-College
0.45***
0.56***
(0.07)
(0.12)

No
-0.01
493
0.26

Yes

0.43***
(0.06)

(5)
All

Yes
-0.01
493
0.33

Yes

0.40***
(0.06)

(6)
All

OLS estimates presented. Dependent variable in columns 1-4 is the revision (t minus t-1) expectation of average offer. In columns
5 and 6, the dependent variable is the revision in the log of expectation of average offer. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
a
Shock is defined as the realized wage offer in time t minus the expected wage offer reported at t-1.
b
Demographics include age, household income, numeracy, and dummies for race, gender, parenthood, and education.

Yes

Survey Fixed Effects

Log Shock (Log Realizationt - Log Expt−1 )a

Shock (Realizationt - Expt−1 )a

(1)
All
0.47***
(0.06)

Table 5: Revision of Expected Average Offer, by Education

Table 6: Determinants of Log Reservation Wages
(1)

Log Expected Average Salary Offer
Log Current Salary
Survey Fixed Effects
Demographics Included?a
Mean of dependent variable
Observations
R2

(2)
(3)
(4)
Employed
Non-Employed
College Non-College College Non-College
0.53***
0.44***
0.73***
0.64***
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.05)
0.35***
0.39***
(0.03)
(0.04)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3.64
3.19
3.14
2.79
3281
1802
368
312
0.76
0.66
0.59
0.50

OLS estimates presented. Dependent variable is log reported reservation wage. Robust standard
errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses. ***, **, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.
a
Demographics include age, numeracy, and dummies for race, gender, parenthood, and education.

52

Table 7: Parameter Estimates
Parameter

Description

β

discount rate

δ

separation rate

λu

offer arrival rate, in unemployment

λe

-, in employment
2

Non-College

College

0.984

0.984

0.039
( 0.006)
0.252
( 0.042)
0.198
( 0.015)
0.317
( 0.024)
0.534
( 0.090)
−0.325
( 0.012)
0.422
( 0.024)
0.564
( 0.003)

0.020
( 0.004)
0.292
( 0.039)
0.203
( 0.008)
0.414
( 0.023)
0.372
( 0.059)
-0.294
( 0.024)
0.380
( 0.031)
0.564
( 0.003)

5.002
( 2.643)
65.903
( 30.181)

2.747
( 1.524)
223.330
( 63.337)

σ?

w ∼ logN (µ?i , σ ? )

ζ

slope of updating rule

η1

worker type 1

η2

worker type 2

π1

probability type 1

b

value of leisure

m

moving cost

P r(U E)

UE transition probability - model

19.130

17.858

P r(U E)

UE transition probability - data

19.130

17.857

P r(EE)

EE transition probability - model

5.449

5.315

P r(EE)

EE transition probability- data

5.450

5.315

The discount rate is set ex ante, while the remaining parameters are estimated from
the corresponding moments in our data, following the methods described in Section 6.
Bootstrapped standard errors from B = 100 bootstraps in parenthesis.

53

Table 8: Validating the Model: Reservation Wage, By Employment Status

Baseline
Conplete Information

Employed
Non-College College
Correlation Coef.
0.577***
0.735***
R squared
0.383
0.563
Correlation Coef.
R squared

0.523***
0.325

0.654***
0.458

Non-Employed
Non-College College
0.499***
0.547***
0.292
0.348
0.090***
0.077

0.106***
0.059

The first and third rows show the correlation coefficients between model-predicted reservation
wages and self-reported reservation wages in the SCE data, by education and employment.
The second and fourth rows show the R2 for regressions of self-reported reservation wages on
model-predicted reservation wages, including controls for demographics as well as industry and
time fixed-effects, by education and employment. *** denotes significance at p < .01.

a

54

Table 9: The Welfare Costs of Information Frictions

Complete Information

Non-College
Pr(UE) Pr(EE)
17.48
4.74

∆ Welfare IQR ∆ Welfare
0.00
0.00

Baseline

19.13

5.45

-175.24

55.44

Empirical Priors, No Learning

18.56

5.57

-1524.84

1202.60

Bayesian Learning

24.94

6.27

-467.10

638.25

Increase λu = 0.25 in Baseline:
2 percent
10 percent
50 percent
100 percent

18.45
18.04
16.67
15.66

5.57
5.57
5.57
5.57

104.70
499.54
1893.40
2009.56

74.75
348.84
1610.14
4548.75

Increase λe = 0.20 in Baseline:
2 percent
10 percent
50 percent
100 percent

18.61
18.80
19.99
21.58

5.56
5.52
5.35
5.20

80.09
388.40
1718.43
3050.89

88.84
439.10
1952.51
3466.39

Complete Information

College
Pr(UE) Pr(EE)
13.97
4.18

∆ Welfare IQR ∆ Welfare
0.00
0.00

Baseline

17.86

5.32

-816.94

343.54

Empirical Priors, No Learning

18.12

5.50

-3173.89

2606.80

Bayesian Learning

29.17

6.39

-434.10

1763.05

Increase λu = 0.29 in Baseline:
2 percent
10 percent
50 percent
100 percent

18.01
17.59
16.13
14.98

5.50
5.50
5.50
5.50

145.83
701.43
2738.40
3245.63

106.43
498.00
2477.22
6451.30

Increase λe = 0.20 in Baseline:
2 percent
10 percent
50 percent
100 percent

18.16
18.32
19.19
20.42

5.49
5.45
5.26
5.06

233.07
1127.93
4469.56
8817.79

266.06
1322.11
6238.61
10416.73

The first column reports the one-period-ahead UE transition probability for each model, while the
second column does the same for EE transition probability. The third column reports the mean
difference in present discounted value of income (expected utility) as described in Equations 15 and
16 (converted to an annual equivalent by multiplying by 2000 ∗ (1 − β)) relative to the complete
information model in the first three rows, and relative to the baseline model in the rows moving
arrival rates. The final column reports the interquartile range of these gains.

55

A

Additional Tables and Figures

Non-college

0

25
50
75
100
Full-time hourly salary

College

125

0

SCE

25 50 75 100 125 150 175
Full-time hourly salary

CPS

Figure A1: Comparing salary distributions in the CPS and SCE

56

Table A1: Labor Force Transition Rates
New
Same
Employer Employer
Panel A: SCE 4-month transition rates
LFS (t=0) Employed
92.7
4.6
Unemployed
29.1
OLF
5.1
Panel B: CPS 3-month transition rates
LFS (t=0) Employed
90.0
4.9
Unemployed
36.5
OLF
8.6

Unemployed

OLF

N

1.5
56.4
2.2

1.3
14.4
92.7

3083
118
419

1.8
38.8
3.5

3.2
24.7
87.9

369301
19709
106987

Panel A shows the percent of SCE respondents in the labor force status listed in the rows that
transition into the labor market status listed in the column headings in the next four months.
Panel B shows the percent of CPS respondents in the labor force status listed in the rows that
transition into the labor market status listed in the column headings in the next three months.

57

Table A2: Labor Market Expectations and Realizations by Current Employment Status - Consistent Sample
All

Employed

Unemployed

OLF

0.32
(0.47)
[0.00]
3670

0.33
(0.47)
[0.00]
3134

0.54
(0.50)
[1.00]
118

0.17
(0.38)
[0.00]
418

Number of offers

0.86
(2.46)
[0.00]
2863

0.85
(2.50)
[0.00]
2489

1.84
(2.46)
[1.00]
85

0.58
(1.93)
[0.00]
289

Salary Offer

32.22
(21.43)
[27.18]
545

33.88
(21.81)
[29.11]
468

21.46
(17.09)
[16.83]
49

23.39
(12.85)
[24.26]
28

0.17***
(0.38)
[0.00]
3670

0.17***
(0.37)
[0.00]
3134

0.43***
(0.50)
[0.00]
118

0.12
(0.33)
[0.00]
418

Number of offers

0.28***
(0.89)
[0.00]
2863

0.28***
(0.88)
[0.00]
2489

0.73***
(1.37)
[0.00]
85

0.16
(0.72)
[0.00]
289

Salary Offer

30.39
(22.63)
[24.92]
545

31.54
(23.35)
[25.77]
468

23.00
(16.48)
[15.45]
49

24.05
(15.56)
[19.64]
28

Panel A: Expectations
Received at least 1 offer

Panel B: Realizations
Received at least 1 offer

Table reports means, standard dev in parentheses, and medians in brackets. Sample size
in the last row of each variable panel. Sample is restricted to respondents who report both
an expectation(Panel A) of the outcome and a realization (Panel B) in the subsequent
survey. ***, **, * denote that mean realizations differ from mean expectations at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

58

59

Yes
0.22
274
0.40

Demographics Included?b
Mean of dependent variable
Observations
R2
p-valuec
0.10

Yes
-0.55
219
0.49

Yes

0.55***
(0.08)

Yes
-0.34
260
0.39

Yes

(3)
Did Not
Search
0.47***
(0.09)

0.65

Yes
0.91
183
0.42

Yes

0.43***
(0.09)

Searchedd

(4)

Yes
3.93
205
0.23

Yes

Yes
-3.01
288
0.39

Yes

(6)
Negative
Shock
0.47***
(0.09)

0.77

(5)
Positive
Shocke
0.42***
(0.16)

Yes
-0.65
317
0.43

Yes

Yes
0.92
175
0.43

Yes

(8)
High
Uncertainty
0.40***
(0.10)

0.48

(7)
Low
Uncertaintyf
0.49***
(0.08)

OLS estimates presented. Dependent var is the revision (t minus t-1) expectation of average offer. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,
**, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
a
Shock is defined as the realized wage offer in time t minus the expected wage offer reported at t-1.
b
Demographics include age, household income, numeracy, and dummies for race, gender, parenthood, and education.
c
p-value of the equality of the estimate on the shock variable for each pair of columns (1 and 2; 3 and 4; 5 and 6; 7 and 8).
d
Searched is the subsample that did anything in the last for months to look for new work.
e
Positive shock is the subsample which underestimates the offer wage.
f
Low Uncertainty is the set of respondents who assign non-zero probability to below-median number of bins when reporting the subjective
distribution of offer wages expected in the next four months.

Yes

0.39***
(0.07)

Age ≥ 45

Age < 45

Survey Fixed Effects

Shock (Realizationt - Expt−1

)a

(2)

(1)

Table A3: Revision of Expected Average Offer, by Demographics

Table A4: Complete Information Parameter Estimates
Parameter

Description

β

discount rate

δ

separation rate

λu

offer arrival rate, in unemployment

λe

-, in employment
2

Non-College

College

0.984

0.984

0.039
( 0.006)
0.252
( 0.042)
0.198
( 0.015)
0.317
( 0.024)
0.534
( 0.090)
−0.325
( 0.012)
0.422
( 0.017)
0.564
( 0.003)

0.020
( 0.004)
0.292
( 0.039)
0.203
( 0.008)
0.414
( 0.023)
0.372
( 0.059)
-0.294
( 0.024)
0.380
( 0.031)
0.564
( 0.003)

4.786
( 2.595)
47.754
( 19.967)

0.178
( 0.137)
137.737
( 41.883)

σ?

w ∼ logN (µ?i , σ ? )

ζ

slope of updating rule

η1

worker type 1

η2

worker type 2

π1

probability type 1

b

value of leisure

m

moving cost

P r(U E)

UE transition probability - model

19.132

17.859

P r(U E)

UE transition probability - data

19.130

17.857

P r(EE)

EE transition probability - model

5.449

5.315

P r(EE)

EE transition probability- data

5.450

5.315

The discount rate is set ex ante, while the remaining parameters are estimated from
the corresponding moments in our data, following the methods described in Section 6.
Bootstrapped standard errors from B = 100 bootstraps in parenthesis.

60

B

Bayesian Updating

To compute the Bayesian updating parameter, we use the following question from SCE labor
market survey:
“Think again about the job offers that you may receive within the coming four months. What
do you think is the percent chance that the job with the best offer will have an annual salary for
the first year of...
Less than .8*X dollars
Between .8*X and .9*X dollars
Between .9*X and X dollars
Between X and 1.1*X dollars
Between 1.1*X and 1.2*X dollars
More than 1.2*X dollars

”

where X is the respondent’s answer to the question:
“Think about the job offers that you may receive within the coming four months. Roughly
speaking, what do you think the annual salary for the best offer will be for the first year? Note
the best offer is the offer you would be most likely to accept. ”
For each respondent, we fit a log-normal distribution to the answers to the first question. Let
the standard deviation of this estimated distribution be φi . An individual’s Bayesian updating
parameter is then
ζi =

ni φ2i
,
σ ∗2 + ni φ2i

where σ ∗ is the variance of the log offer wage distribution, and is calculated as described in
Appendix F. ni is the number of offers the individual i received.

C

Proofs

We make the following three assumptions:
Assumption 1. If y > y 0 , then W (y, µt+1 (y)) − W (y 0 , µt+1 (y 0 )) > U (µt+1 (y)) − U (µt+1 (y 0 ))
Assumption 2. If y > y 0 , then W (y, µt+1 (y)) − m − (W (y 0 , µt+1 (y 0 )) − m) > W (w, µt+1 (y)) −
W (w, µt+1 (y 0 )) ∀w
Assumption 3. ∃ ŵ such that U (µt+1 (ŵ)) > W (y, µt+1 (ŵ)).
61

The first two assumptions mimic the second assumption in Burdett and Vishwanath (1988),
but account for search on the job. They both imply that receiving a larger offer never increases
the expected returns from search in the current state by “too much”. The third assumption
plays the same role as their assumption that search is always profitable. Informally, an easy
way to see why one needs these assumptions is to differentiate the left hand and right hand
sides of the reservation wage rules. Reservation wage strategies will only make sense if for every
y above the reservation wage, the value of employment exceeds the value of non-employment.
These assumptions guarantee that will be the case. More formally,
Proposition 1. If the above assumptions hold, for any µt there exists a reservation wage in
non-employment yur ≡ yur (µt ) such that
W (y, µt+1 ) ≶ U (µt+1 ) as y ≶ yur (µt )
and a reservation wage in employment yer ≡ yer (w, µt ) for every w such that:
W (y, µt+1 ) − m ≶ W (w, µt+1 ) as y ≶ yer (w, µt )
Proof. Start with the reservation wage in non-employment. Suppose that yur exists and satisfies
(6). Then for any y > yur it follows that W (y, µt+1 (y)) > U (µt+1 (y)) and the offer is accepted.
Similarly, for any y < yur it follows that W (y, µt+1 (y)) < U (µt+1 (y)) and the offer is rejected.
To show existence, note that h(y) = U (µt+1 (y)) − W (y, µt+1 (y)) is strictly decreasing in y since
the first assumption states that the derivative of U with respect to y is less than the derivative
of W with respect to y. The third assumption implies that h(ŵ) > 0. By the first assumption,
h(y) < 0 as y → ∞. Therefore, ∃ yur such that W (yur , µt+1 ) = U (µt+1 ). A similar proof holds
for the reservation wage in employment.

D

Computation

The model is solved as follows. Assume there is a belief grid for µ∗ , p, with Np points, and we
discretize the wage offer distribution to Nwl grid points, but we approximate the value functions
on Nw ≤ Nwl of those points. We are then looking for a numerical approximation at (Nw , Np )
points for W (·, ·) and at (Np ) points for U (·). To solve for the value functions, we proceed as
follows:
1. For a good initial guess, solve the Anticipated Utility model (Cogley and Sargeant (2008))
which has the following value functions:
UAU (µt ) = b +

βλ∗u

Z

max {WAU (y, µt ), UAU (µt )}dFt (y) + β(1 − λ∗u )U (µt )

y

62

(17)

WAU (w, µt ) = w + βδ ∗ UAU (µt )
Z
∗ ∗
+β(1 − δ )λe max {WAU (y, µt ) − m, WAU (w, µt )}dFt (y)
y
∗

+β(1 − δ )(1 − λ∗e )WAU (w, µt )

(18)

These are almost the same value functions as our model, but they do not incorporate that
an individual takes into account the effect that offers have on future beliefs (so everything
on the right hand side remains µt rather than µt+1 . We use the solution to this model as
the starting guess for the values W (·, ·) and U (·) for the true model.
2. Use these values and the corresponding reservation wages from the Anticipated Utility
model as starting guesses, proceed via value function iteration conditional on a guess for
reservation wages. That is, start with some guess for the reservation wages (the first of
which comes from the AU model just described). Given these policy rules, use the initial
guess of the value functions to evaluate the right-hand-side of Equations (4) and (5). To
do so, we need the value of employment for each possible offer, taking into account what
effect that offer has on future beliefs. We get this value by interpolating the guess at
the offer y and its corresponding belief µt+1 (y, p) given some current belief p and some
model-specific updating rule.
3. Proceed via value function iteration until convergence.
4. Update the reservation wages to be consistent with the new value functions following
Equations (6) and (7), and repeat the above steps again.
5. Continue in this way until both wages and values have converged.
6. Once the model has converged, we have approximations for W (w, p), U (p), yer (w, p) and
yur (p).

E

Simulation

To simulate the model, we proceed as follows. For any set of parameters, we first solve the
model following Section D above. Using the policy functions, for each individual in our sample,
we can interpolate on the reservation wage functions at each individual’s µi,t (or µi,t and current
wage, if employed) to get their model-implied reservation wages. Given these reservation wages
and the assumed parameters which govern the offer distribution for each individual, µ∗i and σi∗ ,
we can compute the probability an unemployed individual transitions from unemployment to
employment as λ∗u (1 − F ∗ (yur (µi,t ))), and the probability that an employed individual at some
wage w transitions to another employer, (1 − δ ∗ )λ∗e (1 − F ∗ (yer (w, µi,t ))).
63

F

Estimating Individual Wage Offer Distributions

To estimate the parameters for individual wage offer distributions µ∗i , σ ∗ , we take the following
steps separately for each education group. First, we regress log wage offers on observable
characteristics:
ln(yi ) = α0 Xi + ηi + σ ∗ i , i ∼ N (0, 1)
to obtain an estimate for α, α̂. Given this estimate, we then search for values of η1 , η2 , π1 , σ ∗
to minimize the distance between model-implied percentiles of the wage offer distribution (percentiles {5, 10, 15, ..., 95}), and their empirical counterparts. Throughout, we apply a normalization to η2 to ensure that E (ηi ) = 0. Once we have these estimates, we assume that an
individual’s (log) wage offer distributed is normally distributed with mean µ∗i = α̂Xi + η1 with
probability π1 and with mean µ∗i = α̂Xi + η2 with probability 1 − π1 . In both cases the variance
is given by σ ∗ , which is assumed to vary by education, but not by individual.

G

Complete Information Model

In the complete information model, the value of unemployment is given by:
UCI = b +

βλ∗u

Z

max {WRE (y), URE }dF ∗ (y) + β(1 − λ∗u )URE

(19)

y

while the value of employment at some wage w is given by:
WCI (w) = w + βδ ∗ URE
Z
∗ ∗
+β(1 − δ )λe max {WRE (y) − m, WRE (w)}dF ∗ (y)
y

+β(1 − δ ∗ )(1 − λ∗e )WRE (w)

(20)

We estimate this model by solving the same steps as we do for our learning model, except we
do not use any of the information on beliefs. Table A4 reports the parameter estimates for the
complete information model. Note that, with the exception of b, m all parameters are the same
since they are independent of the model specification. Regarding the new estimates for b, m in
the complete information framework, moving costs are lower for both groups. This is because
in our sample, lower wage workers (the set of workers likely to move to higher paying jobs and
thus likely to be affected by moving costs) tend to be pessimistic. All else equal, they would
therefore move less under complete information. Therefore, to match the data under complete
information, moving costs are lower to induce more movements. Given the lower moving costs,

64

the value of leisure then adjusts to match the transition rates from non-employment in the data.
In general, the direction that the value of leisure will move to under complete information is
ambiguous, and depends in part on what happens to the newly estimated moving cost, since
moving costs also affect reservation wages in non-employment.

65

